---
title: Can Mushrooms Save The World Circular Food Systems Local Empowerment With Chido Govera Zimbabwe Ep 9
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### The Great Full  (2021-03-01)  
### Author(s): Michelle Grant  

**0:00:00-0:00:09:**  Hi, I'm Michelle, and welcome to The Great Full Podcast, a place where we contemplate  how we can eat, live, and lead each day to build a more sustainable world.  Before we dive into today's episode, I just wanted to give you a little bit of background.  
**0:00:23-0:00:29:**  Last year, sometime during lockdown, I discovered a really beautiful film called Fantastic Fungi  and it's really a love story to mushrooms and the role that they can play in applications  that support our health and our food systems.  
**0:00:38-0:00:43:**  I found this film amazing and inspiring, but I also found it a little heavy on psychedelics  and a little light on how mushrooms can play an incredibly transformative role in our food systems.  So after I watched the film, I immediately started googling who is working in this space  
**0:00:56-0:01:00:**  and just wanted to seek out interesting people around the world that are working with mushrooms  in food systems in ways that build circular and solidarity economies.  And I came across a lot of interesting people, but three of them in particular stood out to me.  
**0:01:10-0:01:16:**  So I got each of them on the podcast and the next few episodes are dedicated to answering  this question, can mushrooms save the world?  And you'll hear three really interesting perspectives on that from three different parts of the world.  
**0:01:27-0:01:34:**  To start off today, I'm taking you to Zimbabwe to meet the phenomenal Chido Guevara.  And she's the founder and director of the Future of Hope Foundation, which has the wonderful  tagline changing lives one mushroom at a time.  
**0:01:44-0:01:51:**  Chido's organization works with women and girls primarily who are suffering from poverty  and supports them to become change agents in their own lives using, you might have already  guessed it, mushrooms.  
**0:01:59-0:02:03:**  And they specifically offer trainings and support to grow mushrooms on waste products  and as part of regenerative food systems and to create small enterprises around this activity  to also create new livelihood opportunities and to help elevate women and orphans out  
**0:02:17-0:02:19:**  of poverty.  And Chido's story is really phenomenal.  She grew up as an orphan.  
**0:02:24-0:02:29:**  She experienced firsthand what it's like to not know where your next meal is coming from.  And at the age of 11, she had this unique opportunity to learn about growing mushrooms.  And she used that to support herself and her family and her community and has continued  
**0:02:41-0:02:45:**  to apply that knowledge to help women and orphans all across Africa.  And she has this beautiful statement on her website.  We are not victims.  
**0:02:50-0:02:55:**  We are endowed with so much potential provided we learn the tools and are exposed to the  best examples.  And that's exactly what she tries to do with her organization, Future of Hope.  
**0:03:00-0:03:10:**  I hope you find her as inspiring as I did and enjoy our conversation today.  I was looking at your organization's website and I loved the first thing that I saw, which  is change agents, not victims.  
**0:03:18-0:03:23:**  I thought that's such a powerful statement and I'd love to know more about what you're  doing to bring this to life at the Future of Hope Foundation.  Thank you.  
**0:03:29-0:03:34:**  The Future of Hope is actually inspired by my personal experiences growing up in a village  without enough food.  And my best option to get out of that situation was to be married off so that I could have  
**0:03:43-0:03:48:**  a husband who provides for me and that the family that I was leaving could benefit from  dowry paid when I'm married.  And then there was also a number of other things that happened.  
**0:03:55-0:04:01:**  So looking back at my life, I was just thinking, I want to inspire something different.  I want people who grow up in the same circumstances as I did to be able to stand up, to pick themselves  up and to make a difference.  
**0:04:12-0:04:21:**  And so the Future of Hope was inspired from that with the mission that we want to help  people to look around them, to use what they have and to start changing their stories.  And there was no better place to start than food production, because if you look at the  
**0:04:34-0:04:39:**  fact that I could have been married off to somebody who was 30 years my senior year,  just so I can get food on my plate and that people were willing to do that to me so they  can get some money and hopefully get something on their place as well.  
**0:04:50-0:04:57:**  So that this commodification of women, the commodification of vulnerable people, that  it has to stop.  And we can only stop it if we build around the things that we have locally available,  
**0:05:05-0:05:11:**  things that people can relate to, things that people can take full ownership of.  So with the Future of Hope Foundation, we are looking at what is the biggest abundance  in our world today, in our country today, being from Zimbabwe, I'm sure you're well  
**0:05:22-0:05:27:**  aware of the different challenges that we face as a country.  We are a highly agrarian economy.  Agriculture has been a very big part of the economy in Zimbabwe.  
**0:05:36-0:05:43:**  And then of course, the land reform happened and with it came a lot of shortages that now  worsened by recurrent droughts and generally, I mean, climate change in its totality has  worsened the situation for our economy.  
**0:05:56-0:06:03:**  And if you're thinking young girls and women in villages who depend on this need an alternative.  And so we're looking at food production with a specific focus on mushrooms, mushrooms because  there's a lot of different kinds of agricultural waste which is left, which people cannot eat.  
**0:06:17-0:06:22:**  And the standard is that you make that into a compost, and then you wait for the next  rain season or something like that to plant another crop which is sure to fail, because  there won't be enough rain, people don't have irrigation, those who have irrigation, the  
**0:06:35-0:06:39:**  electricity is not stable and all kinds of things.  And also a lot of the crops, they are seasonal crops.  And so when you don't have irrigation or when you have irrigation and there's no electricity,  
**0:06:48-0:06:50:**  it's a different kind of challenge.  And so what we were looking at is to make a compost takes anything from three to six  months going to even a year with some materials.  
**0:07:00-0:07:06:**  And with mushrooms, you can do that in a small controlled environment.  And in the same time that you would get a compost, let's say the quickest compost from  this kind of agricultural material, which is cellulose based, would be about three months.  
**0:07:17-0:07:23:**  And in three months, you can grow, you can finish a whole cycle of mushroom production.  And by doing that in three months, you already create a new opportunity, a new revenue stream,  a new food source out of the process that normally used to just make compost, which  
**0:07:36-0:07:42:**  you still have to look for different kinds of inputs to try and make into something in  terms of using it to fertilize the land, finding seeds, planting them, waiting them to mature.  And with mushrooms, that time in three months, you earn some money which you can then later  
**0:07:53-0:07:54:**  use to buy seeds.  But today at the Future of Hope, we implement what we call the mushroom-based integrated  food production system, where from our mushroom production, in the three months we produce  
**0:08:06-0:08:11:**  mushrooms, we bring what we bring to the market, and out of the substrate of the mushrooms,  we then fertilize a small piece of land where we grow different kinds of things.  And of course, as a young woman, as a young Zimbabwe woman, we're confronted with the  
**0:08:23-0:08:28:**  reality that a lot of land is owned by men.  Inheritance of land and a family just follows a line of men.  As a woman, you only can own land where you are married, and it's not you who owns it,  
**0:08:38-0:08:41:**  it's a man who owns it.  But I think as Zimbabweans, we also have a special relationship with land in general.  The land redistribution was land to the people, but we still have this cultural thing when  
**0:08:54-0:08:58:**  they say land to the people, who are these people?  Those people are ages who did not go to fight the war.  We did not easily and directly benefit from this land redistribution.  
**0:09:08-0:09:13:**  There's women, women my age owning land, it's still something quite delicate.  Yes, it's changing, a lot has changed, but when I sit with my sister, who socialized  differently than me, even to buy a house as a woman before you are married, and when your  
**0:09:28-0:09:34:**  husband is not buying it for you, you are a little bit too forward.  And so in my approach, understanding again my background to say as a young orphan, I  had no access to land which was mine.  
**0:09:42-0:09:46:**  I couldn't really directly influence what happens there.  And my passion as an individual is to see how we can also change this relationship with  food production and size of land.  
**0:09:56-0:10:02:**  And mushrooms help us to do that because with mushrooms, on a square meter, you can already  harvest quite a lot of mushrooms.  And with this system that we are using where we use the waste of the mushrooms, I live  
**0:10:10-0:10:14:**  today on a plot of land which is just a hectare and a half.  And I've had some of the craziest remarks from people who have 27 hectares or more or  even 100 hectares of land or more, and they don't even produce half of the food that I  
**0:10:25-0:10:29:**  produce on half a hectare of land.  And this for me is one of the very important things that I think in this time, at this  stage and with our history as Zimbabwe, it's very important to bring these kinds of models  
**0:10:42-0:10:47:**  of how we can approach food production in a way that responds to issues that affect  women, in a way that responds to issues that affects us today as a civilization in relation  to climate change.  
**0:10:56-0:11:02:**  And today with the coronavirus, it's just become so clear.  It helped to put everything into perspective because we create a system.  We are moving away from this monoculture approach of food production where you have a piece  
**0:11:13-0:11:18:**  of land, you always have to calculate in this land how many tons of corn I can produce,  and you don't care where your greens are coming from.  You don't care where all your different herbs are coming from.  
**0:11:25-0:11:31:**  And today we are modeling and showing to the communities that we work with to say, look,  the food system needs to go back to being diverse again.  And that is where the resilience is going to come.  
**0:11:38-0:11:45:**  I always tell a story of how in the very beginning, when I moved here, which is now is my sixth  year, and of course I started with producing mushrooms and I was fertilizing the land with  waste from the mushrooms.  
**0:11:53-0:11:58:**  And I went to the market and when I look at the price I want to charge for my food, I'm  thinking about the quality of it, what effort I put into it.  And I'm a proud farmer.  
**0:12:04-0:12:11:**  I don't intend on growing things and just going to compete with the same mediocre quality  and just charge a price because somebody dictates the price.  I come up and I tell you why this is the best and I can tell you the difference in taste  
**0:12:21-0:12:23:**  between that lettuce and the other one.  And when you taste it, you can feel it because when I'm growing the food, I grow it to enjoy  it.  
**0:12:29-0:12:34:**  I grow it not just to fill a stomach, I grow it with the right kind of care, which we should  actually give to food production.  And at the same time, if you don't sell, at least you can be 100% sure that you have all  
**0:12:43-0:12:46:**  the nutrition that you and your family need.  I remember even way before the coronavirus in Zimbabwe, we experienced some difficult  situations where there was a time when we were not able to go into the city because  
**0:13:00-0:13:07:**  there was some political tensions and everything, some time in 2019.  And when we were stuck home, that was the very first time when we experienced it being  stuck, the shops were closed and from one day to another, we could not go to the city.  
**0:13:19-0:13:25:**  And we had to spend a whole week harvesting and eating from our garden and one of the  girls, her name is Rotendo, she made the remark, she says, you know what Auntie, with what  we grow here, even if they lock down the country for a long time, we'll be able to survive.  
**0:13:37-0:13:42:**  We pick our eggs from the chickens, we harvest all our different vegetables.  And at that time we had lots of pumpkins, we had some corn and we have our mushrooms  and we have rabbits and we can eat meat and make bread and we have sweet potatoes in the  
**0:13:54-0:13:55:**  garden.  It's a small place, but it's packed.  For me and for the Future of Hope Foundation, this is the kind of thing that we want to  
**0:14:02-0:14:08:**  promote where it does not have to be a lecture in class, it has to be a way of life.  I didn't have children who believe that carrots grow in a supermarket.  These are children, the girls are adopted children.  
**0:14:16-0:14:20:**  When I came to this place, it was run as an orphanage and they were used to receiving  handouts and things and everything.  And today they are even able to walk in the garden and to find weeds, edible weeds that  
**0:14:29-0:14:34:**  we had forgotten in the name of civilization, in the glorification of these people who came  with monocultures and they produce our food in these monoculture systems.  They have special chemicals to kill all the weeds, including some of the delicate wild  
**0:14:45-0:14:52:**  vegetables that growing up with my grandmother, those were some very, very special things.  And until today, I strongly believe that one of the reasons why my grandmother lived so  long was part of the important ingredients of our food systems.  
**0:15:02-0:15:07:**  I strongly believe as a person that all the changes we see in the world today are actually  going to push us to rethink our food systems in such a way that we return to these things.  We return to embracing diversity and we can move away from these monocultures that we  
**0:15:19-0:15:26:**  have created, go back to these integrated systems, systems that promote diversity, but  also systems that are going to be able to feed us in view of pandemics like coronavirus  that we're faced with today.  
**0:15:34-0:15:35:**  Absolutely.  Wow.  What a phenomenal start to our discussion.  
**0:15:39-0:15:40:**  Thank you.  I really, I was just, wow.  I talked too much.  
**0:15:44-0:15:45:**  Not at all.  It was amazing.  I immediately want to come and visit you because it sounds like you've built a new narrative  
**0:15:51-0:15:55:**  and people can see it and they can step into it and they can get their hands dirty and  that's the best way to learn and embody anything.  So thank you.  
**0:15:59-0:16:02:**  You're most welcome to visit as soon as the world is open.  Opening it.  Well, I'm going to take you up on that.  
**0:16:04-0:16:06:**  So I'm very much looking forward.  I look forward.  And so there's a lot of people saying at the moment, mushrooms will save the world.  
**0:16:13-0:16:14:**  Mushrooms can change the world.  Do you believe that?  I totally, I totally, totally believe that.  
**0:16:17-0:16:19:**  And I'll tell you why.  So this plots of land where I am living now, we don't, we fertilize everything using waste  from our mushrooms.  
**0:16:29-0:16:32:**  So what we actually do is we grow mushrooms.  We take the waste of the mushrooms either directly on the land or first to the chickens.  So the chickens are eating, that's what they can eat.  
**0:16:40-0:16:44:**  And their droppings, they are mixing that up with their droppings.  And then we take that, we bring that to the fields.  I mean, I've been growing red corn and so I'm curious about, you know, all the different  
**0:16:52-0:16:54:**  varieties of corn that they are.  When I moved here, the first thing that I did was to plant a few lines.  And today I say I harvest and save my own seed from the red corn.  
**0:17:02-0:17:10:**  And I came from having cobs this small to having cobs almost 30 centimeters long.  And fertilizing all of this with mushrooms.  And I'm very much aware of all the different initiatives happening in the world where they  
**0:17:18-0:17:22:**  are making bricks out of mushrooms.  But if you look at food systems, just the little bit that we are able to do here today,  growing mushrooms, feeding our chickens with part of the mushroom leftovers, feeding the  
**0:17:33-0:17:36:**  soil with the mushroom leftovers.  And to see the mycelium growing in the soil, and every time we harvest an onion and you  see the white mycelium on there, and that you see that these things are actually able  
**0:17:46-0:17:48:**  to live together.  And also in view of building communities, what we're able to do with the mushrooms will  actually help to recycle nutrients within the ecosystem of a community.  
**0:17:59-0:18:05:**  Within that ecosystem of a small farm, you can recycle nutrients much more efficiently  with mushrooms in the land.  And the way we are doing it in terms of, you know, everybody is always asking, okay, how  
**0:18:12-0:18:14:**  fast can you get food when you do this?  Well, with the mushrooms, the whole process, you're making food.  Earthworms, when we turn our land today, there's earthworms in the soil, and we didn't even  
**0:18:24-0:18:26:**  have to make a special earthworm farm.  We just had to feed it with enough mushrooms.  The amount of insects, the diversity of insects we have here.  
**0:18:33-0:18:38:**  For me, it was not an accident that I learned to farm mushrooms when I was 11 years old,  and that I grew so hungry that I want to do what I can to help enough people to take charge  of their food systems.  
**0:18:46-0:18:50:**  And I really think that mushrooms can play an important role in that.  What I think is amazing about your work is you've just explained so beautifully the natural  cycle that you're trying to come back in line with.  
**0:18:57-0:19:02:**  But there's this social side to a circular economy too, and that's what your organization  has just such an incredible track record in really empowering people and helping them  step into a new narrative.  
**0:19:09-0:19:13:**  So can you talk a bit more about what you do with, I think you're working mostly with  women and girls, right?  70% of our beneficiaries are women and girls.  
**0:19:19-0:19:27:**  So we work with them to take up food production, but we're also addressing some of these issues.  And food always creates a platform where you can start talking about different things.  To open any conversation and to bring the community of women and girls together and  
**0:19:38-0:19:42:**  the communities, the vulnerable communities together, we're using food.  We arrive in a community, we understand their needs, and we know today almost 80% of the  population and more than 80% of this population is in need of food.  
**0:19:54-0:19:59:**  Like we're actually not an agrarian country.  It's crazy and it's sad.  So we give trainings and we're working both in urban and in rural areas.  
**0:20:08-0:20:12:**  So we build a little mushroom house in the different places where we work.  So we give training, build little mushroom houses, and in every situation we adapt those  to the local conditions.  
**0:20:20-0:20:27:**  So where they build with mud, we build a mushroom house with mud, where they build with bricks,  we do that with bricks.  And recently we started working in urban areas where we noticed that a lot of people are  
**0:20:33-0:20:37:**  renting houses and they move quite a lot.  So we're also working on little mushroom houses that one can move with and stuff like that.  And then the first thing that we do is to secure that they can provide for their own  
**0:20:49-0:20:51:**  nutrition first.  So they produce mushrooms for their consumption and then we help them to mobilize markets  for the mushrooms.  
**0:20:59-0:21:07:**  We actually this year in the process of reflecting on what we've done since 2013 when we started,  we trained quite a lot of people, around 3000 people now.  We've taught to farm mushrooms.  
**0:21:12-0:21:20:**  We built close to maybe 100 mushroom production units, different sizes, and some districts  where we've worked for projects of the likes of UNDP, WFP, and we've worked with Rotary  as well.  
**0:21:28-0:21:35:**  And we've reflected and looked at what can we do to actually scale, what can we do to  enable people to actually earn money because it's very, very important for people to earn  money.  
**0:21:41-0:21:45:**  And in this country that has been very, very challenging.  So in the first place we address the issue of access to markets by creating a situation  where the future of hope, secure as a contract with a big supermarket, and then the women  
**0:21:58-0:22:05:**  groups that we have scattered around the country can go to the nearest supermarkets to them  with our brand and they can put the mushrooms to that supermarket.  And we saw that it was working.  
**0:22:11-0:22:17:**  And so today we are working to graduate that from the future of hope into a separate entity.  It's a project that we still have within the future of hope today, which is called Hope  Food.  
**0:22:22-0:22:27:**  And Hope Food then will work to mobilize all the women that we've trained.  So that is also to change the mindset because if future of hope, who is also a charity,  keeps doing this, then you don't really help people to break out of the cycle of charity.  
**0:22:38-0:22:43:**  And so creating a separate entity where they know that now, after so many years of working  at the future of hope, I'm now connecting to Hope Food.  And that shift also mentally is very important for changing how they think about what they  
**0:22:52-0:22:53:**  are doing.  And so we are in the process of creating associations of our farmers.  We are looking to see how can we help them to have access to raw materials for the production  
**0:23:05-0:23:06:**  in their neighborhood.  So we've put what we call fungi culture dealerships, little shops that just focus on selling all  the implements for mushroom production because it has not been done so far.  
**0:23:19-0:23:24:**  When you look at what they're doing with mushrooms in China, you can go to a shop that only sells  plastic bags for mushroom production.  And here, our farmers have had to struggle with going 20 kilometers in one direction  
**0:23:33-0:23:37:**  to buy plastic bags, 100 kilometers to find the substrate.  And so the future of hope, understanding the situation of the people we are working with,  but also understanding the opportunity that mushrooms present, we really think that it  
**0:23:48-0:23:53:**  is high time that we develop it in such a way that we organize the groups properly so  they can work together as a community, have in the same way, we're not looking to build  a monopoly of all mushroom farmers selling mushrooms through us.  
**0:24:02-0:24:06:**  And that's why the associations will be locally registered.  They can operate as community companies, and they can also pursue markets of their own.  And I think our leadership as the future of hope is again to create that platform where  
**0:24:19-0:24:23:**  even as a community, they can be changed with or without us.  We need to rethink empowerment.  The reason why even the word empowerment has a bad connotation because of this thing that  
**0:24:32-0:24:35:**  somebody comes, gives you power, you're sort of tied to them.  And so the whole idea of thinking, how can we help this and how can we facilitate the  creation of the structure and at the same time, give the freedom of that structure to  
**0:24:47-0:24:53:**  benefit people beyond our goodwill.  We should change our minds and when something should happen that our investments do not  die.  
**0:24:59-0:25:03:**  We should make sure that the people have the capacity, that the entity which is the association  has the capacity on its own.  Organizations of our nature should give people power in such a way that they can one day  
**0:25:10-0:25:16:**  disappear and people still remain and be able to help themselves.  And this is the whole thing.  Again the thinking of treating oneself like a victim, we're not just saying, well, go  
**0:25:22-0:25:26:**  and grow your own food, but we're saying build a community.  And as a community, have that strength to change things in your environment and continue  to promote that so that its effects can be felt on a global level.  
**0:25:39-0:25:45:**  And I think for Zimbabwe, this is one of the most important tools we can use.  When you reflect enough about what it means to be a victim, you can start to see the kind  of work we need to do on a systemic level to try and dismantle.  
**0:25:58-0:26:04:**  This whole thing of us as citizens thinking that our savior is only the government, that  we ignore our power, we ignore our capabilities as a society, as communities is also a very  important thing that I think on the bigger picture.  
**0:26:16-0:26:18:**  This is the kind of empowerment that we want to inspire.  But we want to start with the individual because where our societies are today actually a result  of a failure on the individual level.  
**0:26:28-0:26:33:**  The reason why our leadership is not as good as it should be, it's actually we are failing  it somewhere.  And I think addressing food systems as a start, addressing women issues as a start with that  
**0:26:41-0:26:50:**  message as the foundation, that message of empowerment, that message of taking power,  taking charge of what happens to you as a person, taking charge of what happens to you  as a community and driving change is very, very important.  
**0:27:05-0:27:09:**  What you've just said is a nice way to loop back to your own story because your life seemed  to take a very sharp turn in a different trajectory.  I'm sure there were some external factors that supported that, but certainly a lot of  
**0:27:17-0:27:23:**  internal ones that helped you step into a new narrative and also start bringing other  people along with you.  What do you think were the most important internal factors that have helped you along  
**0:27:29-0:27:31:**  this path?  The most important internal factors that helped was of course hunger.  You know, just this frustration of going to bed hungry and not having a say over my own  
**0:27:48-0:27:57:**  life and then a strong sense of responsibility over my grandmother at the time and my younger  brother who depended on me.  And just really, these things, a combination of these things helped me to sort of have  
**0:28:08-0:28:15:**  this resolve to say I'm going to do something about this.  I could not bear to watch my grandmother and my little brother go to bed hungry.  There's something very important about responsibility that is missing in our society.  
**0:28:28-0:28:33:**  It explains why today they start to talk about responsible leadership.  What is that?  And this is something that I think without me choosing it, it was imposed on me as a  
**0:28:42-0:28:50:**  child, but at the same time it also turns out to be the most important element that  our societies need to build today.  Even when we look at how we deliberate around our food systems, how do we deliberate around  
**0:29:01-0:29:06:**  mechanisms we put in place to deal with a crisis like the coronavirus?  How do we hold each other accountable as a community?  It's all something that I think when you learn to be responsible for the things that you  
**0:29:14-0:29:21:**  do say and the things that you don't do, when you learn to take ownership of that, it makes  a big difference.  I think for me the very first part I would say is realizing that I am responsible for  
**0:29:32-0:29:38:**  getting rid of this pain of not having food that I felt every time before I went to bed  and I thought I've got to do something about it.  And I started working as a child and then when the opportunity to farm mushrooms came,  
**0:29:48-0:29:54:**  I immediately was able to recognize what I needed to do.  Hunger for food led to hunger for change and you stepped into it.  Yeah.  
**0:29:58-0:30:07:**  I always talk about that time was very important in my life.  I found my appetite for life from those experiences.  And it's actually funny because I was sitting just now with my sister who has a little girl  
**0:30:21-0:30:28:**  that's my namesake and my sister is a little bit worried that she's too much like me.  I think that's a good thing.  I think the world needs more of you.  
**0:30:33-0:30:36:**  Of course we'll laugh about it.  And so today I was telling her about how much you are very unfortunate that you're going  to be like the person who has got a big hunger for whatever that I get confronted with.  
**0:30:50-0:30:56:**  If it is change that I want, I want it big.  I was a hungry child.  I had no food on the table and it's that hunger that pushed me to action.  
**0:31:04-0:31:06:**  Amazing.  Well I could possibly keep talking to you for hours, but I'm really respectful of the  fact that you have about 15 different jobs and do all kinds of amazing things.  
**0:31:16-0:31:20:**  But honestly, if you ran for president of anything, I would absolutely vote for you.  I have so enjoyed talking to you.  One of these days is going to come.  
**0:31:25-0:31:29:**  Thank you for being the light that you are and doing all this amazing work.  If you'd love to learn more about the Future of Hope Foundation and Cito's work, as well  as how you can support them, I've put a link to the organization just down below in the  
**0:31:41-0:31:42:**  show notes.  So please feel free to check that out.  I've also put the link to the movie that started these conversations, Fantastic Fungi, which  
**0:31:49-0:31:52:**  I definitely recommend watching.  And stay tuned for a couple more interesting conversations coming up.  I will be taking you to Portugal and to Serbia to learn more about this fantastic world of  
**0:32:03-0:32:04:**  mushrooms.  Thanks so much for listening to this episode of the Great Full Podcast.  If you liked it, then please go ahead and subscribe and share it with a friend.  
**0:32:17-0:32:20:**  And I would love to get your questions answered here.  So if there's something that you would like answered or explored on this podcast, just  send me an email to podcast at the great full dot com.  
**0:32:29-0:32:34:**  And I'll do my very best to get your questions answered here on the show.  And that's it for this episode of the Great Full Podcast.  