---
title: Can Mushrooms Save The World Circular Food Systems Local Empowerment Part 2 With Natan Nam Mushrooms Portugal And Ivanka Ekofungi Serbia Ep 10
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

<script src="https://cdn.podlove.org/web-player/embed.js"></script>
    <script>
        document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', function () {
          if (document.readyState === 'interactive' || document.readyState === 'complete') {
            podlovePlayer('#player', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/The Great Full/Can-mushrooms-save-the-world-circular-food-systems-local-empowerment-part-2-with-natan-nam-mushrooms-portugal-and-ivanka-ekofungi-serbia-ep-10.json', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/The Great Full/config.json').then(registerExternalEvents('player'))
          }
        })
  </script>

### The Great Full  (2021-03-30)  
### Author(s): Michelle Grant  

**0:00:00-0:00:23:**  Hi, I'm Michelle, and welcome to The Great Full Podcast, a place where we contemplate  how we can eat, live, and lead each day to build a more sustainable world.  This week is the second episode of our little series on Can Mushrooms Save the World.  
**0:00:23-0:00:39:**  Last episode you joined me in Zimbabwe with the amazing Chido Guevara, who's the founder  of the Future of Hope Foundation, and this week I'm taking you first of all to Lisbon,  Portugal, where we're going to meet Nathan, who's the founder of a startup called NAMM,  
**0:00:39-0:00:53:**  that collects coffee grounds from all across the city of Lisbon and uses them to produce  mushrooms and also fertilizer.  And when I spoke to Chido and Nathan and several of the other people I reached out to who were  
**0:00:53-0:01:09:**  mushroom enthusiasts, they all talked about one person.  And that person is Ivanka Milenkovic from Serbia.  She is the founder of a very cool school which teaches people how to grow mushrooms on waste  
**0:01:09-0:01:18:**  products as a part of a circular economy.  And it turns out many of the people doing very cool things with mushrooms around the  world have actually been trained by her.  
**0:01:18-0:01:40:**  So after I take you to Lisbon, we're heading to Serbia just outside of Belgrade, where  we're going to have a chat with Ivanka and learn more from her over 30 years of experience  of working with mushrooms and hear her perspective on whether or not they can change the world.  
**0:01:40-0:01:57:**  Could we just start by you letting the listeners know what NAMM is and what you do?  So NAMM actually means mushrooms in Vietnamese.  But what NAMM is, it's a circular economy project and a mushroom urban farm that upcycles  
**0:01:57-0:02:17:**  coffee waste into mushrooms, fresh mushrooms, and also fertilizer.  So the idea here is that actually really few people know it, but when you make a cup of  coffee, you only use around 1% of the total biomass that is available into your coffee.  
**0:02:17-0:02:27:**  All the rest is considered waste.  So first of all, that's a huge amount of waste.  That's also a huge inefficiency of our food system.  
**0:02:27-0:02:42:**  But most importantly, it's actually not waste because it makes a really good resource to  grow mushrooms.  Not only because you have a lot of waste, but also because when you make a cup of coffee,  
**0:02:42-0:02:52:**  you pour hot water through your coffee.  And so that means that the coffee or your waste, the coffee waste is totally clean,  which is just fantastic.  
**0:02:52-0:03:01:**  You have waste that is not waste.  And secondly, it's totally clean.  So the idea is to take advantage of that, collect the coffee waste at local restaurants  
**0:03:01-0:03:17:**  and cafes here in Lisbon, bring it back to a local urban farm inside of the city.  Because if you have all your primary material, it makes sense to be close to that primary  material, mix it with mushroom seeds and a bit of straw.  
**0:03:17-0:03:30:**  And six weeks later, you get mushrooms that we then harvest and sell back to the most  of the time, actually, the same coffees and restaurants where we collected the coffee  waste in the first place.  
**0:03:30-0:03:48:**  And then finally, the really cool thing about this whole process is that by growing mushrooms  inside of your coffee waste, you enrich the coffee waste with the treatments.  So the leftover, all the substrate that doesn't transform into mushroom becomes a fertilizer  
**0:03:48-0:04:03:**  that you can then distribute to local farms.  And that's how you go from a waste to food and to fertilizer and you create two times  value locally, locally using only what is locally available.  
**0:04:03-0:04:09:**  Such a beautiful example of circular economy in practice.  Yeah.  Very nice.  
**0:04:09-0:04:26:**  So how did you stumble onto mushrooms?  That's actually linked to what you think.  And I don't know if you heard about winter police.  
**0:04:26-0:04:35:**  Yeah.  The economy is a guy that is on a mission actually to do exactly that business model  that are able to reconcile economy and ecology.  
**0:04:35-0:04:44:**  And that's where the idea of using coffee waste with mushrooms and fertilizer comes  from.  And I worked with this guy for around six months, where I actually learned different  
**0:04:44-0:04:53:**  business models.  And one of them was about growing mushrooms out of coffee waste.  And at the time when I finished my internship, and I also finished my master's degree, I  
**0:04:53-0:05:07:**  didn't have a lot of money, I still don't.  But I wanted to start my own thing.  And so I thought trying to find a small place inside of the city center of Lisbon and trying  
**0:05:07-0:05:20:**  to grow my own mushrooms.  And in your experience so far, is this a viable business model?  In my experience so far, I was doing that on a really small scale.  
**0:05:20-0:05:34:**  I think the secret most of the time is, I think in the food systems and what I understood  is the current way food production and food consumption works, it's most of the time a  question of scale.  
**0:05:34-0:05:53:**  And so at my scale, it wasn't sustainable when I was doing it on my own.  I was only recovering around 500 kilos of coffee waste per month, and producing around  100 kilos of mushrooms per month, and I was selling it for 7, 8 euros per kilo.  
**0:05:53-0:06:10:**  So I was not sustainable on my own, but now we are looking on a much bigger scale.  And the whole idea is actually to find the right mix between using what is locally available  and selling to the local market at the right scale.  
**0:06:10-0:06:29:**  So that means that here we're looking at the market of Lisbon and we want to understand  what is the right scale in terms of mushroom consumption.  And so here we are probably looking at around a ton of mushroom per month that we're going  
**0:06:29-0:06:39:**  to produce out of 5 tons of coffee waste.  So that I hope, and according to the business plan, that sometimes reality is different,  it should be sustainable.  
**0:06:39-0:06:47:**  I'm sorry, I have a truck pass.  No problem.  Maybe we should tell everybody that you're standing in a construction site right now.  
**0:06:47-0:07:00:**  Do you want to talk to us a bit about what's actually happening around you?  Yeah, so that is actually what we're doing.  So I said that I increased the sale of the production and that's what we're doing, is  
**0:07:00-0:07:16:**  that we are building a new farm inside of the city centre of Lisbon, where we're going  to say with exactly the same concept, but at a bigger scale.  And so the idea was to try to find a space where we could put containers, shipping containers,  
**0:07:16-0:07:25:**  that we would then transform into growing rooms for mushrooms.  And that's what we're doing right now.  And so that's why there is a bit of noise and people around.  
**0:07:25-0:07:34:**  Great.  And so when that's completely finished, describe to us what it's going to be like to walk into  one of these shipping containers filled with mushrooms.  
**0:07:34-0:07:44:**  It's going to be like, what do people compare it from time to time?  You know, the guys that are doing drugs inside of their caravan.  Oh, Breaking Bad.  
**0:07:44-0:07:47:**  Breaking Bad.  Thank you.  Thank you very much.  
**0:07:47-0:07:54:**  Okay, now I'm intrigued.  No, I'm joking.  It's just that it's going to be a container.  
**0:07:54-0:08:06:**  So we actually took the containers for those that know, you have two types of containers.  You have the normal containers and then you have the reputed serrated containers, which  are the containers that are covered and insulated.  
**0:08:06-0:08:18:**  And that basically most of the time transport meat.  So that inside it's full of stainless steel.  And then you're going to have racks where you're going to have bags hanging and mushrooms  
**0:08:18-0:08:27:**  growing.  It's going to be really humid, a bit of light and sort of windy slash fresh because the  mushrooms, they need.  
**0:08:27-0:08:36:**  What we're going to do in this production and the production process is that we're always  going to try to imitate the conditions of nature.  And so you have basically two stages.  
**0:08:36-0:08:46:**  You have the incubation, which is when the mushroom is under the bark of the tree.  And that's when we actually, you don't have fresh air.  You have a really high level of CO2.  
**0:08:46-0:08:56:**  You don't have light and the temperature is always constant.  And that's what it looks like in the first stage.  So the first stage actually, if you're walking inside of the container, you don't see anything  
**0:08:56-0:09:08:**  because it's pitch black.  And then after that, we want to imitate the conditions of spring.  So when it's springtime, you have a bit of light, you have a lot of fresh air and you  
**0:09:08-0:09:17:**  have a lot of humidity.  And that's exactly what it looks like on stage two.  And that's where it's actually interesting because then we make little holes inside of  
**0:09:17-0:09:28:**  the bags and the mushrooms start to work on the bags.  Very cool.  Yeah, I think I saw a video of you in one of these rooms and it was very eerie, kind  
**0:09:28-0:09:33:**  of a lot of fog.  Exactly.  That's what it looks like.  
**0:09:33-0:09:47:**  It's really foggy.  But it's a really cool environment to work and it's really beautiful to see that.  I love the idea that the mushrooms, they are the degrader or the recyclers of nature.  
**0:09:47-0:10:05:**  So they can basically take basically any type of matter and type of organic matter that  dies in nature is then recovered and given back to the soil by the mushrooms.  The mushrooms, for example, are going to degrade the tree and then the mushroom by itself is  
**0:10:05-0:10:20:**  going to die and it's going to transform into a substrate for the soil.  And that's the cycle of life.  That's exactly the role of mushrooms in nature is that they degrade anything that dies to  
**0:10:20-0:10:28:**  give it back to the soil, the cycle of life.  Very nice.  And that's leading some people to claim that mushrooms can save the world.  
**0:10:28-0:10:39:**  What are your thoughts on that?  Mushrooms are part of the solution.  I like to believe that solutions are going to come from many different islands, but mushrooms  
**0:10:39-0:10:51:**  are definitely an island and there are some interesting things.  And I think the great thing is that you can start really easy, like I did and in Africa  they also do.  
**0:10:51-0:11:10:**  You can just basically recover any type of waste that is cellulosic, that has organic  matter of it, it can be straw, it can be sawdust, it can be spent beer, it can be coffee waste,  it can be anything you can find locally and then use that as a substrate.  
**0:11:10-0:11:21:**  And the great thing is that not only are you fighting waste, but you also have your substrate  for free.  So that also changed completely the mindset of how you see waste actually.  
**0:11:21-0:11:33:**  And that's why I think mushrooms are really great because you can start really simple.  You don't need a lot of money, you don't need a lot of knowledge, you just need to experiment  and learn by yourself.  
**0:11:33-0:11:46:**  I'm not saying it's easy, but that's the great thing about mushrooms is that you can enter  the world of mushrooms really easily.  So yeah, it's part of the solution.  
**0:11:46-0:11:57:**  Fantastic.  And so all this work with mushrooms and looking at circular economy, how has that changed  how you eat or shop or cook or engage with food?  
**0:11:57-0:12:13:**  That for me changed a lot actually because then once you actually start producing food  and getting into contact with people that are passionate about food, it can be cooks,  it can be producers, it can be supermarkets, sometimes also just passionate about food,  
**0:12:13-0:12:26:**  you learn the value of foods.  How much water it takes to produce a potato, how much water it takes to produce a tomato,  how much work it's the whole process that is behind all the people behind.  
**0:12:26-0:12:40:**  So that's really the way producing something really changed my relationship with food because  I value a lot more what is behind the products.  And then also more than anything, more than being organic, more than being nice looking  
**0:12:40-0:12:57:**  or everything for me what's really important nowadays is eating local because that is really  helping the local economy, helping people that live next door that are doing some cool  stuff and that love what they do.  
**0:12:57-0:13:10:**  I'm interested in hearing a bit more about your personal journey.  What have been the biggest learnings for you as you start a new organization and have to  lead yourself and others through all sorts of processes from fundraising to growing mushrooms  
**0:13:10-0:13:22:**  to communication?  That's a good question.  Something I noticed actually quite recently is that at the beginning of your project you  
**0:13:22-0:13:34:**  have a lot of time to think about your values, you think about the philosophy you want to  implement, you think about all of that stuff.  So once you get into the real action, you don't have time for that anymore because then  
**0:13:34-0:13:49:**  it really becomes micromanagement of cash flow, micromanagement of people, micromanagement  of everything, daily stuff that you need to do and at the end of the day you get back  home and you really tired and you don't have time anymore to think about all the value  
**0:13:49-0:14:00:**  and the why you started this project.  So I think that's really something I realized is that at the beginning you really need to  know why you're doing something and to build that whole philosophy, that whole mindset  
**0:14:00-0:14:15:**  that you want to implement because once you're in it, it's really difficult to take the time  to do it.  So that is something I realized quite recently and that's I think it's an important learning.  
**0:14:15-0:14:34:**  Also very important, once you get into the action, you need to be patient with the results.  So you need to be sort of impatient with the action, taking action as soon as you can and  trying stuff even if it's really little, even if it's to have a really real impact, it's  
**0:14:34-0:14:50:**  better than anything but then you need to be patient with the results and that sometimes  as an entrepreneur or as a person, it's difficult because you're expecting everything to happen  and you dream about a perfect state of things but that's not how it happens or at least  
**0:14:50-0:15:07:**  it takes a lot of time and that's why people don't see about success or about failure is  that either a failure or a success takes time to get there.  And so yeah, patience is actually also really important.  
**0:15:07-0:15:16:**  And this path is inevitably littered with different types of failures.  So what's been the failure you've learned the most from?  That's a really good question.  
**0:15:16-0:15:26:**  I never thought about it.  Obviously one of the failures I've had is when I started my project, I couldn't go much  more.  
**0:15:26-0:15:41:**  I wouldn't go.  And I think that can happen to any grower or to any person that develops something.  So at the beginning you think it would work but then it doesn't work.  
**0:15:41-0:15:52:**  And that's something you learn from me also to be persistent and to keep going even though  you don't get there because eventually you get there.  So that's a failure.  
**0:15:52-0:16:09:**  And then another one you can have.  Maybe it would be to sometimes you believe that the people with whom you're going to  work or with whom you work are what they say they are but then you discover they are eventually  
**0:16:09-0:16:22:**  not.  And that's also really something important is that you always need to make sure that  you can continue to regard them or that you're not too much dependent on them.  
**0:16:22-0:16:34:**  I would say that was an important learning.  So what I really love about what you're doing Nathan is that you're not focusing on fighting  the old but you're building something new.  
**0:16:34-0:16:54:**  So what type of skills do you think are important for anybody that wants to follow a path like  that?  I love that quotation about the secret of change is to focus all your energy on building  
**0:16:54-0:17:06:**  the new and not on fighting the old.  And for that I think the first skill that you need to have is you need to sort of have  it doesn't have something really big because when you see vision from time to time people  
**0:17:06-0:17:19:**  think that it's really something big but you need to have a place where you would ideally  get and be.  And then you need to have that vision or that ability to imagine yourself then there and  
**0:17:19-0:17:32:**  to imagine how you would get there and what you would do.  So I think really having that dream or that vision is a really important part.  And something that I just mentioned and that I've learned to have a lot of patience because  
**0:17:32-0:17:48:**  you don't change even if you focus all your energy on building something new you don't  change the old one day together and even building something takes a lot of time.  So a lot of patience and also I think what is really really important is the ability  
**0:17:48-0:18:01:**  to take action.  So just to you know not thinking too much not starting to analyze markets to you know  just do and then go with the flow and eventually you get there because if you do stuff things  
**0:18:01-0:18:14:**  happen and if things happen in some way or another it will always be better.  Inspirational words for anybody sitting on the idea to start something but getting ready  to get ready to get ready.  
**0:18:14-0:18:22:**  The idea of just acting.  I do have one final question for you.  What's your favorite way to cook mushrooms?  
**0:18:22-0:18:30:**  Simple, simple, simple.  Olive oil and a bit of garlic.  That's the way to go.  
**0:18:30-0:18:45:**  At least for the Arshad one which is the one I produce and which is the one I love.  I always cook it with olive oil and a bit of garlic or onions really simple and then  eat it like this maybe with a bit of good bread if you have good bread from your local  
**0:18:45-0:18:58:**  bakery then yeah.  Very nice.  Nathan wasn't the only mushroom enthusiast that I reached out to.  
**0:18:58-0:19:16:**  There was one thing that most of the people I chatted to seem to have in common and that  was a wonderful Serbian lady by the name of Ivanka Milenkovic, the founder of EcoFungi.  So Ivanka sees it as her mission to empower young people to create their own agribusiness  
**0:19:16-0:19:30:**  putting circular economy principles front and center and many years ago she actually  started her own school just outside of Belgrade in Serbia that trains people from all over  the world on how to create their own mushroom growing businesses.  
**0:19:30-0:19:46:**  As Ivanka's name kept coming up with everybody that I talked to I wanted to chat with her  directly and learn more about her experience as a mushroom pioneer.  Ivanka, thank you so much for joining today.  
**0:19:46-0:19:59:**  I'm really excited to talk to you because I'm very interested in the role that mushrooms  can play in making a better food system and everywhere I looked at this topic I kept coming  to your name.  
**0:19:59-0:20:13:**  So I feel like I'm coming to the mother of mushrooms.  I don't know how you feel about that title.  I will definitely consider that very positive but of course I am far from it.  
**0:20:13-0:20:26:**  At least I cannot be a mother because they are old millions years so that will be very  tricky.  If you can find my name everywhere is the fact that I'm doing a small business created  
**0:20:26-0:20:41:**  with ambition to transform, to translate scientific results and approach into the daily life and  daily practice.  Honestly speaking it is very difficult, it is very rare globally and can you imagine  
**0:20:41-0:20:59:**  how it is rare here in our region around Balkan and Serbia where economy situation and business  circumstances had never been easy.  We are the example how the knowledge and science can help that you survive, that you grow,  
**0:20:59-0:21:11:**  that you implement the models.  I feel so many people are talking about the problems and that's important but you focus  on talking about solutions and not just talking actually doing.  
**0:21:11-0:21:26:**  Which is amazing and it seems like people now come from all around the world to learn  and be inspired by eco fungi.  Could you tell us a little bit about why they come to you?  
**0:21:26-0:21:43:**  What are they coming to learn?  I am a biologist and I have finished my first graduate study with the really most important  scientist globally in this field Dr. Leovan Grinsohn and then I met Silvia Berberi for  
**0:21:43-0:22:07:**  industrial design and systemic design on University of Turin and there thanks to the touring of  Professor Gino Bastignano we created the very first mushroom on the coffee ground which  honestly speaking is not big revolution because mushrooms like cellulose and especially those  
**0:22:07-0:22:25:**  group of mushrooms, that group of mushrooms where oyster on example belong, where they  are only looking for the cellulose in order to grow and flush.  So for mushroom is not important what, where cellulose is coming from.  
**0:22:25-0:22:43:**  Is it from wood or from straw or from coffee waste?  So we just used that biological characteristic and based on the coffee waste and the project  was supported by Lavazza so that was very important to show that it is possible.  
**0:22:43-0:23:03:**  We offered to the global auditorium first mushrooms on the coffee waste growing during  the slow food festival in Turin in October 2008.  So it was revolutionary step honestly like always happened accidentally and from that  
**0:23:03-0:23:26:**  time people start to have interest for me and thanks of the Xari network and Dr. Ginta  Paoli they really wanted to start something and slowly little by little, little by little  we grown up and as far as we grow more people had been more convinced to come because first  
**0:23:26-0:23:45:**  at our place they are learning about the biology pillars of the mushroom cultivation.  That's something what I'm insisting on.  Second they can spare in time and money, spare 30 years of my working because I working for  
**0:23:45-0:24:07:**  30 years and based on that what people's name open source we transferred to them all our  knowledge but in the afternoon after the sessions in the classroom, of course we are not school  we are production so this is in our office, they are going in the production and with  
**0:24:07-0:24:20:**  own eyes they are seeing that exactly what I'm talking about I am doing and some people  have a salary out of that.  So it is second reason.  
**0:24:20-0:24:50:**  Third we try to make out of that school one a nice social gathering and people enjoy it  is very relaxed but the fact is that through that light communication we transferred to  them all relevant knowledge which definitely saved them from failures in financing, in  
**0:24:50-0:25:09:**  wrong investment and it is nice you know you spread sort of the community so that is the  reason why people are coming.  So science, application, honest speech, honest talk and good relations.  
**0:25:09-0:25:23:**  I think they are the most important pillars of any education right?  Taking the theory into practice and building a social network and community around it.  Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, I think so.  
**0:25:23-0:25:35:**  And it seems that circular economy and blue economy are terms that are important to your  work.  What does it mean for you practically in how you grow mushrooms and how you set up your  
**0:25:35-0:25:54:**  business?  In the nature, mushrooms are big common enterprise who take care about the garbage.  So mushrooms in fact create opportunity that nature has circularity and in nature circularity  
**0:25:54-0:26:09:**  is normal.  It is a way of functioning of the nature.  So if you apply mushrooms then in fact you are doing copy paste of the processes from  
**0:26:09-0:26:33:**  the nature and our approach is nothing more but adjusting processes from the nature into  the small industrial or big industrial processes.  And what we recognize that it is going in the natural cycles, we try to apply in our  
**0:26:33-0:26:46:**  business.  Like result, we created a unique circular economy company but circularity in eco fungi  had never been goal by itself.  
**0:26:46-0:27:06:**  We just use opportunity with circularity in order to maintain our business.  Through circularity it is not only that you use waste from something like raw material  or other things, it is also multiplication of the cash flow.  
**0:27:06-0:27:31:**  So when not easy economic conditions and business circumstances then you found a way for surviving.  And that is how circularity in eco fungi exists.  Copy the processes from the nature and transfer those into the industrial life.  
**0:27:31-0:27:55:**  And we started to talk about that already in Zere emission research 20-30 years ago.  But the differences between circularity in blue economy for me is that nice atmosphere  in the company, positive relations with the people, correct approach towards employees  
**0:27:55-0:28:07:**  wondering about their happiness to create total nice atmosphere where people are coming  to be happy.  Not just in theory but actually in practice.  
**0:28:07-0:28:21:**  So I noticed on your website you have a nice saying from waste to taste which I like very  much.  So what type of waste can you actually use as a substrate or as a material to grow mushrooms  
**0:28:21-0:28:35:**  on and where do you collect it from?  Well just to come back on your previous question, one of the most important pillar of the blue  economy is that you have to that it is producing locally for the local market.  
**0:28:35-0:28:53:**  We produce organically certified Champignon and organic certified oyster mushroom.  For Champignon originally, already three centuries ago, people are using horse manure like raw  material for the compost production.  
**0:28:53-0:29:09:**  In big modern industry horse manure is almost forgotten because of the lack of the horse  manure.  We collect horse manure from our neighborhood horse farms which are 30 kilometers in our  
**0:29:09-0:29:31:**  surrounding because you cannot transport like a small entrepreneur any sort of such a voluminous  material like horse manure, like straw, like whatever on the longer distance than 30 kilometers.  We collect those horse manure, we make compost on very old traditional way.  
**0:29:31-0:29:46:**  We are making the compost, it is the substrate, it is nutrition basement for the mash or Champignon  growing.  Then we produce the mushroom, then that spent substrate is delivered like a soil amendment  
**0:29:46-0:30:08:**  or organic fertilizer to our organic vegetable farmers and we collect from them extra quantity  of those vegetable what they are producing also according to organic rules and we create  that dehydrated product what you also can see on our website.  
**0:30:08-0:30:17:**  So I had seen a lot of things recently that say that we can use mushrooms to change the  world.  That's true.  
**0:30:17-0:30:30:**  I don't think that we can change the world.  You know it is too strong word.  It is true that fungi at all pretty underrated kingdom and I think that mushroom can be useful  
**0:30:30-0:30:50:**  but I will not use such strong words that we can save the world.  I think that we can save the world only if I act in synergy with inside and with everybody  you see this COVID is exactly a perfect example of that.  
**0:30:50-0:31:06:**  So you actually started EcoFungi and all of this as a one woman show.  So could you take us back to when you were first starting out.  What were you worrying about and struggling with the most in the very beginning?  
**0:31:06-0:31:21:**  Well, you know was in fact funded by two girls.  One changed career path and left so I was never thinking that I am one or two women  in the business.  
**0:31:21-0:31:38:**  I simply believe and I trust that it is normal and very honestly I had now after 25 years  when I take a look on the back then I said, oh my God, how it must be that I was looking  so funny to the people.  
**0:31:38-0:31:55:**  But definitely in that moment I just had the idea.  You know, I told you I was a student in Wageningen University in mushroom experimentation and  course there they have done applied science and my ambition was that we create production  
**0:31:55-0:32:15:**  unit where also we will be the breed between university and daily practice.  Based on that my ambition, I start this my business, you need to know that was total  abundant piece of the field with very bad quality of soil.  
**0:32:15-0:32:29:**  Otherwise nobody would not give that soil to me, you know, but it was totally.  Only some roots and some trees and some plants can be totally like a small jungle was on  that field.  
**0:32:29-0:32:48:**  Without electricity, without water supplying, without any infrastructure and I said okay  because across of the road in front of that field was my lab where I was working before.  I said listen, I'm going to rent this piece of land and I'm going to start my mushroom  
**0:32:48-0:32:59:**  production.  Everybody was laughing but honestly I was never thinking about myself like a woman,  like about women in the business.  
**0:32:59-0:33:25:**  I am, I still believe that we like women much more persistent, stronger.  We have a much bigger energy for over bridging problems, for finding problem solution because  so that's what I am thinking about the women in the business and about myself in the business  
**0:33:25-0:33:47:**  because I know that a lot of men will have given up already million times on my place.  And it sounds like you did have a lot of obstacles to overcome and challenges to face and I also  saw that you said the existence of inner peace won't make the outside disruptors go away  
**0:33:47-0:33:59:**  but I was wondering how do you try to cultivate inner peace for yourself and how does that  help you when you have to face external structures or challenges?  It's not easy question.  
**0:33:59-0:34:20:**  So first of all I share my problems then I think that the social network, that is also  point of my training curriculum for EcoFungi School, I am insisting that the people learn  how important it is to have a social network in surrounding, how it is important to have  
**0:34:20-0:34:38:**  the people in surrounding, sometimes only for coffee, sometimes for help.  And you know, Michelle, about those things, those are normal things but unfortunately  it is pretty that now we start to talk about normal things like something very special.  
**0:34:38-0:35:01:**  I think that just normal communication with the people can really save our lives.  So to be in communication with the people, to be positive, to be open, to be brave, to  be strong, for me was received to over-bridge obstacles and honestly sometimes I am a little  
**0:35:01-0:35:17:**  bit tired of that because here there is no normal, I mean we are in permanent transition  and this region in the permanent transition which means that you permanently don't know  what's coming next.  
**0:35:17-0:35:30:**  And that is the point.  That makes me sometimes really very tired but okay, that's for sure normal.  That's a very important message I think particularly in these times.  
**0:35:30-0:35:43:**  Very important.  In being open and bringing people together around this passion that you have, what's  been the most important thing you've learned about leaving both yourself and others towards  
**0:35:43-0:35:55:**  a common goal?  You know, in the beginning of my career my father told me, oh great, now you are a biologist,  now you are going to the primary school to teach your children about to be a teacher.  
**0:35:55-0:36:08:**  And I said, my goodness, I am everything but not a teacher.  That saw me absolutely not.  So all of a sudden after 25 years I found in myself almost to be a teacher, but that  
**0:36:08-0:36:22:**  is a teacher out of the box.  I think that being open and doing, if you are doing your business, your job with the  passion like I think that you are doing as well, if you have a big pool of the knowledge  
**0:36:22-0:36:37:**  and I really have at least experience and okay knowledge but experience in the first  place, then you do not need to make a calculation what to say or not, how to approach or not.  You are just happy that people trust you and travel.  
**0:36:37-0:36:52:**  You know, we have people from Canada, from Taiwan, from Australia.  Can you imagine they are traveling half globe to come here in Nacofungi today?  And for me it is fantastic already personal satisfaction and for me how we succeed by  
**0:36:52-0:37:12:**  just be like what we are.  I think that globally people have to become more aware what they are at the end of the  day and stop to present themselves as a different person, as a bigger expert, try to be something  
**0:37:12-0:37:23:**  what they are not.  And I think that it is just be what you are and that's all.  Yeah, I think that's a very important cry for more authenticity in our lives and not  
**0:37:23-0:37:38:**  always feeling we have to put different masks on in different settings.  I think that's also a particularly for younger people as they start their careers, if we  can avoid that practice from the beginning and show up as our full selves, I think that  
**0:37:38-0:37:53:**  we can make much stronger connections.  Michel, I think that we have to start from the early childhood to bring the children  message that they are the best if they are what they are.  
**0:37:53-0:38:15:**  And I think that it is too late already when they come on university.  I am absolutely sure that we need from kindergarten to teach the children that be open is the  90% of the happiness in life indeed.  
**0:38:15-0:38:22:**  Absolutely.  Yeah.  Liberating yourself from all of the boundaries you put up.  
**0:38:22-0:38:34:**  Very nice.  So I want to ask you, what is your favorite way to cook mushrooms?  There is many, but I will surprise you with a very ordinary response.  
**0:38:34-0:38:48:**  The best way to cook mushroom is just fresh mushroom, put in wheat, white flour, then  egg, then paneer meal.  And then you put the salt inside of egg.  
**0:38:48-0:39:04:**  And when you cover with that, like a steak Parisienne, place in the deep oil.  It is not very healthy.  But trust me, it is something what I really, really like.  
**0:39:04-0:39:10:**  OK, that sounds great.  I'm going to try that.  It sounds like an oyster mushroom schnitzel or something.  
**0:39:10-0:39:19:**  Exactly.  Exactly.  Thanks so much for listening to this episode of the Great Full podcast.  
**0:39:19-0:39:33:**  If you liked it, then please go ahead and subscribe and share it with a friend.  And I would love to get your questions answered here.  So if you have something that you would like me to explore on the show, go ahead, pull  
**0:39:33-0:39:46:**  out your phone, open up the voice memo app, hit record, and then email it to podcast at  the great full dot com.  And I'll do my very best to get your questions answered here on the show.  
**0:39:46-0:40:16:**  Music in this episode came from Blue Dot Sessions.  