<script src="https://cdn.podlove.org/web-player/embed.js"></script>
    <script>
        document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', function () {
          if (document.readyState === 'interactive' || document.readyState === 'complete') {
            podlovePlayer('#player', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/The Great Full/Circular-bio-economy-of-wellbeing-with-prof-jacqueline-mcglade-ucl-ep-19.json', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/The Great Full/config.json').then(registerExternalEvents('player'))
          }
        })
  </script>---
title: Circular Bio Economy Of Wellbeing With Prof Jacqueline Mcglade Ucl Ep 19
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### The Great Full  (2022-03-14)  
### Author(s): Michelle Grant  

**0:00:00-0:00:17:**  It's the fact that countries that have gone through multiple cycles and have evolved towards  the kind of wellbeing principles that we're talking about are the kinds of nation states  that make it very easy for women to become their leaders.  
**0:00:17-0:00:27:**  And I think that's really the two go together.  It's not that you have to have a woman leader to get a wellbeing economy.  It's actually that they mutually support each other.  
**0:00:27-0:00:39:**  Hi, everyone.  Welcome to the Grateful podcast, where we explore how we can eat, live and lead to build  a more sustainable world.  
**0:00:39-0:00:53:**  This is a place where we hear the stories of women leading change and building more  generative and even joyful communities, food systems and lives.  I'm really excited to share my conversation with you today because I had the chance to  
**0:00:53-0:01:08:**  sit down with the very impressive Jacqueline McGlade.  And I actually got in contact with Jackie because one of you wonderful podcast listeners  wrote to me and said, I absolutely have to speak to Jackie as a guest because she's one  
**0:01:08-0:01:17:**  of the most fascinating people that this person had ever met.  And so that was enough of an incentive for me to reach out to Jackie.  And she kindly agreed to join me.  
**0:01:17-0:01:28:**  And within the first five minutes of our conversation here, I think you'll begin to understand why  her story is just so fascinating and why she has so much interesting knowledge and wisdom  to share with us.  
**0:01:28-0:01:40:**  So from Jackie's work, that's really taken her all around the world.  She has this wealth of interesting insights at the interface of sustainability and food  security and climate change and leadership.  
**0:01:40-0:01:55:**  And I was interested to talk with her about a new report she was a part of, which ties  all this together through something called the circular bioeconomy of wellbeing.  And you'll find out more about what all of that means during our conversation and most  
**0:01:55-0:02:05:**  importantly, what we can all do to play our part in it.  Jackie's currently a professor of resilience and sustainable development at the university  college London.  
**0:02:05-0:02:20:**  And she's also a professor at Strathmore university in Kenya, which is where she actually lives.  Jackie was previously chief scientist of the United nations environment program.  And she was the executive director of the European environment agency for 10 years.  
**0:02:20-0:02:35:**  So she's really had some of the big jobs in the sustainability and environment space.  And that's why I was excited to tap into her wisdom and yeah, find out what all of these  years of fascinating work experience have taught her and what she thinks are the most  
**0:02:35-0:02:51:**  important things we need to be doing to build a more sustainable and resilient world.  I really love my conversation with Jackie and I hope you will as well.  And to get started, I was really interested to learn more about her story and what led  
**0:02:51-0:03:06:**  her to currently be living in the Masai Mara.  Looking into your background and your experience, I just found your journey really fascinating.  And I concluded at the end that you must thrive in extremes because I saw that you'd grown  
**0:03:06-0:03:18:**  up in the UK, you had done work, not only in the ocean floor, but also in space.  And you now live in a mud hut in the Masai Mara in Kenya.  And I am sure there's a fascinating story behind all of that.  
**0:03:18-0:03:36:**  So could you just share your story and how you got to be where you are today?  I think the main driver in my life has always been never really knowing where to say no  and always being completely fascinated by going to places where obviously where no one  
**0:03:36-0:03:49:**  else has ever been.  And lots of explorations to completely uninhabited, untouched parts of the planet.  But on the way, discovering that people are so interesting and they want to talk to you  
**0:03:49-0:04:02:**  about their lives and their stories.  And I always felt that you gain more by just going with the flow, going what might seem  to be an incredibly dangerous journey.  
**0:04:02-0:04:15:**  But actually, if there's somebody with you, they're taking equal dangers.  And so for me, danger, exploration, excitement, they all kind of meld into one.  And that's really why I've taken what appear to be very difficult journeys.  
**0:04:15-0:04:31:**  But at the time, it's just one step in front of another, whether it's crossing the ice  cap or doing extreme physical challenges, as well as intellectual challenges.  I've always felt that if you go with other people, you can travel to places which are  
**0:04:31-0:04:37:**  just amazing.  So that's always been my kind of mantra.  If you've never been there, you might as well try it.  
**0:04:37-0:04:43:**  Amazing.  And so how did you find yourself living in the Masai Mara?  I used to work for the UN.  
**0:04:43-0:04:52:**  And whilst I was there, one of my staff visited the Masai Mara because I was headquartered  in Nairobi.  And he came back and said, oh, wouldn't it be great if we could invite some of the Masai  
**0:04:52-0:05:01:**  to come up to the UN headquarters and talk to us about their life?  So I said, oh, yeah, that would be really interesting.  So Friday seminar, if you can imagine it.  
**0:05:01-0:05:09:**  And so a group of people, four men came up.  And subsequently, I learned my husband was amongst them.  It was the first time they'd ever left the Mara.  
**0:05:09-0:05:20:**  They'd never been to a city before.  They came with all of their tribal gear and their weapons.  And they arrived at the UN with spears, poison arrows, the whole works.  
**0:05:20-0:05:27:**  Unfortunately, the UN guards, they're just brilliant.  So they thought, OK, let's let them in.  And so they came and they gave a seminar.  
**0:05:27-0:05:44:**  But when my husband walked into the room where everyone was waiting for them, I didn't know  who I was, but he saw me and he said that I was exactly the person that he had dreamed  that he would marry when he was 10 years old.  
**0:05:44-0:05:51:**  And he had told his parents and his parents that under no circumstances can you marry  a white person.  You know, you have to marry a Masai.  
**0:05:51-0:06:03:**  You will become the next chief and so on.  Anyway, he went back to his village and he must have, I don't know, caused the most massive  stir, because the next thing was as part of the handover when he became the new chief  
**0:06:03-0:06:15:**  from his father, the local chief, he announced that he was going to get married to me.  But I didn't know anything about this.  So he invited me to the ceremony and I arrived with a colleague and another friend to an  
**0:06:15-0:06:26:**  enormous gathering of thousands of people with all their weapons and everything else.  A huge, huge celebration.  And we thought we were just going there to visit to see the new chief being made.  
**0:06:26-0:06:36:**  But at the very end, when they started throwing milk over me and I asked the interpreter,  you know, what's happening?  Oh, this is when you're announced as the chief's wife.  
**0:06:36-0:06:44:**  And I went, oh, right.  OK, that's sort of interesting.  And of course, you don't really say no.  
**0:06:44-0:06:53:**  And there's there's all people with swords and spears and all sorts of things around.  So I thought I'd just go along with it.  And yes, I told my daughters, I said, I think I just got married.  
**0:06:53-0:07:01:**  And they just went, that's so typical of you.  You don't find out before you get into things.  Anyway, we fell madly in love with each other.  
**0:07:01-0:07:13:**  And we got married and he and I then built a new village with about 300 people.  We built houses for everybody, still mud huts.  And we put in electricity and brought water into the village from the mountains.  
**0:07:13-0:07:24:**  And we all lived happily ever after, so to speak.  Wow, that's amazing.  How was that moment for you as a super independent woman to realize in the moment that you were  
**0:07:24-0:07:35:**  now married?  Well, I think that I didn't really understand all of the interests of it.  And it took me probably about six months to be comfortable with wearing because I wear  
**0:07:35-0:07:44:**  a Maasai dress when I'm in the village.  And so I and of course, no one can speak English.  It's all in, particularly the ladies, they only speak inside.  
**0:07:44-0:07:51:**  They don't speak anything else.  So I was learning the language as quickly as I could.  And it is just a mud hut.  
**0:07:51-0:08:00:**  And there's very little and people are extremely poor.  I mean, there is no money, there's nothing.  And so you realize what you can do without.  
**0:08:00-0:08:14:**  And so overnight, I began to just do what people do in this kind of extreme situations,  you figure out what's really important.  And then you just do without all the rest of it.  
**0:08:14-0:08:28:**  And so we have a very, we have a very stripped down life, but the greatest thing, of course,  is that you wake up in the morning, and you're greeted by least 300 people who are so happy  to see that you're alive and you're happy and wealthy in in terms of that.  
**0:08:28-0:08:40:**  So it's important that you get back to the idea that we're naturally born to live in  communities.  And that's the way that humans actually thrive.  
**0:08:40-0:08:51:**  Absolutely.  I can imagine there are many other lessons learned from that experience also in terms  of food security and climate change, which are topics that you've worked on in that context  
**0:08:51-0:09:04:**  where I imagine there's a high vulnerability to food security and climate change, but also  a much closer connection to nature and an entirely different way of living.  What are some of the things you're seeing there that are really inspiring in terms of  
**0:09:04-0:09:18:**  adapting and mitigating climate change and facing food security challenges?  I think the most fundamental point is that tribes like the Maasai are extraordinarily  resilient.  
**0:09:18-0:09:31:**  So they know that they can survive on very, very little.  And when I say little, I mean little, you know, like a thin cup of tea in the morning  with some milk in it, some leaves from the forest during the day, and another cup of  
**0:09:31-0:09:47:**  tea at the end of the day.  And essentially, if you're confident that you can survive on so little, you see a very  different attitude towards the kind of difficulties that climate change can bring.  
**0:09:47-0:10:04:**  Nevertheless, the Maasai themselves have just issued a new calendar.  So given the fact that most people are illiterate in the tribe, everything is done with pictures.  And so typically, there would be the rainy seasons, the dry seasons and so on.  
**0:10:04-0:10:15:**  And what this new calendar talks about is not only how has it shifted, but what people  should be doing at these different times.  So what should you do in February is different to what it was before.  
**0:10:15-0:10:25:**  So they have pictures of what people should be doing in February, what should they be  doing in June, and so on.  And for me, it's a fantastic manifestation of long term survival.  
**0:10:25-0:10:32:**  So effectively, they just kind of moved everything.  So it fits now with nature.  And it fits with what's happening in climate change.  
**0:10:32-0:10:39:**  So you do certain things with cattle at different times.  And now that's sort of shifted.  You realise that you're going to be in drought conditions.  
**0:10:39-0:10:51:**  So you kind of do different things.  It's like the old almanac.  And all of this, what it's doing is just turning on that traditional tap of knowledge, which  
**0:10:51-0:11:03:**  says, we're kind of moving into a different regime of how we're going to adapt and how  we're going to be.  And so it's far less extreme than perhaps it might be when you're talking to people  
**0:11:03-0:11:13:**  in the urban environment, who are in a coastal area, which may become inundated and things  get washed away.  So they're able to adapt, they're able to think in a way which is all encompassing,  
**0:11:13-0:11:21:**  and they don't see a difference between themselves and nature.  It is just one continuum.  And because of that, it's not a war.  
**0:11:21-0:11:29:**  It's not like them and us, nature and us.  It's just like, oh, nature is doing this, right?  We better move in this direction.  
**0:11:29-0:11:42:**  And as you have such a strong background in science, how has that influenced how you show  up as a scientist?  Well, it's fantastic because of course, I can explain some of the things that are happening.  
**0:11:42-0:11:56:**  And I can also bring that global view right down into the village.  But I can also take what's happening at the village level out into the global setting,  because there are things that they do, which are, they've come out of millennia of dealing  
**0:11:56-0:12:09:**  with extremes, whether it's floods and droughts and so on, pests and all kinds of nasty things  happening.  And in a way, that's what we've lost in most of civilization around the world.  
**0:12:09-0:12:23:**  We've lost that innate ability, our inner instinct of how to respond to changes in nature.  And they have not lost it.  So whether you're up in the forest or wherever you are with indigenous peoples, and I found  
**0:12:23-0:12:37:**  the same thing up in the Arctic, wherever I've worked with indigenous peoples, there  is a kind of confidence that nature will take care of you.  And okay, they realize that death may come, but they're much more accepting also of deaths  
**0:12:37-0:12:52:**  of fatality in a way that we haven't really, we've lost that sense of it's a continuum,  and you're just part of the whole system.  Yeah, I think we've particularly seen that in the last year and a half, people's inability  
**0:12:52-0:13:06:**  to face the inevitability of death.  Yeah, we don't have that skill or mindset anymore in many parts of the world.  So I mean, this kind of links to what I also wanted to ask you.  
**0:13:06-0:13:19:**  You've worked on a lot of different sustainability-related challenges.  From your perspective, what are the biggest changes we need to make as humanity, not at  the superficial or surface level, but at a much deeper level?  
**0:13:19-0:13:36:**  I think we have to recognize that our old model where the elites have the answers and  somehow it comes down to us is completely wrong.  That in many cases, yes, we need education, we need research, but I often find that there's  
**0:13:36-0:13:49:**  far more innovation in communities and in the way in which people solve problems that  never makes it into textbooks.  So I think there's got to be a deep-rooted understanding, which would be called something  
**0:13:49-0:14:00:**  – I call it chthonic traditions.  Chthonic traditions are where you don't set up institutions just to carry knowledge  forward.  
**0:14:00-0:14:13:**  Knowledge is shared.  And one of the things that we need to learn is to not separate people away from knowledge  that will help them move, adapt, to live, to live more securely, but also where their  
**0:14:13-0:14:21:**  voice can be heard.  And that for me is a very deep change because it starts to talk about the equivalency of  humans.  
**0:14:21-0:14:37:**  It starts to move away from hierarchy in the formal sense that the developed world has  and go back to an idea that you gain your wisdom and the way you use that wisdom and  that experience is how you are then respected by others in the community.  
**0:14:37-0:14:51:**  So you kind of earn that respect as opposed to buy the respect or learn it from a very  narrow point of view.  And I think that's, for me, it comes down to a very deep change that we have to have,  
**0:14:51-0:15:08:**  which is a respect for each other and for nature.  And that's – it sounds very superficial, but if you listen to that and really understand  what it means, it alters pretty much everything, even the way that we think about what is the  
**0:15:08-0:15:13:**  economy for.  What is the economy for?  Well, it's not just to make a few people wealthier.  
**0:15:13-0:15:24:**  It's actually to try to make sure that everybody has security, that we have safe housing, we  have energy and so on and so forth.  So that's where I think the biggest change has got to come.  
**0:15:24-0:15:32:**  And it's about well-being, it's about prosperity, but it's for all.  It's not just for the elites.  Yeah, I think that's the key word.  
**0:15:32-0:15:47:**  The more I think about sustainability or regeneration or whatever buzzword you want to use, at the  end it comes down to well-being for ourselves and others and the planet and realising that,  in essence, that's all the same thing.  
**0:15:47-0:15:58:**  And I was really interested to see – you're a co-author on this report, The 10 Steps to  a Circular Bioeconomy of Well-Being, which is a mouthful of a title, but I really like  it.  
**0:15:58-0:16:11:**  And I was wondering if you could tell me more about what this circular bioeconomy of well-being  is and what are the important steps we need to take to get to it.  Well, lots of people talk about the circular economy and that kind of makes sense if you  
**0:16:11-0:16:24:**  live in an industrialised world where you have a lot of waste and we talk about gathering  waste and making value out of it by converting it, recycling it and so on.  And then there's a kind of next step where you go beyond that circularity and you start  
**0:16:24-0:16:38:**  to think about, well, maybe if we redesign things then we don't need to recycle them  because if we can actually repair them and renew them in a way which is not putting them  once through another loop, then we're getting closer and closer.  
**0:16:38-0:16:49:**  And of course what we're trying to do is make the most out of the material resources that  we have.  But a lot of it is still entrenched around resources that are finite, whether it's fossil  
**0:16:49-0:17:02:**  fuels or minerals and so forth.  Whereas the bioeconomy for me is essentially infinite because things continue to grow and  they grow in such a way that we can use them for many things.  
**0:17:02-0:17:16:**  So the first stage of this circular bioeconomy was going back to the fundamental idea of  the human-non-human relationship and looking at how we can interact with the non-human  part to better effect.  
**0:17:16-0:17:32:**  So for example, growing trees, yes, of course to secure carbon, yes to create all kinds  of timber products and so on, but actually trees have got medicines.  They need very little nurturing in some cases, but some cases they do.  
**0:17:32-0:17:46:**  But what's fascinating about the circular bioeconomy and wellbeing is that locked up  in the bioeconomy are many, many chemicals and complexes that are really good for our  wellbeing.  
**0:17:46-0:18:02:**  So if you read the literature, there's some literature that documents how improvements  to our wellbeing happen from very short periods of being in a forest, so 30 minutes in a forest  or a walk on the beach, breathing in clean air.  
**0:18:02-0:18:17:**  But more than that, it kind of resets our internal dynamics.  So there's a very deep rooted sense in which working with the bioeconomy, which is circular  by its very nature because you're not creating pollutants, which then you have to deal with,  
**0:18:17-0:18:33:**  which take you out of the circularity.  But if you work on the bioeconomy where everything has that bio base, local foods produced, et  cetera, then you come back to understanding that this is wellbeing because in a very mundane  
**0:18:33-0:18:48:**  way, you would say, well, I'm not travelling hundreds of miles or food isn't travelling  hundreds of miles to get to me.  I'm actually much more closely locked into my local setting and human beings are highly  
**0:18:48-0:19:01:**  adapted to their local setting.  So whether it's through nutrition and diet, we have the most amazing set of phenomena  to do with the human body, whether it's our skin or ability to eat different kinds of  
**0:19:01-0:19:13:**  foods.  So wellbeing for me is tightly coupled with our local environment and then of course,  tightly coupled with it being healthy and essentially being able to regenerate itself.  
**0:19:13-0:19:26:**  So as we regenerate ourselves every day, as our skin grows and it replaces itself and  so on, we're actually taking in our local environment.  Everything we eat and our breathing and the water we consume, all of that is essentially  
**0:19:26-0:19:39:**  telling us that we are just part of nature.  So that's what the circular bioeconomy for wellbeing is all about.  I guess the main question that comes up for me then is what leadership do you think we  
**0:19:39-0:19:52:**  need to move that forward to achieve that?  I mean it is a very different kind of leadership.  We saw in the last two to three years with the wellbeing economy alliance initially and  
**0:19:52-0:20:07:**  now governments sort of jumping towards it, particularly smaller governments, Iceland,  Finland, New Zealand, Scotland and so on, that the principles of a wellbeing economy,  which talk about equality, they talk about the bioeconomy, they talk about all the things  
**0:20:07-0:20:22:**  I've been mentioning, a respect for each other principles, not necessarily owning things  for generations to come, but actually dispersing wealth.  The countries that are best able to take on this are those that are led by women.  
**0:20:22-0:20:40:**  Now that's not a coincidence by any form, it's the fact that countries that have gone  through multiple cycles and have evolved towards the kind of wellbeing principles that we're  talking about are the kinds of nation states that make it very easy for women to become  
**0:20:40-0:20:48:**  their leaders.  And I think that's really the two go together.  It's not that you have to have a woman leader to get a wellbeing economy, it's actually  
**0:20:48-0:21:00:**  that they mutually support each other.  And it's a different kind of leadership because it's a leadership which is much more tightly  connected between the leader and communities.  
**0:21:00-0:21:14:**  There's a coupling, there's a greater power of voice from the local up to whatever decision  making level you want, but there's also what I call third order governing where essentially  responsibility is given over to the community.  
**0:21:14-0:21:28:**  So it's a different kind of leadership.  It's not that people don't take responsibility, it's not that people aren't accountable, but  there is a kind of sense in which the community takes on a different role and finds its own  
**0:21:28-0:21:40:**  leadership.  So it's not politically or ideologically, it's the leadership that is right for that  community to solve those problems at that time.  
**0:21:40-0:21:54:**  That's so important.  And in working on that, have there been particular individuals or communities or let's say case  studies that have really inspired you in terms of demonstrating this leadership?  
**0:21:54-0:22:11:**  Yes, I think all over the world, wherever I've had the opportunity to visit and travel  and be close to communities, I can find male and female, gender doesn't really seem to  be so much the issue amongst indigenous peoples because there people have different roles,  
**0:22:11-0:22:32:**  but the kind of the hallmark of the leadership that I've run into, I think can be properly  identified, perhaps in the Maasai, but also in the Inuit and a few other communities,  for example, in Greenland, in the Sami peoples and so forth, is that the leadership that  
**0:22:32-0:22:57:**  I have really found most effective is the leadership where, for example, in the Mao  forest, we have a couple of ladies, Beatrice and Irene, who have a kind of a formal position,  but why they are considered to be leaders is that they understand the intergenerational,  
**0:22:57-0:23:13:**  they understand how to connect young people with the elders.  They understand the power of storytelling and they're able to translate all the kind  of noise that's out in the system into the daily pragmatic lives of people and really  
**0:23:13-0:23:31:**  make a difference and then to sustain it and then just to really be there on the ground.  Up in Greenland, there was a hunter and he was quite an extraordinary man because he  also took on a lot of orphans who, for whatever reason, had lost their parents in a very extreme  
**0:23:31-0:23:49:**  setting where you're right on the edge, you're in the Arctic, you've got polar bears and  it's a hunting society, but again, he was the one who could really make that connection  between the dogs, the animals, the wild animals, the stark environment, climate change and  
**0:23:49-0:24:02:**  then society as a whole.  So I think for me, no matter where I go, I always find that there's a natural leadership  amongst those who can make those connections and there are many, many stories of how people  
**0:24:02-0:24:12:**  have come back.  Maybe they've even been trained outside and then they've come back, but they've been able  to bring a community together because they could see the connections that need to be  
**0:24:12-0:24:22:**  made.  Yeah, it's about building and holding a container for those connections to be held and sustained.  Yeah, thanks for those examples.  
**0:24:22-0:24:38:**  For me, leadership always links to this question of personal development and I'm wondering  what your thoughts are on what sort of personal development we need to be future ready and  what future leaders need to be future ready.  
**0:24:38-0:24:51:**  As you know, if you read my CV, people say, oh, you know, you've had all these really  big jobs, top jobs, you see, head of this and head of that and so on, chief scientist  and that, but I wish, and this is a personal reflection, I wish that I had learned about  
**0:24:51-0:25:04:**  something, which I experienced when I was in my fifties.  I wish I had learned it when I was in my twenties and my teens and what it is, is it's called  Vipassana.  
**0:25:04-0:25:22:**  It's a kind of meditation and what I realized as soon as I had completed this course with  the 10 days of not talking and all of that, which my staff were aghast that this could  actually happen, was that being able to work your way slowly, but eventually in a sort  
**0:25:22-0:25:37:**  of habitual way into your inner self and literally almost down to the molecular level where you  could detect as I do, I can detect when things aren't going well or if there's a small thing  going wrong in my body.  
**0:25:37-0:25:57:**  Having that ability to do housekeeping of your brain and housekeeping at the same time  of your body is a skill that is unparalleled because what it has enabled me to do, since  I carried on doing this every day, is it's enabled me to see things and see connections.  
**0:25:57-0:26:15:**  I've always been very good at pattern matching and understanding the connections and the  linkages between the science that I know and what I'm experiencing and all of that.  But what it allows me to do is to think more deeply on what are the dynamics between people.  
**0:26:15-0:26:34:**  And so the greatest skill I think that you can achieve is not being necessarily emotional  about everything, but in having that emotional intelligence to be able to understand what  someone is actually saying to you when they're speaking, but their body is telling you something  
**0:26:34-0:26:46:**  else.  And I'm not saying you can learn it, but going through the route of meditation kind of clears  your own system out so that you're much more open to understand what other people are doing.  
**0:26:46-0:27:01:**  I think that's the biggest change that I experience.  And so I don't hear noise, I just listen to the person and then they're able to communicate.  And the extraordinary thing that happened when I was being trained by a forest monk  
**0:27:01-0:27:13:**  who came from Sri Lanka from the forest, where he would meditate for 15 hours a day, quite  an extraordinary man.  But during the 10 days, literally all of farm animals around where we were being trained,  
**0:27:13-0:27:23:**  there were three of us, went silent.  They just sat quietly around.  And then when we finished the training and we started just to sort of give off energy,  
**0:27:23-0:27:35:**  then all the animals sort of got up and started doing what animals do, barking and yelping  and peacocks, crow, and all this.  And I find that that's something which is tremendous is that that skill where you can  
**0:27:35-0:27:49:**  help people to calm, particularly, I do a lot of conflict resolution.  So helping people to be calm in a highly conflictual setting is really, really important.  I think that's so important.  
**0:27:49-0:28:03:**  What's happening internally is the biggest reflection of what we'll then perceive is  happening around us as well.  I think also, if you can trust in yourself, then that measure of trust can convey.  
**0:28:03-0:28:11:**  And I'm not talking about hubris.  I'm not talking about arrogance.  I'm talking about a sort of centering of yourself thinking, I think I can manage this or actually,  
**0:28:11-0:28:17:**  no, I can't manage it.  And I'll ask for help.  I think that's also an extremely important leadership skill, knowing when to ask for  
**0:28:17-0:28:30:**  help, and when to inspire others to sort of come to the front.  And when just to sort of take a backward step and let others fill the space.  I think that's absolutely vital.  
**0:28:30-0:28:34:**  Completely agree.  And when to say I really don't know.  That's as important.  
**0:28:34-0:28:45:**  Any other things you would go back and tell your younger self?  I think probably, yeah, certainly listen more to people.  Always listen carefully.  
**0:28:45-0:29:01:**  I think without sounding self-satisfied, I was always very pleased in the, sometimes  in the short term and the longer term by the enthusiasm I always had for things.  And as I said, to dive into the deep end and just kind of get involved, I think.  
**0:29:01-0:29:18:**  So I would always say to my younger self, just go for it because you never lose.  You always gain something by committing yourself to things and being enthusiastic.  But I think sometimes maybe, and it's youth in its own right, you feel there are moments  
**0:29:18-0:29:22:**  when you are incongruable.  And of course you aren't.  I mean, absolutely you're not.  
**0:29:22-0:29:35:**  But I think overall, you know, by dint of using your intelligence and everyone has intelligence,  it just comes in different packages and different ways, but using it always to help others.  It pays back over the years.  
**0:29:35-0:29:46:**  I can't tell you how many people have come over the decades, said to me something like,  you know, you did this for me.  And I, you know, tiny little things and people are so grateful and they come back and they  
**0:29:46-0:29:50:**  tell you it's wonderful.  It's really nice.  So always be kind to people.  
**0:29:50-0:30:02:**  Always.  It starts with kindness to yourself, I think.  And all of these exciting adventures that you went on, I could imagine there were moments  
**0:30:02-0:30:12:**  where you perhaps doubted yourself or doubted the decision to embark on them.  What did you do in those moments to find courage and to find a way to continue?  I don't know what it is.  
**0:30:12-0:30:15:**  I mean, I'm a great one.  I can bury things.  Absolutely.  
**0:30:15-0:30:23:**  If they're just so awful.  And I've had one or two absolutely really awful things happen to me in my life.  I don't know.  
**0:30:23-0:30:37:**  There is something I have inside me which means I get up and I just solve it.  But if it's very dangerous, I've done quite a few very dangerous things.  And I think in the end it is about being able to calm yourself and just say, if you don't  
**0:30:37-0:30:50:**  get through it, well, you know, you've had a great life.  So I've always had that sense of cutoff and just to go for it.  So I have a lot of confidence in my skills and capabilities.  
**0:30:50-0:31:00:**  But when it pushes me right to the very edge and I think, oh, this is actually really dangerous,  then I kind of think, well, you have to live with it.  You got yourself into this mess.  
**0:31:00-0:31:09:**  Now you've got to get yourself out of this mess.  So that's usually the way I've treated ridiculously difficult and dangerous things.  Yes.  
**0:31:09-0:31:20:**  So I'm interested to know all this wisdom that you have.  I know it comes primarily from life experience.  But is there perhaps one book that you've reread many times in your life that you think  
**0:31:20-0:31:27:**  has been a constant kind of companion in this journey or any other resource that need to  be a book?  Well, I've tended never to.  
**0:31:27-0:31:32:**  I don't like rereading books.  I'm terrible at that.  There are very few books that I have reread.  
**0:31:32-0:31:42:**  But I've also I mean, I think I've read thousands of books because I just read I just read all  the time, always reading, reading, reading.  I mean, there are reference books that I'll go back to and I feel secure when I oh, yes,  
**0:31:42-0:31:55:**  particularly books around the medicines and, you know, a lot of medicinal books I read,  but particularly plants and medicines like that.  But I love reading inspirational books from, you know, Bear Grylls to Obama.  
**0:31:55-0:32:10:**  I mean, all of these books where I see something, a little nugget and sometimes so it's not  a book per se.  It's lots and lots of short little pieces and snapshots of something that somebody did  
**0:32:10-0:32:22:**  at a time when it would appear that, you know, the odds were stacked against them.  Kofi Annan, I mean, he's just he was inspirational, a Secretary General, and I had the privilege  to meet him.  
**0:32:22-0:32:35:**  I was really struck by him because, again, you know, he found himself in some awful situations  in Africa, particularly here in Kenya.  He came in and he brokered the kind of the peace deal, as we would call it.  
**0:32:35-0:32:45:**  So he wrote a he wrote a book.  Obama has written a book.  So I find those books written by people who I have huge respect for to be inspirations.  
**0:32:45-0:32:52:**  And I probably do travel the world with a with a bookcase of those kinds of books.  Definitely.  Definitely.  
**0:32:52-0:33:03:**  But I love poetry.  Norman MacAig is a particular favorite of mine, only probably because I heard him read  his own poetry in Scotland years and years and years ago.  
**0:33:03-0:33:17:**  And it stuck particularly a piece in a train journey where he talks about he's obviously  lying in a bunk and he talks about drawing his legs in as they go through a tunnel.  You know, it's just it's so, so beautiful.  
**0:33:17-0:33:28:**  Some of his descriptions of nature.  So yeah, I would say it's probably a catalog rather than a book, a catalog of small pieces  out of many, many hundreds of books that stay with me.  
**0:33:28-0:33:34:**  And I remember them and I think about them.  It's interesting you mentioned Obama's book.  I'm reading that at the moment.  
**0:33:34-0:33:45:**  And it's it is fascinating to go back and read about how situations were before they  were historic, right?  When it was the first person doing something or you were doing something unexpected, just  
**0:33:45-0:33:57:**  how difficult each moment was and the courage that they kept needing to find again and again  to stand out and unpacking it and making it a next step and the next step, but always  keeping the long view in sight.  
**0:33:57-0:34:08:**  Yeah.  What work are you up to at the moment that you feel excited about?  I'm completely excited about the idea that we're launching a voluntary carbon market  
**0:34:08-0:34:25:**  which connects investors to hundreds of ladies who are working in the Mao forest and in the  Maasai Mara who are going into the forests that have been degraded and we've taught them  how to collect the seeds of particular medicinal trees and they are growing the seeds into  
**0:34:25-0:34:45:**  seedlings, nurturing them, watering them or keeping them on their way.  And then we got a small donation from a person who was just out of the blue helped and it  has been transformational because those ladies have gone out and have walked all of the areas  
**0:34:45-0:34:56:**  around where they live and they've claimed community land.  So they're not going to the government, they've claimed community land and they're now rescuing  and restoring and planting the trees.  
**0:34:56-0:35:14:**  I've taught them how to measure the satellites and actually measuring trees and all of that.  And so now as we launch this, we can genuinely say that if you want to make a difference  on planet earth, you can look at our organic carbon maps of the forest and the Mara.  
**0:35:14-0:35:32:**  You can tell us what kind of impact you want to have and we can then put that small donation  directly into a household and she will then be able to pay for school fees and food for  years to come and she'll go and nurture that tree and she'll take a picture of it and over  
**0:35:32-0:35:48:**  15 years, gradually it'll grow and it will not only produce medicines or fruits and food,  it'll also sequester carbon at a rate that's nearly the same as the Amazon forest, which  is extraordinary, but it will also give her the ability to be independent financially  
**0:35:48-0:35:53:**  as well.  So it's really exciting.  I think that's the one.  
**0:35:53-0:36:11:**  And then at the other end of the scale, we've found a way to bring the waste of the glass  bottles into a kind of production system where you crush it, you coat it with a particular  activated media and it can then clean water even from the river Ganges once passed through  
**0:36:11-0:36:20:**  into drinking water.  And at the other end I can put it into the ground.  It's called porous alpha and I can put it into the ground and I can turn deserts into  
**0:36:20-0:36:30:**  green areas.  So within two weeks I can grow trees in the desert by putting this directly into the ground  just from recycled glass.  
**0:36:30-0:36:36:**  And it's all communities.  It's all Samburu.  It's basically communities are doing all of this.  
**0:36:36-0:36:45:**  So yeah, it's amazing.  And so what I'm trying to do now is package it up so that people can be inspired and hopefully  donate some money and get involved and do it.  
**0:36:45-0:36:54:**  We've got literally hundreds of thousands of people doing this now.  That's amazing.  We'll put the links in the show notes so that anybody listening can follow up on the projects  
**0:36:54-0:37:02:**  and get involved.  Let me ask you, is the world any different today for a woman than when it was when you  started your career?  
**0:37:02-0:37:11:**  Superficially, when I began my kind of career, I would have been correct in saying that I  was always the only woman in the room.  I was the only scientist.  
**0:37:11-0:37:21:**  I was the first scientist in the Canadian federal system to ask for maternity leave.  If you can imagine it.  So you know, I had to actually try to do all of these things first everywhere.  
**0:37:21-0:37:37:**  First one in a submarine, first one here and that.  But what I have seen is what a lonely life that is from the perspective of today.  And I also fundamentally realized that if women had been around in the density that  
**0:37:37-0:37:53:**  we are today in the sciences particularly, but in all these areas of innovation, we would  have achieved sustainability 30 years ago.  Because the answers are completely different to the answers that we were getting 30, 40  
**0:37:53-0:38:06:**  years ago.  And if IPCC, the climate change discussions, had been started with women and not with men,  I suspect we would have had this done and dusted at least 20 years ago.  
**0:38:06-0:38:19:**  So there is a massive difference in the solutions because of the way that women come to the  problem and how we actually try to solve things as opposed to how it was done when I first  started in my career.  
**0:38:19-0:38:28:**  And for that I am eternally grateful.  Yeah, I think that's such a fundamental point that how we understand the situation we're  in depends on how we frame the problem.  
**0:38:28-0:38:37:**  And if we don't have diverse voices at the table when we do that, then we go down the  wrong path.  So I like to ask all my podcast guests this question.  
**0:38:37-0:38:50:**  The podcast is called The Great Full.  So what does living a great and full life mean for you?  Putting the two together means living with the Maasai at one end, living with my other  
**0:38:50-0:39:05:**  family in the UK and Germany and in parts of Europe and recognising that they give me  so much.  But by connecting them, we've been able to start to build a different kind of future  
**0:39:05-0:39:23:**  for a lot of young people here and a lot of young people and older people who see a future  by investing some time and effort into what we're doing in Africa.  So for me, it's been building the connections and that is a great and a full life.  
**0:39:23-0:39:36:**  Thanks so much for listening to this episode of The Great Full podcast.  If you liked it, then please go ahead and subscribe and share it with a friend.  And I would love to get your questions answered here.  
**0:39:36-0:39:50:**  So if there's something that you would like answered or explored on this podcast, just  send me an email to podcast at the great full dot com and I'll do my very best to get your  questions answered here on the show.  
**0:39:50-0:40:03:**  The topic in this episode came from Blue Dot Sessions.  