<script src="https://cdn.podlove.org/web-player/embed.js"></script>
    <script>
        document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', function () {
          if (document.readyState === 'interactive' || document.readyState === 'complete') {
            podlovePlayer('#player', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/The Great Full/Conserving-nature-and-our-wellbeing-with-kavita-prakash-mani-ep-12.json', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/The Great Full/config.json').then(registerExternalEvents('player'))
          }
        })
  </script>---
title: Conserving Nature And Our Wellbeing With Kavita Prakash Mani Ep 12
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### The Great Full  (2021-05-18)  
### Author(s): Michelle Grant  

**0:00:00-0:00:22:**  Hi, I'm Michelle, and welcome to the Great Full Podcast, a place where we contemplate  how we can eat, live, and lead each day to build a more sustainable world.  My guest on the show today is Kavita Prakashmani, and she has spent decades working towards  
**0:00:22-0:00:34:**  something I also really care about, making our food system more sustainable.  Most recently, Kavita was the Global Conservation Director at WWF, but actually I'm catching  her at a really interesting time.  
**0:00:34-0:00:46:**  When we spoke, it was the first day of her professional sabbatical, taking a break from  it all for a while to get some new perspectives.  So naturally, we talked about why this is important, and I also picked her brain to  
**0:00:46-0:01:03:**  get insights on what each of us can do in our personal and professional lives to contribute  to nature conservation and building more sustainable food systems.  So I feel very lucky to talk to you because I know it's quite a special day for you today.  
**0:01:03-0:01:15:**  It's the first day of your professional sabbatical, and you have very kindly agreed to talk with  me.  It is kind of strange to go on a Monday morning and walk your dogs in Central Park and say,  
**0:01:15-0:01:23:**  oh, actually, there's nothing much to do other than have a good chat with Michelle.  So it's a nice way to ease into it.  Wonderful.  
**0:01:23-0:01:33:**  I was worried I was disrupting your plan, so I'm glad to hear that it fits in.  Absolutely.  So I thought it would be nice to just start and hear a little bit about what this sabbatical  
**0:01:33-0:01:42:**  means for you, what taking a break means.  Absolutely.  I think we don't give ourselves the option of taking breaks.  
**0:01:42-0:01:50:**  I think especially in the field that we're in around sustainability and conservation,  these are very passionate careers for us.  They're not even careers.  
**0:01:50-0:02:00:**  They're like callings.  And we put in heart and soul into working whatever organization we may be at.  And recently I've been at WWF and then GrowAsia and the World Economic Forum.  
**0:02:00-0:02:12:**  And at some point, it just feels like, OK, we need to stop, take care of ourselves, reconfigure  what might the direction be, how we can have greater impact, what are the areas that are  important for us.  
**0:02:12-0:02:27:**  So I think at some point in life, it's just nice to slow the pace down a little.  We hadn't planned on COVID, so that's an extra bit.  But COVID is making the world slow down, which is also good to stop and think about what  
**0:02:27-0:02:37:**  all this might mean.  And then on a personal level, because I'm moving back to Singapore, it was like rather  than rushing, as we always do, from one country to another country, one job to another job,  
**0:02:37-0:02:41:**  to just take that pause.  So here we are.  Wonderful.  
**0:02:41-0:02:50:**  And it can sometimes be a bit jolting to go from running full speed to slowing down.  So do you have any ideas of how you sort of want to manage your time or things you want  to explore?  
**0:02:50-0:02:58:**  It is.  It's really strange.  You know, you sign off and you shut your email down and you get out of the WhatsApp group  
**0:02:58-0:03:10:**  from office and then you're like, oh, my God, what am I supposed to do now?  So yeah, I mean, health is definitely high on the agenda to go out for walks and runs.  So hoping to do a lot more of that.  
**0:03:10-0:03:22:**  I'm hoping to have many conversations like this one to actually see what's happening  in the wider world.  I think even though we work with big organizations and big agendas, we do tend to get boxed into  
**0:03:22-0:03:29:**  that reality.  So just taking a step back and reading more, figuring out what the next 10, 15 years might  look like.  
**0:03:29-0:03:40:**  I'm also keen on doing a little more back in Asia.  So I've been out of India for 20 plus years now.  And it would be nice with this move to Singapore to be in the region and see how we can be  
**0:03:40-0:03:51:**  a little more grounded.  So it's a lot of shifts in different ways and subtle ways, but also feels like a full  circle of going back to what got us into the field in the first place and where home is.  
**0:03:51-0:04:00:**  Sounds lovely.  A return to the roots, so to speak.  So actually, in this role that you just wrapped up, you were the global conservation director  
**0:04:00-0:04:10:**  for WWF.  And I was reading about all the interesting work that you were doing in that role from  working on sustainable commodities and plastic pollution to implementing blockchain to trace  
**0:04:10-0:04:21:**  tuna from oceans to the plate.  And I just thought it would be really nice to hear from you what of all the different  projects you worked on, which one you think had the biggest impact and why, if it's possible  
**0:04:21-0:04:25:**  to choose one.  Yeah, it's really hard to choose one.  And thank you for listing them out.  
**0:04:25-0:04:37:**  Just like as you were saying, it brings back how rich the last three, four years have been  and how big the agenda is.  So I think in previous roles, I have worked a lot with supply chains and smallholder farmers  
**0:04:37-0:04:49:**  and continuity and sustainability of the supply chains.  And so that felt like a good exposure into the broader conservation agenda around these.  But then also, like you said, how do you use technology like blockchains to make that happen?  
**0:04:49-0:05:03:**  But I have to say one of my personal highlights of working with WWF is the pure work onto  conservation and bringing stronger markets to bear on that.  And one of the projects that we kicked off early in my stay there was really working  
**0:05:03-0:05:17:**  with the ivory market in China.  China had just closed its ivory market and made it illegal to sell ivory because of the  20,000 elephants dying in Africa every year because of the poaching that brought the ivory  
**0:05:17-0:05:26:**  into China.  And we started looking at it from a market's perspective and saying, how do you get customers  and consumers and look at that from the demand side?  
**0:05:26-0:05:36:**  So how do you use the different means that we have of demand creation to use ways to  reduce that demand?  So we ran some globe scan research.  
**0:05:36-0:05:45:**  We ran online campaigns.  We worked with online markets to close those markets.  We worked with tourists out of China going into Mekong countries where they do tend to  
**0:05:45-0:05:57:**  buy the ivory as well and send them messages on their phone.  We ran little campaigns on the ground.  So there was a lot of this really looking at market-based solutions to fuel conservation  
**0:05:57-0:06:09:**  areas.  And we have seen demand fall like millions of hits on social media, change in perception  from those consumers and then extending that out into market closures in the Mekong countries.  
**0:06:09-0:06:20:**  So that's one that I'm particularly glad to have been part of.  Yeah, that's such an important and overwhelming topic as well.  It must have felt really good to have really seen some tangible impact working on that.  
**0:06:20-0:06:28:**  Absolutely.  And I think it's one of those things where we start putting these areas in silos, right?  We work with business sustainability and that has certain connotations and we work with  
**0:06:28-0:06:39:**  conservation and that has certain boundaries.  But how do we look at all the actors across all of that?  Because at the end of the day, ivory, it might be illegal, but it is a marketplace and there  
**0:06:39-0:06:50:**  are poachers and then it's traded like a commodity.  It's the fourth largest illegal trade is an illegal wildlife trade.  And then there's a market and then they're consumers and we can use and we can learn  
**0:06:50-0:06:57:**  and cross-fertilize.  So that was very, very exciting to see how we can actually make those links happen and  take some of those new tools.  
**0:06:57-0:07:10:**  And I think that brings up a really interesting point for many sustainability challenges that  a lot can actually be done on the consumer side.  And so as you have worked so much on this space of harnessing markets to tackle different  
**0:07:10-0:07:22:**  sustainability goals, what did you learn about the consumption end and what do you think  are the most important things that consumers do?  You can speak generally or the topic that I have a lot of focus on is obviously related  
**0:07:22-0:07:27:**  to food.  Yeah, and absolutely.  And I'm very happy to stick with food, Michelle, because one of the things we were doing at  
**0:07:27-0:07:41:**  WWF and I just wrapped up as I was leaving was create our WWF global goals.  And we're also looking for a new deal for nature and people, which really brings higher  targets and standards into the system.  
**0:07:41-0:07:56:**  And so while we've always traditionally thought about saving our habitats and saving our species,  so looking at forests and grasslands and oceans and rivers and all the natural systems that  we have, and then looking at all of our species, what we realized was that the biggest threat  
**0:07:56-0:08:08:**  to this and a number of reports have come out recently is coming from our production  and our consumption systems.  So we did add a third goal, which said about harming the impact of our production and consumption.  
**0:08:08-0:08:20:**  And primarily, if you look at that, then the food system becomes absolutely one of the  biggest drivers of habitat loss and change, especially around destruction of forests and  grasslands and peatlands and everything else that we have.  
**0:08:20-0:08:33:**  And then the over exploitation of the oceans for fisheries.  So the food system is definitely a big part of the conservation agenda.  And then when you start looking at it, it does come down to consumer choice.  
**0:08:33-0:08:45:**  So consumer choice in terms of diets is something that is not traditionally work that we've  done in the conservation space, but is becoming more and more important.  So not saying that everyone should become vegetarian, but everyone should be aware of  
**0:08:45-0:08:56:**  how the food is produced and what they eat.  So whether it's diets, whether it's sustainability, whether it's traceability, I think we need  to get much more awareness and choice into consumers.  
**0:08:56-0:09:03:**  We have traditionally in our field, always felt like we work with the big companies in  the middle.  And that's what WWF did a lot of.  
**0:09:03-0:09:13:**  So we got all of these certification, like on palm oil and on sugarcane and on soy.  So we felt like if you could certify that and get the big companies to change, then  we could get to a sustainable outcome.  
**0:09:13-0:09:25:**  But it only takes us that far.  And so both in the production end, but especially on the consumer end, we need to really get  much more awareness and action from consumers.  
**0:09:25-0:09:33:**  And we need to shine a spotlight on that.  Yeah.  I think particularly when we act collectively to find our power in numbers and not just  
**0:09:33-0:09:36:**  as individuals.  Absolutely.  Yes.  
**0:09:36-0:09:42:**  And so how do you tip it?  Right.  So we have sustainable organics and everything else growing at a faster rate, but in a very  
**0:09:42-0:09:52:**  small base and that's not shifting the whole market.  That's just niches that we're creating.  I'm wondering if there's been any behavior change in your own life that stemmed from  
**0:09:52-0:10:01:**  anything you've learned at WWF.  Is there something you've changed in your day to day habits?  It's funny you ask that Michelle, because I remember going into a grocery store a few  
**0:10:01-0:10:08:**  years back with my husband and he was like, you work so much on food.  So what is our family policy?  What are we going to buy?  
**0:10:08-0:10:17:**  Is it all organic or is it all local?  And I stood there completely confused because I knew so much.  And I was like, if you buy local and you're not supporting the African farmers, if you're  
**0:10:17-0:10:30:**  buying organic, not all organic is sustainable.  And by the end of it, I was like, oh my God, just buy a mix of everything, which is not  good advice for someone in the sustainability field, but it's just like, okay, the green  
**0:10:30-0:10:41:**  beans need to be from here and the carrots need to be from there.  So it's, it's really hard as a consumer, even with all the knowledge that you have to make  those choices that we particularly do.  
**0:10:41-0:10:53:**  As you said before, personal behavior change is one thing, but the scaling of getting everyone  to collectively change behavior is another.  So little things that I think, and I hope add up.  
**0:10:53-0:11:00:**  I hope they do too.  And I really understand what you say with food.  The more you learn, the more complex it gets, the more aware you are of all the different  
**0:11:00-0:11:07:**  trade-offs and the harder it gets to give people simple advice for their day to day  actions.  So I often struggle with that as well.  
**0:11:07-0:11:19:**  So you mentioned, of course, it's the center of everybody's discussions at the moment,  the current pandemic that we find ourselves in and how that's allowing us to reflect on  many different aspects of our lives, including how much we travel.  
**0:11:19-0:11:34:**  But I also think it's bringing up some interesting discussions that probably weren't happening  enough around the links between nature conservation, our food consumption in particular, and the  emergence of zoonotic diseases like COVID.  
**0:11:34-0:11:48:**  So I was just sort of wondering what you think is the most important thing that you've learned  about this interface in the last few years of your work and also what you think is important  in terms of what action we need to take to avoid a pandemic like this in the future,  
**0:11:48-0:11:57:**  or at least avoid the risk?  Yeah, no, and thank you for raising that.  It's been, in the last few months, particularly been very busy at WWF, as you can imagine,  
**0:11:57-0:12:07:**  to come to grips with this.  And of course, the health of people remains a primary concern, but we can't keep responding  to it and being on the back foot.  
**0:12:07-0:12:17:**  Like you said, we have to understand where these come from and see what needs to be done  and put in place to actually prevent them or at least reduce the incidence of these.  And you're right.  
**0:12:17-0:12:31:**  I mean, these are zoonotic diseases and the World Health Organization has said about 70  to 75% of the recent viruses and outbreaks have come from zoonotic diseases, which means  that it jumps from another animal species or even birds and others into human.  
**0:12:31-0:12:45:**  And that is primarily, in very simple terms, a function of how close humans are to other  species, whether through their food system or directly.  And so the four things that I'd just like to highlight here is one, as we keep reducing  
**0:12:45-0:12:56:**  and encroaching and destroying habitats, that distance between humans and species becomes  lesser and lesser because we're taking away their homes, they come closer to us, and we're  in closer contact with them.  
**0:12:56-0:13:06:**  And again, like I said, the food system is the primary change of these habitats at this  point of time.  So we are directly responsible through our food system to create a exposure to different  
**0:13:06-0:13:15:**  species.  Also, what happens is that as these habitats get lesser, the wildlife itself starts disappearing  and through habitats, the extinction rate increases.  
**0:13:15-0:13:23:**  And so there's what they call a less dilution effect.  There are many, many species and many, many animals that are kind of like, at some point,  some species will stop the virus.  
**0:13:23-0:13:30:**  Now there isn't that barrier and it moves much closer.  So the first one is around habitat.  The second one is around the species themselves.  
**0:13:30-0:13:43:**  The illegal wildlife trade, as we were talking about in ivory, but also in food, the amount  of pangolins and bats and all of the other species that are making their way into our  food chain as exotic species is worrying.  
**0:13:43-0:13:54:**  Of course, there is bushmeat and protein access in many communities from the Arctic to the  Congo where communities are dependent on these as meat sources, but those are smaller in  number.  
**0:13:54-0:14:10:**  And again, we do need to watch it because Ebola also came from bushmeat.  So again, we need to be really careful about how these wild species, these high risk species  are managed and whether they are allowed into our food chain at all and under what hygienic  
**0:14:10-0:14:19:**  conditions we have them.  So we're really calling for the illegal wildlife trade to be monitored and stopped and high  risk species to be particularly managed.  
**0:14:19-0:14:25:**  The third is our food system itself.  A lot of our livestock is becoming homogenous.  They are in very close quarters.  
**0:14:25-0:14:36:**  They have crowded into small spaces.  If there is an outbreak of any kind, it rushes through because they are genetically similar.  They have no resistance and it kind of nothing stops these viruses.  
**0:14:36-0:14:45:**  So whether it's bird flu or swine flu and all of these things, it kind of like spread  through our global food system.  So those are the three, I think from the terms of the causes, but I think one of the other  
**0:14:45-0:14:57:**  things that we're really looking at is what happens next with these stimulus packages  being put forward, the new deals being put forward.  We absolutely must be looking at how you integrate conservation and environmental protection  
**0:14:57-0:15:12:**  and climate change specifically into this because climate change is exacerbating the  loss of habitats and species as we speak.  So we are keen that there is much more integration of long-term sustainability into these stimulus  
**0:15:12-0:15:19:**  packages.  And we're not just looking at going back to exactly how it was and subsidizing big airlines  and big fossil fuel companies.  
**0:15:19-0:15:32:**  That will all just bring us back to where we were in terms of our emissions and our  pollution and our environmental non-sustainability.  So many aspects of this that we need to be taking care of, but absolutely for people  
**0:15:32-0:15:44:**  to understand the clear link between environmental protection and human health, what we're now  starting to call one health.  So planetary health, human health coming together and that interlinkages is absolutely critical.  
**0:15:44-0:15:56:**  I hope that that will become something that we take out of this pandemic.  I certainly hope so as well.  And I think with a lot of the conservation topics, it often feels very distant and far  
**0:15:56-0:16:08:**  away and perhaps a topic of tropical countries, but we're intricately linked with all of these  challenges through how we buy and what we consume.  And I think that we all have a responsibility when we can to become more aware of that and  
**0:16:08-0:16:16:**  to see how changing our own behavior can actually be connected with reducing some of these activities  in other countries.  Absolutely.  
**0:16:16-0:16:28:**  And then, you know, you take mad cow disease and BSC didn't start in developing countries,  started in Europe and the UK.  So, you know, our food systems are fragile and these viruses, they all breed to survive  
**0:16:28-0:16:35:**  and mutate.  So it could be anywhere literally that we can be exposed to these.  So it's a global system that we need to, and it is global, right?  
**0:16:35-0:16:44:**  I mean, anything that happens anywhere, it moves so quickly that we can't be putting  boundaries that easily.  Now, I would love to hear your perspective on this.  
**0:16:44-0:16:55:**  How much can we achieve in our current economic system and how much do we need new alternatives,  whether that's regenerative capitalism or other ideas that are floating around?  There are so many ideas, Michelle.  
**0:16:55-0:17:11:**  I mean, you talked about regenerative capitalism, which is really coming up and the green swan  theory, and there's now compassionate capitalism that people are starting to talk about.  We've had a number of new ideas in terms of stakeholders versus shareholders and who do  
**0:17:11-0:17:26:**  you need to maximize returns for that have been coming and going.  But I think, you know, and I really believe that we need a system reset.  What we've been doing till now is just improving where we are within the system and saying,  
**0:17:26-0:17:40:**  if you're producing a commodity or a good or some food, how do you do it better?  But I think if we are right now where we are is given that we are so conscious of the fragility  of the entire system and the unsustainability of that.  
**0:17:40-0:18:00:**  Do we have the wherewithal and the strength of character to really look at how we can  reimagine the entire future, how we can reimagine what growth looks like, what consumption is  feasible and sustainable and not just measure our progress by how much wealth we accumulate  
**0:18:00-0:18:13:**  or how many goods we have, but a quality of life that is different.  And I know it sounds really esoteric, but I think that is what drives a lot of our economic  conditions right now and what we all strive for.  
**0:18:13-0:18:26:**  And we can't have the lifestyles and the life, you know, the kind of consumption that we  have in many of the markets, especially in the West.  So can we reimagine a future that is more sustainable and then work towards that, which  
**0:18:26-0:18:41:**  will then mean that we don't go back to just saying, oh, we need to get the airlines back  to the level of air travel that we had, but saying actually travel is a luxury and you  travel when you absolutely need to or as a special holiday that you take and what then  
**0:18:41-0:18:55:**  falls out from that.  So it is also interesting to see what's going better and what's getting worse in this.  And I do worry that if we don't systematically look at that system change and try for that  
**0:18:55-0:19:06:**  system change and get it written into whether it's stimulus packages or new economic growth  deals, then we will all just strive to go back to what was rather than what we want  to be.  
**0:19:06-0:19:21:**  Yeah, I have similar feelings.  And I think that we also all need the courage to talk about this at the moment for so long.  Any sort of questioning or critique of capitalism was sort of seen as, oh, you just want to  
**0:19:21-0:19:33:**  move to communism or something else, but it's not a polar discussion like that.  There are so many alternatives and so many things we can build in to the system that  we have right now, but we really need the courage to talk about it.  
**0:19:33-0:19:46:**  As I understand it, you grew up in India, so I was really interested to hear when you  think back to your upbringing and education there, what do you think about that had an  influence on the career path you eventually took?  
**0:19:46-0:20:01:**  It's interesting you say that we had a family Zoom as everyone seems to be having these  days. Yesterday, it was a sad occasion that one of my aunts passed away, but it was also  a celebration because she was 92 and she and my uncle were very strong influences in my  
**0:20:01-0:20:13:**  life.  My uncle, who's my father's elder brother, was a Gandhian. He spent his entire life working  with Gandhi and Gandhian institutes and was part of the landless labor movement, the redistribution  
**0:20:13-0:20:28:**  of land. I'm talking about agriculture so that there was more equitable distribution  of land for people to set up lives. He then set up a center of science for villages, which  was really saying, how do you get a lot of technology that is locally relevant, that  
**0:20:28-0:20:40:**  helps local communities and especially the village economy.  And it was fascinating as a child for me to spend a bit of time with them where they were  making paper from waste or they were making clay tiles and they were looking at construction  
**0:20:40-0:20:55:**  of huts that was very low cost, made out of clay, but with high technology that stayed  cool, that was affordable and sustainable and many of these little, little things that  can make such a big difference. And those are the kind of basic building blocks that  
**0:20:55-0:21:06:**  we kind of take for granted. But when we stop and think about them and see what kind of  motivates us and the influences we've had in life, I just feel like I've been really  lucky in that context.  
**0:21:06-0:21:21:**  My father was from the engineer score in the army, very much of the mindset of saying we  need to give back and that we are blessed with so much that it's all about giving back.  There's a number of pools of those sorts that are very top of mind for me right now, also  
**0:21:21-0:21:37:**  as I move back to Asia. But I definitely feel like growing up in India, seeing what it's  like for nature and people to thrive together. And so all of these little bits about the  people, the warmth, the coming together, our heritage in terms of what's a bottom up movement  
**0:21:37-0:21:48:**  look like.  That's wonderful. So if you were talking to someone who was sort of starting their career  and wanting to work on topics related to food, sustainability, conservation, or just sort  
**0:21:48-0:22:03:**  of generally building a better world, what would your advice be to them?  I would always say follow your heart. And, you know, we know what we want to do. And  a lot of this inspiration comes from within. And then we kind of feel like we have to give  
**0:22:03-0:22:18:**  it up because there's other pressures, there's college choices, career, life and things like  that. And we kind of keep getting pressured into doing something different. I remember  at one point of time, I had a friend call me and says, can you speak to my daughter?  
**0:22:18-0:22:33:**  She's looking at a career and environment. And I've always been happy to do that. And  then the next sentence she said was, and can you talk her out of it? I was like, absolutely  not. I'm not talking out of it. And so I did talk to her and I said, you know, your mom's  
**0:22:33-0:22:49:**  my friend, but I will stand besides you because it's not easy to make these choices for all  the different things that we want. So you have to be able to follow your heart and follow  your dream and be strong and find people like us who can be there and help you through it.  
**0:22:49-0:23:04:**  So I would just say there is a lot to be done. And as we look at our food system, as we look  at our sustainability system, every bit counts. And then the other thing I like to tell people  is that you don't always need to be in a core sustainability role. Like people think, should  
**0:23:04-0:23:21:**  I be in a sustainability organization or an NGO or a consulting firm? I think we need  all our people to be thinking sustainability wherever they are. And sometimes it's more  important to be in mainstream roles of whether it's within a business or within a government  
**0:23:21-0:23:35:**  or anywhere else where you bring the sustainability lens to bear, because we need much more of  the integration between those functions and sustainability, not just have sustainability  outside and then keep trying to influence from outside.  
**0:23:35-0:23:44:**  I fully agree. We don't need sustainability islands. We need networks.  Absolutely. Absolutely. Well said.  And now you've had some fascinating roles all around the world in a lot of different  
**0:23:44-0:24:06:**  contexts and sectors. Based on all that experience, what do you think are the most important leadership  attributes for anybody who wants to work on tackling these big global challenges?  You know, I used to think it was just about sheer stubbornness and bloody mindedness.  
**0:24:06-0:24:21:**  But all of us do like, I'm right, you're wrong. I can see the future and you can't. That kind  of passion that we all brought to it. But I think over years as I've got older, those  rough edges have been smoothed out a lot more. And I feel like the two or three things that  
**0:24:21-0:24:37:**  I feel like leaders need to have is being able to see all parts of the puzzle. Of course,  hold true to what's important to you and the whole sustainability agenda, but see how it  fits into the jigsaw puzzle and what impacts it has. And how do you make it worthwhile  
**0:24:37-0:24:52:**  for everyone? Like, what's the business case? What does the world look like in the shoes  of someone else? And I think we need to be able to not just, like you said, have these  silos, but have this integration. And I think that's really, really important to be able  
**0:24:52-0:25:07:**  to meet people where they are, not just keep saying, I'm right. I think the second one  is collaboration. I mean, that might feel like the next part of integration, but collaboration  is so important. We need big system changes. We need to be able to take people along from  
**0:25:07-0:25:21:**  diverse organizations. And it could be even within the organization, different functions,  different colleagues, different leaders. So how do you bring together a gender rather  than split it apart? And then I've always felt like that passion is important. People  
**0:25:21-0:25:37:**  need to be able to follow a leader and to do it with some kind of determination and  clearheadedness and a clarity of what outcome you want to achieve. And of course, with that  clarity and moving forward is to just say, how do you take people along? Because very  
**0:25:37-0:25:50:**  often we find like, especially in the sustainability field, the leaders have gone so far ahead  that the distance between them and the next person following them becomes so wide that  no one comes behind them. So yes, I just feel like we need those leaders who can actually  
**0:25:50-0:26:06:**  create the movements, take people along and provide solutions all at the same time.  Yes. And which is not always easy, which leads me, I guess, to my next question, which is  what's been your biggest challenge in sort of juggling doing well and being well. So  
**0:26:06-0:26:22:**  facing all of these large, overwhelming challenges and playing a role in leading change. How  have you juggled your own wellbeing with trying to build societal wellbeing?  Brilliant question, Michelle, you're asking someone on the first day of the sabbatical.  
**0:26:22-0:26:38:**  Obviously, I haven't done particularly well. I think that's true for almost everyone right  now. I think the world is becoming so hectic and manic that it's all nearly impossible  to find a pace that suits you. But I think especially for people who are driven by a  
**0:26:38-0:26:53:**  personal passion and a belief, it's even harder to achieve that. And again, we need to pace  ourselves. There's a lot to be done. And sometimes you're in a huge hurry to get there, but the  system can only move so fast. I think one of my personal biggest learning is that you  
**0:26:53-0:27:10:**  can only move as fast as the system allows you to work before you kind of burn out. And  you know, I'm terrible at following my own advice, but the advice I would give for people  is like set a few milestones and achieve them because every bit matters, but also hand over  
**0:27:10-0:27:26:**  the responsibility to other people and other organizations or colleagues or your own team  so that you're not feeling like you are the only one who can save the world because you  may be able to, but you probably burn out before you did that. And individually we can  
**0:27:26-0:27:40:**  only go so far. So that I think for me is one of the biggest things that I've learned  in terms of not burning out is to let go a little more is to inspire people to create  the change, but not feel like every single thing needs to be done by me personally.  
**0:27:40-0:27:54:**  I think that's very good advice. And it also speaks to the importance of building that  network of like-minded people around you, not only to share the burden of the work,  but to sort of share with each other the challenges along this path and to learn from each other  
**0:27:54-0:28:07:**  and support one another in that way. Yeah. So that sort of brings me to the next point  of what sort of practices have helped you along the way.  Actually, it's funny because I live in New York and one of the things I've done in the  
**0:28:07-0:28:21:**  last few years is work from home because we don't have a WWF office in New York, but the  organization is so widespread that it was absolutely fine for me to be here and sometimes  go to our office in DC, but, you know, be on the road with different things. And so  
**0:28:21-0:28:34:**  that kind of self-regimentation where everything starts too early because you're in the West  side of the world and the East gets up early and then having these kinds of routines of  saying actually I will stop working at the end of the day and go for a walk with my dogs  
**0:28:34-0:28:50:**  or go for a yoga class or go out and meet someone is important. So I think some of these  little things that you build in for yourself, go for a run, take a hike. I think all of  us who work with nature kind of sometimes forget how healing nature itself is. And that  
**0:28:50-0:29:07:**  time of just being, whether it's a walk in the park or a bike ride along the river or  a hike in a national park, I think those things are really, really important for us to ground  ourselves as individuals to reemphasize the importance of what we might be trying to do,  
**0:29:07-0:29:18:**  but also heal our own selves.  Yeah, that's really beautiful. And what you said is so important. It's about setting those  boundaries and saying at the end of the day, that's enough and holding those boundaries,  
**0:29:18-0:29:26:**  right? And then actually going out and doing the things that you know support your wellbeing.  That's the ongoing challenge, I think, for all of us.  Yeah.  
**0:29:26-0:29:39:**  So what I would love to know is, is there anything inside of you that you sort of hope  to be able to share or give more space to in your next phase, something you want to  share with the world?  
**0:29:39-0:29:57:**  That's a very deep question, Michelle. I think, you know, some of it is also self-realization  that I think very often we get stuck in big organizations trying to find ways of working  and moving forward. And I find that it takes up more time and energy than the agenda itself.  
**0:29:57-0:30:12:**  And so one of the things that I want to think through is like on a personal level, purely  for myself, like, what is that balance between creating change at scale, being small, being  an advisor, collaboration, creating movements. And I really feel like some of the topics  
**0:30:12-0:30:28:**  that you you've very nicely touched upon today are critically important. I do feel like consumers  and focusing more on consumers in the market side is absolutely important right now. So  I hope I'll spend a little more time on that. But I also feel like and I hope something  
**0:30:28-0:30:40:**  that comes out of this pandemic, agility, creativity, movement, innovation, new testing,  new ideas, new generations. So that's, you know, where my glimmer of light right now  is.  
**0:30:40-0:30:56:**  Well, sounds very exciting. And I'm very interested to see what next steps you take. But I hope  that you most importantly enjoy these next few months as a chance to spend time with  the dogs and do all of those practices that are so important for all of us. So, Kavita,  
**0:30:56-0:31:07:**  thank you so much for joining today. It was such a pleasure to chat with you. And really,  I wish you all the best in the next few months.  Thanks Michelle. Appreciated.  
**0:31:07-0:31:23:**  Thanks so much for listening to this episode of the Great Full Podcast. If you liked it,  then please go ahead and subscribe and share it with a friend. And I would love to get  your questions answered here. So if you have something that you would like me to explore  
**0:31:23-0:31:44:**  on the show, go ahead, pull out your phone, open up the voice memo app, hit record and  then email it to podcast at the grateful dot com.  