---
title: Courageous Leadership With Beccie Dcunha Founder Courage Lab Ep 18
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### The Great Full  (2022-02-11)  
### Author(s): Michelle Grant  

**0:00:00-0:00:06:**  When working with difficult conversations and in conflict, one of the big challenges  is that we judge each other and we judge each other harshly.  And for me, curiosity is a really wonderful antidote to judgments, that it's hard to  
**0:00:14-0:00:17:**  stay judgmental if we practice curiosity.  And I do see curiosity as a practice.  Hi, everyone.  
**0:00:22-0:00:25:**  My name is Michelle Grant.  And this is The Grateful Podcast.  A place where we explore how each of us can eat, live and lead to create a more sustainable  
**0:00:35-0:00:36:**  world.  On this podcast, we have conversations with inspiring and courageous leaders who are trying  to shape their food systems, their communities and their own lives to be more sustainable,  
**0:00:48-0:00:52:**  joyful and purpose driven.  And when it comes to creating that change, the key word really is courage.  And that's why today I'm chatting with Becky de Kooner, who is the founder of Courage  
**0:01:00-0:01:06:**  Lab, an organization that supports both leaders and teams to have courageous conversations  that help them get unstuck and create resilient and creative organizations that then allow  them to collectively have a shared impact in the world around them.  
**0:01:16-0:01:21:**  And Becky came to this work from years of experience as a social justice campaigner,  as a CEO and director in the not for profit sector.  And for the last 20 years as a facilitator and conflict mediator.  
**0:01:30-0:01:33:**  And through all this work, Becky saw that whenever we're talking about trying to have  an impact, it's always in the end coming down to the question of courage.  That if we want to lead and create positive change, we need to understand the role that  
**0:01:44-0:01:46:**  courage plays.  So I met Becky a couple of years ago in a program called Vision 2020, which brings together  founders of purpose driven organizations who are looking to build communities to have a  
**0:01:57-0:01:59:**  shared impact.  So Becky and I immediately found some synergies and commonalities in what we were trying to  do as I was setting up the grateful and the be the change leadership program.  
**0:02:09-0:02:13:**  She was setting up Courage Lab and her courageous leaders program.  And aside from this shared interest in creating positive impact and leadership, we also have  a shared passion for the Enneagram.  
**0:02:21-0:02:27:**  So we're both certified Enneagram practitioners and have literally spent hours going down  the rabbit hole talking about that.  That's not the topic today.  
**0:02:30-0:02:34:**  We're really focusing today on the topic of courage.  This conversation that I'm sharing with you today was actually recorded as a part of a  session with my grateful community.  
**0:02:40-0:02:45:**  At the end of the be the change program, the community members often have a desire to keep  exploring this topic of courage.  And so we invited Becky in to do a workshop with us.  
**0:02:50-0:02:54:**  And this conversation that you're hearing now is just the introduction to that workshop  before we jumped into some of the more interactive aspects of it.  Now to help frame today's conversation, when I think about the role that courage plays  
**0:03:03-0:03:07:**  in creating change, I usually think about three things.  Firstly, the courage to leave behind the old.  Secondly, the courage to envisage and experiment with the new.  
**0:03:16-0:03:21:**  And finally, the courage to challenge the status quo, to face difficult conversations  and difficult emotions that are always a part of that process.  And in today's chat with Becky, we're really focusing on this third point, how courage  
**0:03:29-0:03:34:**  can help us challenge the status quo, face difficult conversations and emotions, and  what that means for each of us as courageous leaders.  I'm really interested to know what motivated you to set up Courage Lab and what do you  
**0:03:45-0:03:48:**  hope that it changes in the world?  When I look back, I realised that courage has been the thread running through all my  different roles and the different work that I've done.  
**0:03:55-0:04:01:**  I started out as a social justice campaigner, working on issues like the arms trade, social  justice and peace issues.  And I guess that was all about campaigning, as I'm sure many of you are campaigners as  
**0:04:07-0:04:10:**  well, and change makers is about courage.  It's about the courage to speak up to challenge injustice.  And I've been a leader, that was a real kind of courage building experience as well,  
**0:04:18-0:04:23:**  leading courageously through times of crisis, through times of change and uncertainty, as  well as just day to day leadership challenges that I think require courage and build courage.  And then as a mediator, the work is all about courage, it's about moving towards the things  
**0:04:32-0:04:33:**  that we avoid.  So I think of it as kind of moving towards the fire in many ways, it's the stuff that  everyone wants to run away from, but actually the growth and learning and resolution comes  
**0:04:42-0:04:44:**  if we move towards the difficulty.  And then Courage Lab now is all about courageous conversations and courageous relationships.  So it kind of pulls all of that together, I think.  
**0:04:51-0:04:55:**  And it's been a journey of developing my own courage, as well as working out how to help  others to develop their courage.  I think that that's often what we are called to bring into the world are the things that  
**0:05:02-0:05:05:**  we want to build, work on or grow ourselves, right?  Yeah, I know that for myself, part of my courage journey, I guess, has been about working through  that and standing up for myself, understanding my own needs and asserting them as well.  
**0:05:15-0:05:19:**  And even if that upsets the other person, but finding a way to do it with empathy, empathy  and honesty.  Yes.  
**0:05:21-0:05:24:**  So I agree, we're drawn to the things that we need to work on ourselves often.  But I also like to hear how you reframed challenging or a challenging situation as courage building.  I think that's a very nice mindset flip for all of us that when we are facing struggle  
**0:05:36-0:05:39:**  or challenges to think, oh, this is courage building.  It's a kind of more positive framing of a difficult situation.  Yeah, that's what we do as mediators.  
**0:05:44-0:05:46:**  It's all about reframing actually.  It's all about kind of finding the opportunity in the difficulty, I guess, without taking  away from the difficult bits, but kind of finding the moments of opportunity as well.  
**0:05:56-0:05:57:**  Yeah.  Very nice.  So what role do you think courage plays in helping lead this transformation that we're  
**0:06:05-0:06:07:**  seeking in the world around us?  Yeah, I think it's a great question.  I know that we share this, Michelle, and the work that you do is be the change that I firmly  
**0:06:14-0:06:20:**  believe that it has to start with us, that change only happens if we work on ourselves  and that kind of interchange leads to outer transformation.  Our ability to change the world is really limited until we've worked on our own stuff,  
**0:06:28-0:06:34:**  whether that's our self-limiting beliefs or the things that trigger us in our relationships.  There's different reasons I became a mediator.  I was already a campaigner.  
**0:06:38-0:06:40:**  That was the work I was doing.  But one of the reasons was that I saw around me a lot of anger in the campaigning community  and the not-for-profit community, a lot of kind of angry campaigning and sometimes violent  
**0:06:51-0:06:57:**  campaigning in terms of not physical violence, but violence in language or an attitude.  And I also saw a lot of burnout, unhappy people in that community and a lot of conflict, a  lot of people who were really passionate about changing the world, but they didn't know how  
**0:07:09-0:07:13:**  to have healthy relationships within that workplace.  And so I wanted to change that.  And I also realised that change needed to happen from within.  
**0:07:19-0:07:24:**  So it was a bit of a journey of realising or facing the kind of violence in me, the  judgementalism, the anger, the prejudices, all of that, and being honest about recognising  that and then working on it.  
**0:07:34-0:07:39:**  And so for me, mediation was part of that journey because mediation is about justice.  It's about justice in relationships, giving everyone a voice, listening to your enemy  in a sense.  
**0:07:44-0:07:45:**  And that's kind of what...  So for me, it has to start with us, I think, and that inner work that leads to the kind  of outer change.  
**0:07:51-0:07:55:**  Yes, that's what we're all about here.  And you've touched on a lot of these points already, but maybe just sort of to summarise  it, what do you see are the main connections between courage and leadership?  
**0:08:03-0:08:04:**  Yeah, good question.  So for me, leadership is pretty much all about courage.  I do a lot of work to support leaders to become more courageous.  
**0:08:11-0:08:15:**  And the things that require courage as a leader are things like being able to talk about difference  and help others to talk about difference, being able to speak up, being an upstander,  not a kind of bystander if something around us isn't right, if there's something that's  
**0:08:24-0:08:25:**  not fair.  It takes courage to listen to people, to genuinely kind of listen to feedback and take that on  board to hear the difficult things when people kind of hold the mirror up to us, and that's  
**0:08:35-0:08:36:**  really painful.  But to hear that and take that on board, to support people through tough times, crisis,  if we are leading people or teams, to support people through crisis or change or uncertainty,  
**0:08:48-0:08:50:**  which is everywhere at the moment.  Something about kind of difficult decisions that might not please people, but that are  the right decisions to make and the courage that comes with that integrity, courage to  
**0:08:58-0:09:00:**  have difficult conversations, to face conflict.  So often that's a lot of my work is to help leaders and teams to face conflict rather  than avoid it and shove it under the carpet.  
**0:09:08-0:09:14:**  And I think that's why when I've been a leader and a manager of people, I spent a lot of  my time mediating between people and that is part of leadership to help people to build  strong relationships around you and to help others to talk about the things that are difficult  
**0:09:24-0:09:25:**  in the conflict.  It's something that I'd be interested to know, because I think that courage is often conflated  with confidence.  
**0:09:32-0:09:35:**  Do you have anything to say about that?  What's the difference between courage and confidence?  Yeah, good question.  
**0:09:40-0:09:41:**  I don't think it is the same.  I mean, there's a relationship there, but for me, courage is stepping into things that  we don't feel confident in sometimes.  
**0:09:49-0:09:56:**  So for instance, in working with conflict, I'm helping people to in a mediation situation,  I'm helping parties to step into completely unknown territory where they're being vulnerable  with each other and talking about their feelings in a way that they haven't done before, or  
**0:10:06-0:10:10:**  finding their voice, learning to empathise if they're not good at that.  And often they're things that they're not confident in, but the courage is in the trying  in a way.  
**0:10:16-0:10:19:**  I think courage is about action in many ways.  And that taking courageous action kind of makes us become more courageous as well.  It changes us every time we do it.  
**0:10:26-0:10:32:**  Brene Brown is perhaps the most famous for shedding light on the fact that there is no  courage without vulnerability.  Could you talk a little bit about the connection between these two terms?  
**0:10:37-0:10:38:**  Yeah.  Yeah, I'm a big fan of Brene Brown's work.  And there's a lot of echoes of what she says in her approach in the way that I work.  
**0:10:46-0:10:49:**  And so my work is all about vulnerability.  It's about supporting people to let their guard down, to take the risks to it could  be the risks around sharing how they feel, because that is risky to people.  
**0:10:58-0:11:01:**  And I think that takes vulnerability and takes courage.  People are often afraid of letting the other person know that they've been impacted by  something, a conflict, and that takes vulnerability.  
**0:11:09-0:11:14:**  It could be about the kind of vulnerability to name our fears to somebody or to own our  mistakes and the things that where we've slipped up.  For me, all of that's about vulnerability.  
**0:11:19-0:11:23:**  And I think that's what courage is really about is that the Latin root of the word courage  is cor, C-O-R, which means heart.  The original meaning of the word courage is about speaking, speaking what's in our hearts  
**0:11:31-0:11:34:**  and on our minds and being wholehearted, I guess.  And Ray Brand talks a lot about wholehearted leadership.  And I really like that.  
**0:11:38-0:11:43:**  That's exposing, I guess, speaking from our hearts, sharing what's in our hearts and sharing  what's on our mind, sharing our feelings.  All of that is exposing.  
**0:11:46-0:11:48:**  We're opening ourselves up to others.  And I think that that's deeply rewarding and that's where relationships are really enriched.  But it does, it's scary for most people and it's vulnerable.  
**0:11:56-0:11:58:**  Without that vulnerability, we can't have courageous relationships.  We can't have real relationships.  Yeah.  
**0:12:01-0:12:07:**  And we can't have any change, I don't think, if we're not willing to be vulnerable about  what's not working and how it's making us feel as well.  Yeah.  
**0:12:11-0:12:12:**  Yeah, absolutely.  So, I mean, you've talked a lot about the role of courage in conflict, in difficult  conversation.  
**0:12:19-0:12:23:**  How do you think it can help us move from this artificial harmony I've heard you speak  about to healthy conflict or moving towards the things that we avoid, particularly in  these tense situations, difficult conversations, conflict situations?  
**0:12:34-0:12:44:**  So, I think most cultures, as in workplace cultures and people towards either kind of  artificial harmony, so being too nice to each other or thinking that it's all about niceness  and politeness, maybe in England, that's definitely the case.  
**0:12:53-0:12:59:**  So, towards that kind of niceness, artificial harmony, where we're pretending things are  okay almost because we don't want to rock the boat, or they go the other way and people  are too aggressive with each other, almost brutally honest, more direct, and that leads  
**0:13:09-0:13:12:**  to kind of a toxic conflict culture.  And so, for me, difficult conversations and courageous conversations are about kind of  timely interventions that build healthier conflict cultures instead of those two extremes.  
**0:13:24-0:13:30:**  And difficult conversations for me are around combining empathy with honesty.  Often people are good at one or the other, but it's hard to do both at the same time.  And I think that's what's required.  
**0:13:37-0:13:42:**  It's that speaking honestly about what's going on for us from the heart as well as the head,  but at the same time, being mindful of how the other person is going to feel when they  hear that and really working to put ourselves in their shoes and what their context might  
**0:13:52-0:13:54:**  be and the reason they might have behaved in that way.  I guess a lot of my work as well is around, for me, coming back to the artificial harmony  thing, I think I used an iceberg analogy quite a lot that often in relationships and in teams,  
**0:14:06-0:14:10:**  there's the stuff that's above the waterline, the bit of the iceberg, the small bit of the  iceberg that's visible above the waterline, some debate and facts and things like that.  But my work is often about surfacing the stuff that's under the waterline, the feelings,  
**0:14:21-0:14:26:**  the hurt, the fears, the judgments, the beliefs, all of that stuff.  So surfacing the difficult feelings, but also the difficult opinions, the opinions that  might maybe differ to help people to really speak what's in their mind and be honest about  
**0:14:35-0:14:38:**  it, even if it makes the waters a bit choppy.  And that's the bit that it takes courage because those bits are more unpredictable and they  require vulnerability and they're uncomfortable.  
**0:14:46-0:14:49:**  We don't know if we have those difficult conversations.  If we surface that stuff as a leader, are we going to be blamed?  Is it going to be aimed at us?  
**0:14:53-0:14:55:**  Is it going to explode in our faces?  Difficult conversations, they surface the stuff that people are, they might not be conscious  of it and then they're definitely not talking about it.  
**0:15:03-0:15:07:**  It's putting that stuff on the table or above the surface so that you can work with it.  And actually that's what makes teams stronger, I think, and relationships stronger, that  kind of being able to face that stuff together and it deepens relationships.  
**0:15:15-0:15:22:**  But it isn't easy and the reason that people avoid it is because it might not feel as harmonious,  but it will be more collaborative, more creative, more meaningful and healthier because everything  is kind of being dealt with.  
**0:15:29-0:15:33:**  But I often do say to people in a mediation setting or when I'm facilitating work with  teams, that I prepare them that it will be uncomfortable.  I make sure it's safe, but it will be uncomfortable at times.  
**0:15:40-0:15:45:**  And I always know that they're making progress if it is uncomfortable because actually they're  talking about the really important stuff if it is the stuff that really matters.  And I also often say that it will get harder before it gets easier because again, they're  
**0:15:53-0:15:56:**  moving kind of towards the fire, they're moving towards the really tough stuff.  And that really is, that is painful in some ways, but if they can do that, they'll really  strengthen their own resilience and their own relationships.  
**0:16:04-0:16:09:**  Yeah, this is, I like the way you describe that as an iceberg and it reminds me a lot  of what they talk about in this book, Difficult Conversations too, that often we're on the  tip of the iceberg discussing the who did what, what happened, you know, the logistics  
**0:16:17-0:16:22:**  of the topic, but underneath is the emotions conversation, the identity conversation.  And this is super timely because that's the book in our book club for the community for  this next round.  
**0:16:27-0:16:30:**  And it's also the module that's coming up next week for those of you that are in the  be the change program at the moment.  So it's a nice little taster for those things.  
**0:16:35-0:16:38:**  We've already mentioned Brené Brown, which is inevitable when we're talking about courage,  but I'm going to mention her again because she talks about concepts called armoured leadership  and daring leadership and argues that we need more daring leadership in the world.  
**0:16:49-0:16:54:**  So what's your take on these two terms and how do you think that we can apply these to  create the change we want to see in the world around us?  So I really like those definitions.  
**0:17:00-0:17:05:**  And for me, daring leadership is, is about letting down our guard, it's taking off our  armour and it comes back to that vulnerability piece that we're because we might feel kind  of exposed in some ways by showing our feelings, by taking risks in terms of saying what our  
**0:17:19-0:17:23:**  weaknesses are, our blind spots or where we've made a mistake.  All of that is, is I think daring rather than armoured, it's taking the armour off.  And I really believe that that's what's important.  
**0:17:29-0:17:36:**  And my most poignant and courage building moments as a leader have been when I've done  that, when I've taken my armour off.  There've been various times where with teams that I've been leading, organisations I've  
**0:17:42-0:17:47:**  been leading have faced really tough times, financially tough times and crises.  And there was one moment that comes to mind where a charity that I was running, where  I had to basically bring the news to staff that there were going to be redundancies and  
**0:17:59-0:18:02:**  we had to restructure, but we didn't know at that point what roles were going to go.  And I, there was a moment in the meeting where I kind of started to cry and I'm a bit of  a weeper anyway, that it was partly out of kind of grief for the organisation and grief  
**0:18:11-0:18:13:**  for the people that were losing their jobs.  But also I knew that my job was vulnerable as well.  And I shared that with them and I was facing redundancy.  
**0:18:18-0:18:20:**  And in the end, actually my role was made redundant.  But for me, that was a really powerful moment for us all.  It basically really strengthened all our relationships and it meant that it created a space, I guess  
**0:18:30-0:18:33:**  I was modelling that actually we can talk about feelings.  It doesn't have to be kind of cold, objective conversations.  This is going to be a really tough time and we need to be able to process that together.  
**0:18:41-0:18:44:**  And so it normalised talking about feelings.  And so others were able to do the same, whether privately to me or in that team setting.  I think leaders have to be willing to do that.  
**0:18:52-0:18:55:**  You know, we don't want to overshare because I think that's not helpful either.  And I think Branny Brown talks about that too.  But knowing and it takes judgment, but the willingness to take our armour off and take  
**0:19:04-0:19:08:**  that risk, let people in a bit and show that we're human for me is really important.  Yeah, that's a really nice summary.  Thank you.  
**0:19:12-0:19:15:**  You spoke before about courage building practices.  So what are the types of practices you typically work with?  What do you offer to people that you're coaching or mediating to help them build their courage?  
**0:19:25-0:19:29:**  So a lot of it is about noticing.  So that being present and noticing what's going on, listening kind of really deeply  inwardly and outwardly.  
**0:19:37-0:19:43:**  So noticing our feelings in the moment, emotional intelligence, noticing what we might be needing  that we're not getting, noticing what triggers us, noticing in our body when we have a reaction  to something difficult or to a behaviour, noticing if we have an instinct to run away,  
**0:19:54-0:19:58:**  just kind of noticing it in a non-judgmental way.  The other thing is that notice the empathy.  And for me, a lot of that is about noticing in others, having a kind of radar out to feelings  
**0:20:06-0:20:11:**  and needs for what might the other person be feeling, looking for those cues.  And so that stuff builds courage, because it's about the courage to sit in discomfort  rather than trying to run away from it, but to sit in it in an empathic way, not an aggressive  
**0:20:22-0:20:25:**  way, which I think is what the courage piece is about.  So noticing so that we're more able to just observe ourselves, but try to gradually start  to take small steps.  
**0:20:31-0:20:37:**  And I think it is about small steps to build up our courage in those difficult situations.  So we might retreat the first time, but then next time we might be able to just stay with  it a little bit longer.  
**0:20:42-0:20:46:**  It's that building up our emotional intelligence, our self-awareness, so that we can notice  what happens in us and in others.  And then for me, it's this practice in curiosity is really important.  
**0:20:52-0:20:58:**  I think when working with difficult conversations and in conflict, I think one of the big challenges  is that we judge each other and we judge each other harshly in conflict often.  And for me, curiosity is a really wonderful antidote to judgments, that it's hard to stay  
**0:21:10-0:21:12:**  judgmental if we practice curiosity.  And I do see curiosity as a practice.  So if I feel myself start to judge somebody, and it happens all the time, I thought I'd  
**0:21:19-0:21:22:**  get less judgmental the more I practice as a mediator, but actually, I think it's the  other way around.  But hopefully I'm not becoming more judgmental.  
**0:21:25-0:21:27:**  It's more just that I'm noticing when I am.  And so it's something about again, noticing, noticing when I start to judge in the moment,  and then what I do to overcome that judgment, because I need to stay impartial as a mediator  
**0:21:35-0:21:37:**  and treat everyone fairly.  And if I judge, I can't empathize and I lose the connection.  So I need to work hard on it.  
**0:21:41-0:21:47:**  So what I do is I ask curious questions and I keep asking them, and I ask why questions  usually.  So if someone's told me something that's kind of triggering for me, they've done something  
**0:21:51-0:21:57:**  that just seems so outrageous or so mean, it might be take a deep breath, notice I'm  starting to feel a bit of judgment rising, help me to understand what you were feeling  when you did that, or help me to understand why you did that.  
**0:22:05-0:22:10:**  And I know that the more curious questions I ask, and often the more why questions I  ask, the more I'll get under the surface and I'll find a connection with that person again.  I'll find a point where I can empathize with them again, because I'll remember that they're  
**0:22:19-0:22:24:**  a human being with feelings, with needs, and that they were just in a difficult place and  that there was a reason for it, because most people don't intend to cause hurt to others,  they do it unintentionally.  
**0:22:29-0:22:36:**  So for me, that's that curiosity, trying to ask why and stay curious even when we're starting  to feel judgment.  And I guess there's one other that might be a kind of practical thing that might be helpful,  
**0:22:41-0:22:43:**  it's a negotiation technique.  And so if we're avoiding a difficult conversation or a conflict, there's something called Batner,  Watner and Malatner.  
**0:22:50-0:22:56:**  And it's quite simple that Batner is best alternative to a negotiated agreement.  So it doesn't have to be framed in that way, but just to give you the context of it.  So the idea is you just think through, okay, if I don't have the conversation, what's the  
**0:23:04-0:23:05:**  best that could happen?  What's the best case scenario?  And then the next one is Watner, worst alternative.  
**0:23:09-0:23:13:**  Okay, if I don't have the conversation, what's the worst that can happen?  And okay, if I don't have the conversation, what's the, the Malatner is most likely.  So we're just thinking it through and then we flip it and think, okay, if I have the  
**0:23:21-0:23:26:**  conversation, what's the best, worst and most likely outcome or scenario?  And it helps us to just think, I guess there's something powerful about naming for ourselves  what our worst fears are, as well as what our best hopes are, the magic one kind of  
**0:23:35-0:23:36:**  scenario.  But weighing them up then and working out what's the most likely, because often our  worst fears are really unlikely to be realized.  
**0:23:42-0:23:46:**  You know, it might be worse fears like that we use it against me or I might cry.  Okay, so what if you do cry?  What's the worst that will kind of happen as a result of that?  
**0:23:51-0:23:56:**  It's a way I suppose of processes some of that and stepping out of the emotion for a  moment to just work out logically, do some problem solving around it.  Very nice.  
**0:24:01-0:24:02:**  I like that.  And I guess that was framed around a conversation, but you could frame it around any action,  right?  
**0:24:07-0:24:11:**  Like if I do take this path of action or if I don't to go through these different scenarios.  Very nice.  Yeah, yeah, absolutely.  
**0:24:13-0:24:18:**  And I know, you know, I talked about these three ways courage is showing up for me in  the beginning, the courage to leave behind the old, the courage to experiment with something  new.  
**0:24:23-0:24:27:**  And then this last part was this kind of courage around these difficult conversations.  I know you and I have been going through a process recently of also looking at these  first two of letting go of the old and experimenting with the new.  
**0:24:34-0:24:38:**  So in that process for yourself, what have been some courage building activities you've  been working on or things you've been doing with yourself as you're building something  new and letting go of something old?  
**0:24:46-0:24:50:**  Well, I find rituals quite powerful by that.  I mean, kind of something that's, I guess, embodied to and actually do something to signify  or symbolize the stepping away from the old and into the new.  
**0:25:00-0:25:04:**  And I do that sometimes with others in the different work that I do with leaders or teams  as well.  So that can be quite kind of powerful to and can bring kind of insights with it, I think,  
**0:25:10-0:25:14:**  if we use objects or do something physical.  For me, I guess part of my journey has been realizing how other referencing I am.  So I often would seek validation or ideas, etc. from others.  
**0:25:26-0:25:28:**  I still need to do that.  But what I know I need to do when it's kind of important decisions or important changes  is spend more time with looking inward.  
**0:25:36-0:25:40:**  And so the stuff that I don't naturally do, because I'm very extrovert and a lot of my  energy is expended in relationships and conversations.  That's why I do the work I do, I suppose.  
**0:25:46-0:25:50:**  The practices that I know help me with things like journaling, doing solitary kind of activities  to process some of that stuff and some of the stuff I've already talked about, but thinking  through the drivers, the things that what am I kind of holding on to?  
**0:25:58-0:26:01:**  What's that I'm struggling to let go of?  Why?  What's my curiosity again?  
**0:26:04-0:26:07:**  How am I feeling and how is that kind of driving my behavior?  What am I scared of?  What am I fearful of?  
**0:26:11-0:26:13:**  And reality checking that a bit.  I don't know if that answers your question or not.  Yeah, absolutely.  
**0:26:16-0:26:21:**  I have some similar practices, so it was nice to hear.  So in the course of your work, have you seen any particular nuances to how women experience  courage in leadership specifically?  
**0:26:31-0:26:34:**  And maybe linked to that, do you have any sort of special messages to aspiring women  leaders from what you've experienced?  Yeah, well, I guess it's been quite a personal struggle, that one, because I'm a woman and  
**0:26:41-0:26:42:**  I've been in leadership.  I remember someone once telling me that their boss had said to wear heels in board meetings.  She was in a corporate environment.  
**0:26:49-0:26:50:**  I wasn't.  But because being tall helps to be more influential.  And at that point I was like, I am completely doomed to them because I'm, you can't tell  
**0:26:56-0:27:00:**  here, but I'm five foot two on a good day.  And so, yeah, something about being a small woman and also being a smiling woman, I could  sometimes show up in a room and I could just tell that people were surprised to hear that  
**0:27:10-0:27:16:**  I was a director or a CEO, that they wouldn't have guessed it.  You can see straight away that they're assuming it's the tall man that I'm standing next to  that's in that role.  
**0:27:21-0:27:27:**  And so I kind of was quite conscious of that, particularly late twenties, early thirties.  A lot of us as women have been, I guess, conditioned to find some aspects of courage harder and  some aspects easier.  
**0:27:36-0:27:41:**  So I think the things that may become easier to us often as women are empathy, which I  think is courageous, listening, curiosity, and also I think negotiation, collaboration,  win-win, problem solving that I think again require real courage.  
**0:27:51-0:27:57:**  Often as women, we've kind of learned that because we've had to influence from an early  age because we're often trying to influence the people in power.  So we found those ways to influence and I think they take courage.  
**0:28:06-0:28:12:**  For me, the harder bit, so often, again, in terms of our conditioning, and I relate to  this myself as a woman, is the direct, honest feedback, the naming our own needs and asserting  those, challenging the injustices we're facing.  
**0:28:22-0:28:26:**  We might challenge them for other people, but challenging our own, the prejudices and  injustices we are faced with as women and maybe we're used to putting others first and  supporting others rather than our own needs and goals.  
**0:28:36-0:28:41:**  The stuff that I do is often helping others to do what I struggle to do myself because  I know I'm often, it's the desire to please or the self-doubt that creeps in, all of the  stuff that can kind of get in the way, I guess, of courage.  
**0:28:52-0:28:59:**  In terms of advice for aspiring female leaders, I guess it is about, it's a bit clichéd,  but for me it is about authenticity, that being comfortable in our own skin and comfortable  that what we bring, that more empathic, less dominant style of leadership, more empowering  
**0:29:11-0:29:18:**  style of leadership is really world changing and I genuinely believe it is.  And really playing to that as a strength, really knowing it, owning it and then developing  it, building around those talents.  
**0:29:25-0:29:31:**  And to help me to work on the bits that I find harder, I've almost drawn on those natural  strengths.  So my ability to read other people and read a room, I have to consciously then do it to  
**0:29:37-0:29:41:**  myself and look inward and think, what am I feeling?  What am I need here?  Yeah.  
**0:29:43-0:29:46:**  I'd be interested to hear what your thoughts are on that, Michelle, as well.  What really struck a chord with me is seeing these traditionally feminine leadership qualities  as a strength, as a thing to put in the forefront, as a thing to be proud of rather than constantly  
**0:29:57-0:30:02:**  trying to fit into the existing mold and suppress all of those things in the process.  I feel like it's almost like a peeling of an onion or a kind of an un-layering that  happens and for me it took many years of work.  
**0:30:10-0:30:15:**  Playing what I felt in some ways were kind of roles of what I felt was expected as a  leader and always feeling I was pushing away these other sides.  So the more that we can all collectively support each other to bring those to the forefront,  
**0:30:22-0:30:24:**  the better the world is.  And to do that, it requires vulnerability and courage front and center.  Just to wrap up.  
**0:30:31-0:30:34:**  So the name of our community is The Grateful Community.  The name of podcast is The Grateful Podcast.  What does it mean to you to live a great and full life?  
**0:30:42-0:30:43:**  Nice.  Lovely question.  Great name as well.  
**0:30:48-0:30:49:**  I really like the name.  I guess for me, I suppose it is about connection.  It's about being really connected to who I am and that's a lifetime journey.  
**0:30:56-0:31:01:**  That's a lot of my work is to kind of understand myself better because it doesn't come naturally  to me.  I'm much better at understanding others.  
**0:31:03-0:31:08:**  So it's about that connection with self and connection with other and deepening that.  And then out of that, learning to harness what we do best.  I'm a big believer in positive psychology and strengths based work and living and leadership.  
**0:31:20-0:31:26:**  So really knowing what our kind of natural strengths and superpowers are, our natural  talents and then honing those and doing those things every day.  And I think that's why I love my work so much because I've pulled together all the things  
**0:31:33-0:31:35:**  I'm kind of best at.  And if we can do the things that we do well every day, I think that's deeply fulfilling.  Thanks so much for listening to this episode of the Great Full Podcast.  
**0:31:49-0:31:54:**  If you liked it, then please go ahead and subscribe and share it with a friend.  And I would love to get your questions answered here.  So if you have something that you would like me to explore on the show, go ahead, pull  
**0:32:02-0:32:09:**  out your phone, open up the voice memo app, hit record, and then email it to podcast at  the grateful.com.  