---
title: Diversity And Resilience In Our Food Systems And Our Leadership With Louise Mabulo Founder The Cacao Project The Philippines Ep 17
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### The Great Full  (2022-01-28)  
### Author(s): Michelle Grant  

**0:00:00-0:00:14:**  When I was a chef, right, your idea is of those Gordon Ramsay kitchens where people  are shouting at each other. And I have this very, it's like a boss idea of leadership.  And then when I got into the farming industry, it softened me up a lot more because people  
**0:00:14-0:00:31:**  were much more welcoming and happy.  Hi everyone, my name is Michelle Grant and this is The Grateful Podcast, a place where  we explore how we can eat, live and lead for a more sustainable world.  
**0:00:31-0:00:48:**  On today's episode, I'm taking you all the way to the Philippines to chat with the amazing  Louise Mabullo. Now, you probably won't realise it when you hear Louise speak, but she's actually  just 23 years old. I kept seeing her face pop up in my LinkedIn feed as we share a few  
**0:00:48-0:01:06:**  contacts in common. And at first I wasn't sure if she's a chef or a farmer or an entrepreneur  or an activist. And the answer is she's all of the above. Louise actually started her  journey with food as a budding young chef. She was a finalist on junior master chef.  
**0:01:06-0:01:22:**  And it was in the kitchen that she became really fascinated by the story behind the  ingredients that she was cooking with. This eventually led her to set up the Cacao Project,  a project which helps to mitigate climate change by helping farmers access more resilient  
**0:01:22-0:01:41:**  crops and production systems and supporting them to build sustainable livelihoods. The  Cacao Project has trained more than 200 farmers in diverse agroforestry techniques in the  San Fernando area. It's planted over 70,000 trees across 70 hectares of land, implemented  
**0:01:41-0:01:59:**  more environmentally friendly pest and fertilisation techniques and also restored two water sources  in the area. And the hard work of Louise to set this up and to make an impact is really  getting noticed. She's a Forbes Asia 30 Under 30 list maker. She's a United Nations Environment  
**0:01:59-0:02:17:**  Programme Young Champion of the Earth. She won Outstanding Farmer of the Year in 2018  in the Philippines. And as a chef, she's won a Best Dessert in Asia Award. And as I mentioned  earlier, this all started when she was a finalist on Junior MasterChef. I found Louise's story  
**0:02:17-0:02:34:**  of how she integrates these different worlds of being a chef and a farmer and an activist  and an entrepreneur really fascinating. And I'm sure that you'll find her energy and  her enthusiasm as inspiring as I did. To get our conversation started, I asked Louise if  
**0:02:34-0:02:51:**  she could tell us a bit more about her upbringing and how that's influenced this interesting  journey that she's taken from the kitchen to the fields.  I grew up in the UK to of course, a Filipino family and to us being in the kitchen was  
**0:02:51-0:03:05:**  like being in the living room. Basically, we were always cooking all the time, every  single day. And that smell was wafting out of kitchen. And it's just a really fond memory.  And when we moved back to the Philippines, it was a matter of rediscovering my roots  
**0:03:05-0:03:19:**  rediscovering heirloom recipes. And I just really enjoyed having fun with my grandmother,  my mom and my dad just cooking every single day. That caught the attention of some people  who were kind of scouting for young people who are cooking at the Junior MasterChef cooking  
**0:03:19-0:03:35:**  competition television show. And they identified me because I'd always post about the food  I cooked on Facebook, which was new at the time. And I ended up in this show. And I was  one of the finalists, I think I was fourth runner up. And it was really it was this, this  
**0:03:35-0:03:49:**  jumping board into a really, really early culinary career for someone like me, I was  12 years old, I was already doing cooking demonstrations and guesting on television  shows. And people were dubbing me as this culinary prodigy. And I participated in competitions  
**0:03:49-0:04:04:**  as I grew up, I won medals and best dessert in Asia award. And it was this really jam  packed childhood where I was growing up training under the best chefs, and it was very privileged  to have those opportunities. But I realized that there were issues within the food systems  
**0:04:04-0:04:18:**  that I could identify because I was so exposed to it, especially in the Philippines, where  a lot of our suppliers were disappearing. And a lot of our farmers were getting impacted  by either old age or just really by unfair supply chains. And it was it was quite concerning  
**0:04:18-0:04:31:**  for someone like me, and I didn't know what exactly to do about it. But so I started off  with an advocacy of farm to table cuisine, I tried growing my own ingredients, and as  well as sourcing everything from local farmers and spreading awareness about where ingredients  
**0:04:31-0:04:45:**  come from, and the process that gets into your table and that story behind all of the  ingredients and dishes that come together. But it was in 2016 that my town was hit by  super typhoon Nocten, that was really the turning point that got me to start the cacao  
**0:04:45-0:04:58:**  project, which was much more involved with farmers and got me to kind of be proud and  label myself as a farmer as well as a chef and really bridge that divide between consumers  and producers in our food system.  
**0:04:58-0:05:12:**  Tell me more about the cacao project and how it was responding to that very pivotal event  for you, this typhoon in your local town.  So the super typhoon Nocten, it destroyed 80% of agricultural land in my town. And that  
**0:05:12-0:05:26:**  was devastating for our town because most of the people here, their livelihoods depend  on farming, agriculture, food production. And so it meant that for months and even years,  people would struggle to have a decent livelihood, decent income source, and reinstating that  
**0:05:26-0:05:41:**  was an even bigger trouble. And that would actually underpin a lot of social issues like  crime and theft and food insecurity that would come up in the next years. So the cacao project  really initially began as a typhoon relief effort. We were giving away seeds, we were  
**0:05:41-0:05:56:**  giving away crops that people could plant to reinstate their livelihoods as soon as  possible in a short span of time. And I realized that doing this post typhoon was just a short  term solution to a bigger problem, which was climate change impacting our town, having  
**0:05:56-0:06:12:**  worse and worse super typhoons. Typhoons in rainy season are quite normal in my region.  But every year we've been seeing increasing intensities that people are actually quite  surprised by how, how vast the devastation is to the people here and to the income sources  
**0:06:12-0:06:27:**  and the recovery was taking longer and longer each year. So we decided that we had to address  a more critical issue, which was how we actually perceive the system of how we farm and do  agriculture. If you ask the farmers here, why they farm the coconuts, rice, corn, whatever  
**0:06:27-0:06:37:**  it is they're growing, it's because that's all they learned. Or that's all they've been  doing for years and years. And they never thought about whether that economically sound  for them in the next few years, or whether that was adaptable and resilient, especially  
**0:06:37-0:06:52:**  since they lost a lot of their profits at the end of every single year. So we thought  of changing the model to make it more resilient. And that involved agroforestry integrating  new crops that had higher demand. So the cacao project was born because we noticed that cocoa  
**0:06:52-0:07:07:**  was one of the first things to regenerate after typhoons. And it was one of the crops  that had a market were more sustainable, and could actually work well within our ecosystems.  And of course, on top of that, we have other things that we intercrop with it, like bok  
**0:07:07-0:07:21:**  ochre, eggplants, pumpkins, cucumbers, and all those different things that you can grow  to make this more holistic food system that would actually give them like short term,  long term income sources, and would give them a lot more security in the aftermath of typhoons  
**0:07:21-0:07:32:**  and better prepare them before typhoons as well.  And how old were you when you started this project?  I think I was 18 years old when I started the project. So quite young.  
**0:07:32-0:07:45:**  Yeah, very young. I can imagine at that age, a lot of kids are maybe still in school and  worrying about all kinds of other things. So what do you think made you take action  or made you act differently to other people that age, you might have seen the same things  
**0:07:45-0:07:57:**  happening around them?  I think for me, it was a different, for one, I had a lot of experience in food systems,  because I started a really early career in culinary. So I was more aware of social issues,  
**0:07:57-0:08:12:**  because I was just in the middle of it and creating these food and finding suppliers  and talking to farmers and how I was posting pop up dinners. And another part of it was  also the social cultural perspective. I grew up in the UK. And, you know, their farmers  
**0:08:12-0:08:26:**  are quite well respected, they're well off, their trade is dignified. But you go to the  Philippines, and it's the complete opposite. We're an agricultural country. But the perspective  of farmers is that they're either associated to poverty, that they lack good education,  
**0:08:26-0:08:38:**  or that they are some of the most vulnerable groups. And I found that extremely problematic  in a country that relies on these people for most of its economy, and for most of its food,  and these people aren't being treated fairly, they're not being paid well, and they're not  
**0:08:38-0:08:52:**  being provided with education and skills training. So I think that idea of mine that I didn't  have to come forward with those stigmas, I didn't have those ideas of associations to  farmers in my mind, it helped me understand and kind of approach that whole industry in  
**0:08:52-0:09:06:**  a more meaningful way, without thinking of, you know, the cultural perspective that young  people wouldn't go into farming, because, oh, this isn't a good career choice, it's  not profitable, or it impacts your social standing, basically. And I didn't really consider  
**0:09:06-0:09:19:**  that going into it, I just wanted to be able to help in a meaningful, holistic way.  Wonderful. And I think I read that you were homeschooled. Is that correct?  Yes, I was. I was homeschooled for most of my childhood through high school. And even  
**0:09:19-0:09:34:**  through university, I went through open university. So most of the time was just really self learning.  Yeah, I'm interested between that and this link to taking action. I wonder if you see  anything there, how it kind of positioned you to take such initiative as you did?  
**0:09:34-0:09:47:**  Oh, yeah, I think so. Because I was always taught not to limit learning into the four  corners of your classroom. And if there's something that you wanted to do, you had to  figure it out for yourself. And you know, when education is in your hands, it's a huge  
**0:09:47-0:10:02:**  responsibility to a young person to actually balance that and figure things out on your  own. So for me, life was a constant learning process. And learning about agriculture, about  food, farming and food systems, that was something that I just really invested myself into, without  
**0:10:02-0:10:15:**  being prompted to do so. And so being homeschooled taught me to have the initiative to step forward.  And if I saw a problem, I had to do something about it, and not just leave it, oh, like,  someone's going to fix that, or it's something that will solve itself. I thought, no, someone  
**0:10:15-0:10:28:**  has to step forward and actually find a solution to that. And that person had to be me because  that's just how I was like hot wired to think. But yeah, being homeschooled was a really  great opportunity to help me develop a sense of initiative, time management, which was  
**0:10:28-0:10:43:**  really huge for me at the time, and also project building on my own. And then also eventually  learning to communicate with people without those social barriers of, you know, like,  oh, I shouldn't be doing that because I'm a young person. I was always taught that age  
**0:10:43-0:10:55:**  wasn't an issue when it came to problem solving.  Yeah, and I can imagine in that environment, you also interact with people from many different  generations and many different backgrounds. And that could imagine helps you in that process  
**0:10:55-0:11:06:**  as well.  Oh, it did, especially in my country where there's a bit of a divide between young people  and the older generation. And it was a matter of striking the balance between that because  
**0:11:06-0:11:19:**  of course, in Southeast Asia, especially, we're taught to revere and respect and honour  elders. And that's still very important. And that's an important value to keep. But it  doesn't mean that you shouldn't be able to speak up and you shouldn't be afraid to actually  
**0:11:19-0:11:32:**  propose change and work closely with them as partners and colleagues to find intergenerational  collaboration towards a better solution that melds both traditional knowledge with modern  perspectives and approaches.  
**0:11:32-0:11:44:**  I think there's so much to learn from when I look at the young activists and advocates  that we have out in the world at the moment tackling all these huge challenges. And I  wonder how you see that. What do you think the older generation can learn from young  
**0:11:44-0:11:54:**  activists and also vice versa? What do you think younger activists can learn from this  older generation who's been trying to tackle these problems for a long time, but perhaps  in different ways?  
**0:11:54-0:12:09:**  Oh, there's a lot of things, especially in my project. I think one of the things that  I mistakenly did in the very beginning was approach, approaches with too much idealism  and too much ideas of modernization. And eventually I realized it had to be a combination of both  
**0:12:09-0:12:24:**  tradition and modern ideas. So for, I think, older generations, something that they can  get from young people is we can be your technological intermediaries and be a bridge for knowledge  and build these new systems because young people are so, they're so, they kind of rebel  
**0:12:24-0:12:39:**  against existing systems and question all of these things that have always been done.  But really it's just to find a system that works because we realize that a lot of the  models that were done in the past were quite broken. And I think young people as well can  
**0:12:39-0:12:52:**  actually implement things that a lot of older people either have tried in the past, but  either needed more resources to do because young people now are so connected. We have  technology, we have all of these resources at the tips of our fingers that we can take  
**0:12:52-0:13:06:**  advantage of. And so now is a whole different game from how it was 50, 40, 50 years ago.  But on the other hand, for young people, we have a lot to learn from older generations  because once upon a time, farming was just farming and food was just food and people  
**0:13:06-0:13:23:**  didn't think of all of these interconnectivities between all of these things. But once upon  a time, food was actually intrinsically sustainable. And biodiversity was something that was well  preserved and there were a lot of these indigenous and traditional techniques that people had  
**0:13:23-0:13:36:**  that were extremely important but are dying away because young people are either not taught  about them or they're just being phased out because of technology and the industrial revolution,  which I think can easily be brought back if we just act as torch bearers of that knowledge  
**0:13:36-0:13:49:**  and learn how to meld it with new information. Like here in the Philippines, we have a lot  of elders who would know the weather by just looking at the sky and actually have weather  predictions for the next week, or they would understand based on the soil what kind of  
**0:13:49-0:14:02:**  content was in it, or they would whistle and then the wind would come, which was absolutely  magical. And it's these bits of traditional knowledge that I think we need to continue  to preserve and actually combine with modern technology. So usually if I look at the sunset,  
**0:14:02-0:14:15:**  I'll know what weather it is by the color of the sunset. But then I would also check  on, for example, there's this website called windy.com that would tell me if there's typhoons  or rains up ahead. And hopefully there's ways that we can integrate scientific research  
**0:14:15-0:14:31:**  to prove all of these things that our elders have been doing and use it for more generative  and more holistic solutions that combine this knowledge in a really good, meaningful way.  I guess that's what you're trying to do with the cacao project as well. Could you take  
**0:14:31-0:14:46:**  me through it? Imagine I've come to visit you and you are walking me through your farm.  Who would I meet? What would I see? What would I see on the ground as an impact from this  project that has been running now for what, five years, right?  
**0:14:46-0:14:52:**  Almost five years.  Five years. Yeah.  Well, of course, if you go to the ground, I would take you to our kind of HQ, which  
**0:14:52-0:15:07:**  is our model farm. And you would probably see a dirt road running in the middle of nowhere  with mountains that are rolling as far as I can see and really lush green forest canopy  and there's definitely a lot of, there's lots of wild birds that just, it's constant chatter.  
**0:15:07-0:15:21:**  You would think that being in the middle of nature and the middle of a farm would be quite  quiet, but there's constant noise from the biodiversity, which is really absolutely amazing.  And you would see cacao trees, kind of short, small person sized trees just fluttering in  
**0:15:21-0:15:34:**  the middle of a farm. You see a lot of coconut trees and all of these different plants growing  around and you would have to be careful where you stepped because there's always pumpkins  and cucumbers and things that are just falling about and coconuts on the ground. And I guess  
**0:15:34-0:15:50:**  you would see some of these beautiful pods that look like Christmas ornaments or Christmas  orbs, but really they're actually cocoa pods, which are going to be turned and processed  into chocolate on our onsite chocolate processing facility, where you'll actually see the process  
**0:15:50-0:16:06:**  of what makes chocolate go from bean to bar. So if you open up a cocoa pod, you'll find  these beans inside and it's quite sour. It tastes like mangosteen and it looks nothing  like chocolate that we know it as a bar, but after some fermenting, sundrying, roasting  
**0:16:06-0:16:18:**  and processing, it becomes the more familiar chocolate. And you would actually see that  all on the ground right now, which is brilliant. And you would, of course, if the weather is  right and if you come at the right time in the morning, you'll actually meet some of  
**0:16:18-0:16:34:**  the farmers who are just brilliant people who we consider them partners and thought  partners and people who have so many ideas. And now that they realize the possibility  of agroforestry and their value to things, they come forward with new ideas and new experiments  
**0:16:34-0:16:47:**  that they've tried on the ground in making different products. We're trying to make a  cola vinegar and we're also trying to make textiles out of the leaves. And it's just  really, really exciting to see the ideation and creation that you would hear from them.  
**0:16:47-0:17:01:**  That's amazing. And I think it's great you do so much value adding onsite because that's  very unusual, particularly in chocolate, right, where it's sold as this commodity and all  of value adding typically happens in another part of the world. What other things have  
**0:17:01-0:17:17:**  you found have been really important to raise the perceived value of farmers in your community  and in your country? That's a really important topic. Like I mentioned before that farmers  experience a lot of stigmas that were deeply rooted from our colonial history and from  
**0:17:17-0:17:30:**  how these industries are actually spoken about. Something that we've been doing is, first  of all, the education systems on the ground in schools. We've worked with this university  group that worked on schoolbooks that created role models for children. They made a caricature  
**0:17:30-0:17:45:**  about me and the cacao project story to give students a good example of what successful  farming can be and that this is a job that you can aspire for. Because those schools,  if you're failing as a young student, usually teachers will tell you that if you fail this  
**0:17:45-0:17:59:**  class, then you'll end up as a sweet potato farmer or a water spinach farmer. And that's  quite problematic because young people immediately associate farming to poverty and failure.  But now we're trying to change that by showing them that you can be successful in a green  
**0:17:59-0:18:11:**  job, you can be an environmentalist, you can be a person who helps develop communities  through agriculture and through farming. And that's really important for them to know.  Another thing is we go to universities and teach them about the value of young people  
**0:18:11-0:18:26:**  in agriculture and how it's more of an entrepreneurial aspect that you can go through with a business  approach rather than just farming for the sake of farming, which is what a lot of people  have been doing in the past. And we also show them how much they would earn from, for example,  
**0:18:26-0:18:40:**  farming on a small pot of land in the provinces versus how much they would earn at an entry  level job in the city, which is what most young people are doing. They want to study,  to move to a city, to get a desk job. But the problem is now the situation in our cities  
**0:18:40-0:18:56:**  is that the cost of living is higher than their salary. And it takes a lot of toll to  their health, their mental health, their well-being, as opposed to being in the provinces and helping  develop your community and actually getting into farming in a more entrepreneurial sense.  
**0:18:56-0:19:09:**  So we open the possibilities up to that. And also another thing that we've been doing is  showing people that farming isn't isolated to being out in the field in the sunlight.  Of course, it's part of it. And, you know, like planting rice, it's one part of it. But  
**0:19:09-0:19:19:**  you can also help through design, through arts, through music, through finance. And  there's so many ways that you can positively contribute to the community beyond the traditional  idea of what farming is.  
**0:19:19-0:19:32:**  That's so nice. And what role have you seen these farmer field schools playing in changing  people's perception of what is possible?  So we'd recently launched a farmer field school as well here, just I think that was about  
**0:19:32-0:19:46:**  last week. And what we're doing is we're teaching them about entrepreneurship, about finance  management. And we're working closely with the local government to help provide resources  to people with existing farms and also with our Department of Trade and Industry so that  
**0:19:46-0:19:59:**  they can actually get all the right paperwork to formalize their farms as a business and  look at it from a business aspect of securing markets, going to trade theirs, packaging,  producing. Because a lot of the farmers here either worked with middlemen who just get  
**0:19:59-0:20:14:**  the raw product at a low price without informing them of what the actual value of their crops  are. So these farmer field schools, we teach them about the value of their crops, how to  kind of gauge whether what markets, what seasons they need to plant these things at, and also  
**0:20:14-0:20:27:**  how to manage their finances, both for their families and also for their farm as a business.  So there's different ways that they can approach that. And also kind of showing them different  aspects. You can sell raw products, you can sell these processed products, you can do  
**0:20:27-0:20:42:**  all of these value adding and special skills that would improve upon it. And also for resiliency  and typhoon preparation. Now that we see our climate is changing quite a bit, they need  those knowledge for preparing for these increasing intensities of typhoons, as we know that they  
**0:20:42-0:20:54:**  will come, whether or not we're ready for them.  So we've talked a lot about your kind of time in the field and what you do on the farm,  but you actually seem to span a lot of different worlds. So sometimes you're in the kitchen  
**0:20:54-0:21:08:**  as a chef, sometimes you're in this, what seems to be very fancy environments, whether  that's on the stage or being a brand ambassador. So in the spanning of such different worlds,  what opportunities does that bring for you and what challenges do you have to face?  
**0:21:08-0:21:23:**  There's a lot of things. You know, I think one of the opportunities of being a chef for  me is that I understand the food system from farms all the way to reaching these fancy  restaurants all around the globe and how they get served to people and like these beautiful  
**0:21:23-0:21:40:**  creations. So it helps me show people that what's on your plate isn't just isolated to  that. You're impacting these farmers and livelihoods, these stories that all go into the food on  your table. And what a miracle it is that this alchemy of soil, water and air and sunlight  
**0:21:40-0:21:53:**  all combined creates these recipes for you. Because I noticed that there's this huge gap  between consumers and producers these days that we want to close and it helps them make  more conscious choices as well in the future of how sensitive they are to the sourcing  
**0:21:53-0:22:07:**  of their ingredients. And of course, speaking publicly helps tell these stories of resilience  and not just resilience, but all of these disasters, which are the reality on the ground  and all these cultural stigmas that we want to end. So it helps spread awareness to more  
**0:22:07-0:22:21:**  people, especially young people, to get into agriculture and actually build solutions,  not just agriculture, but really food systems as a whole. And I think on another side of  it, it helps build awareness for the stories of these farmers that are experiencing all  
**0:22:21-0:22:34:**  of these different issues, because I think that their voices are generally underrepresented  on big playing fields and discussions where usually the focus, if you think of environment,  you wouldn't exactly think of agriculture because it's a major contributor to greenhouse  
**0:22:34-0:22:50:**  gas emissions. But it's opening the possibility that this could be an avenue to solve a lot  of these issues in climate change, because we are also people who are heavily affected  by them, by the impacts of climate change, even if agriculture is considered unsustainable,  
**0:22:50-0:23:04:**  maybe it could actually help become a solution.  You mentioned a couple of times story and storytelling, which I also work with a lot  in the programs that I run, because I just think storytelling is so central to how we  
**0:23:04-0:23:15:**  bring other human beings on board and share an exchange with one another. So how do you  use storytelling and how have you developed your capacity to weave it into the work that  you do?  
**0:23:15-0:23:30:**  Well, I think that now as well, where so many stories are kind of clouding the internet,  it's really important to make the information that's going on on the ground available to  more people, but in a meaningful way that doesn't take advantage of their stories or,  
**0:23:30-0:23:43:**  you know, like just use their stories for the sake of tokenism that, oh, this is just  represented here because their story is being told, but actually build change because there  are realities on the ground that have never been told internationally. And there are a  
**0:23:43-0:23:57:**  lot of pieces of knowledge that can be woven into stories that would make it to general  audiences that makes it easy for them to understand, oh, what's really going on and what can we  do in a more step-by-step practical way to actually help these people. And it puts like  
**0:23:57-0:24:09:**  real faces to an issue instead of talking about data and statistics and numbers, you're  actually humanizing the problem and showing that this is a very real issue to these families  and that this is what you can do to change it through these stories. And it's not just  
**0:24:09-0:24:24:**  consuming stories for the sake of, oh, I heard about this story and that's about it, but  oh, I heard about the story and this is what we can do to help.  Oh, very nice. And I mean, you do a lot of public speaking and I was interested to know  
**0:24:24-0:24:38:**  if that's something that always felt very natural to you or is it a skill that you've  really had to sort of work on? And if so, how have you gone about that?  Oh, public speaking. I've always been kind of pushed into the spotlight because of being  
**0:24:38-0:24:53:**  on a television show to actually speak publicly. And if you look at the very earliest videos  I did, I'm still until this day very shy and I was always quite shy, but over time I learned  to actually speak up and learn that my voice mattered because if I don't speak up and if  
**0:24:53-0:25:06:**  I don't use my voice for something greater and I have all this platform and it's really  a waste, so I learned how to maximize those platforms to make something out of it. And  public speaking, it doesn't come naturally, but over time and a lot of practice and a  
**0:25:06-0:25:19:**  lot of feedback as well and critical feedback from people and making all these crazy blenders  on stage in front of a group of people. I think it taught me some valuable lessons in  public speaking. I think that it's a good skill that people  
**0:25:19-0:25:33:**  should learn, not just public speaking, but communication in a way that's meaningful,  that conveys urgency and that is very genuine and more humanized because of course not everything  should be performative. Although part of public speaking is being able to perform quite well  
**0:25:33-0:25:46:**  so that people understand and get the message well and are engaged, but it's not just the  performative side, but it's also the authenticity and the meaningful side of public speaking  that's much, much harder to cultivate, especially when you don't feel like you're talking to  
**0:25:46-0:25:59:**  someone one-on-one, you're talking to a huge audience. I think that was really challenging  to learn, but it's something that is an ongoing learning process for me.  Yeah, I've had the same experience and I think it's, I read over the weekend, I don't know  
**0:25:59-0:26:13:**  if you've ever heard of this book called Quiet, the power of introverts in a world that can't  stop talking. And I really enjoyed it because I think it, she's obviously a shy introverted  person naturally and has learned also to kind of public speak in, as you say, a way that's  
**0:26:13-0:26:26:**  not performative, but is really about using your voice towards a purpose. And that's actually  how most introverts can tap into their voice is when they know the bigger purpose behind  what they're doing. So that was really nice book. I don't know if you've read it, but  
**0:26:26-0:26:39:**  it's, I really enjoyed it. Oh, it's on my reading list. It's on my shelf, but it's still  wrapped because I haven't opened it up yet. Now that makes me want to read it.  Yeah. I found it really nice, especially if you grow up shy and introverted, I think it  
**0:26:39-0:26:53:**  makes you feel the value in that maybe for the first time in a very extroverted world.  Yeah. And I think the preparation for kind of shy introverted people, it makes you really  think about what you have to say and you make sure that what you say is meaningful and it  
**0:26:53-0:27:05:**  goes, it cuts through the point you want to say, because you know, it's not something that  comes naturally to you. So when you do finally find that chance to speak, you want to make  the most of it and you want to make sure that it has the best biggest impact because it has  
**0:27:05-0:27:21:**  to be worth it because you took that risk. Yeah, exactly. And speaking of risk, it strikes  me that, you know, a lot of what you've done has taken courage. It's taken courage to try  and potentially fail and try again. So what association or relationship do you have for  
**0:27:21-0:27:35:**  this word courage and how do you foster it and work with it in your life?  Well, for me, well, not to be like too much of a preacher, but I'm quite spiritual as a  person. And I always take courage from the knowledge that I have a creator who stands  
**0:27:35-0:27:48:**  behind me and that everything I do has a greater purpose than myself. And that I'm not isolated,  that there are these interconnectivities and there's a lot of people that share that  knowledge and hopefully can relate to these experiences. So that's one of the things that  
**0:27:48-0:28:02:**  really give me courage. But on another level of it, I think that, you know, I've come to  realize that failure is really part of the process. It's not something to be afraid of  and it's not something to avoid. Yes, it's best to prepare so you don't fail. But if you do fail,  
**0:28:02-0:28:16:**  then that's fine. That's great. It's only considered failure if you never learn from it,  because if you learn from it, then it's a lesson. So understanding that you are inevitably going to  fail because we're all humans, we're all imperfect, being able to take that risk and actually prepare  
**0:28:16-0:28:29:**  and have those plan Bs. And, you know, it's calculated risks, because if you're an introvert  like me or you're someone who understands that there's definitely going to be a chance for  failure, you're going to have to find a way to pivot after that and make the most of that failure  
**0:28:29-0:28:46:**  to do something better out of it. So that I think my relationship with courage is I never thought of  it as courage. I just thought of it as having no aversion to failing and understanding that failure  is an opportunity to do something even better or to learn from it so that you can actually  
**0:28:46-0:28:58:**  strengthen yourself. It's kind of like scars. If you cut yourself, your skin becomes stronger,  or if you burn yourself enough, your skin becomes like hide and then you're ready for the next  thing. And it's upgrading to bigger and bigger challenges and understanding that, yeah, you're  
**0:28:58-0:29:15:**  going to have bigger and bigger risks, but it's okay if you fail. Spoken like a true chef, you were  pointing to your arm as you were talking about burns. Have you had a few of them in your career?  Not a few, maybe a lot. I think I've went through the blood, sweat, and tears in quite  
**0:29:15-0:29:32:**  serious literal matters. Yeah. Particularly as a young one, right? In the kitchen, I can imagine.  Yeah. Too much idealism and too many risks in the kitchen and too many experiments has probably let  me do more burns than necessary. But some probably some delicious outcomes as well.  
**0:29:32-0:29:49:**  Yep. It makes it made the best dishes. Yeah. Lovely. So as you have learned from all of these  experiences and some failures along the way, how's your understanding of leadership changed,  let's say over the course of the time that you've been running the Kakao project?  
**0:29:50-0:30:06:**  When I was a chef, right. And your idea is of those Gordon Ramsay kitchens where people are  shouting at each other. And I have this very, it's like a boss idea of leadership. And then when I got  into the farming industry, it softened me up a lot more because people were much more welcoming and  
**0:30:06-0:30:21:**  happy. And I realized that those kind of tough leaderships aren't always the standard for  everything. So I learned that becoming a leader is also learning from the people that you're helping  and kind of talking to them meaningfully and knowing that everyone is actually supposed to  
**0:30:21-0:30:37:**  be a leader within their within their sphere. So there's so much that I have to learn. And there's  so much that I could still improve upon. And I'm not necessarily the leader as in the main thought  person that knows everything. Being a leader means that I understand where I lack things and being  
**0:30:37-0:30:51:**  able to find the people who could teach me or lead in that part that I don't know as much in. And it  was actually really valuable because I would learn from a lot of the elder farmers here and how they  farm and how they used to farm or how their grandparents used to farm. And they taught me  
**0:30:51-0:31:05:**  they taught me about natural pesticides, they taught me about natural fertilizers and how they  do things traditionally that aren't traditionally taught in say, courses in agriculture. And then  now there's a building movement of regenerative farming. And I noticed a lot of the patterns that  
**0:31:05-0:31:20:**  those elders have told me are kind of like parallel to those courses in regenerative agriculture and  how people are finding ways to make the food system and farming more holistic. And so I  realized that these people are actual geniuses in regenerative agriculture. It's just a matter of  
**0:31:20-0:31:35:**  giving them the platform to speak up and teach about that or teach us more young people about  what we can learn from them and reviving those bits of knowledge. So really, it's not the  traditional idea of leadership here. It's more of being a partner with everyone and learn it. And  
**0:31:35-0:31:49:**  it's a mutual learning process rather than just like, oh, you need to do that or this or I know  everything and I'm the authority. It's not just being the authority. It's understanding that  everyone has authority and you just have to find those people and create those spaces that they  
**0:31:49-0:32:06:**  feel safe to share that. Lovely. So I was wondering if there are any questions you wished people asked  you in these settings or things you want to talk about that you're like, nobody ever asks me about  that. I think one of the things I would hope to talk about as well as women in farming, because  
**0:32:06-0:32:24:**  traditionally food systems are well known to be a male-dominated industry, whether it's in a  professional kitchen or whether it's on a farm, it's usually the stereotype is that a farmer is a  man or an executive chef is a man. You notice that if it's non-professional, like they would say,  
**0:32:24-0:32:38:**  if you're a gardener or if you're home-cooked, then you're probably a woman. And I found that  quite ridiculous because the moment that it becomes a career, it's considered male, but if  it's not a career, it's considered female. And so people have used that to kind of discriminate  
**0:32:38-0:32:51:**  against me and say, oh, you're just gardening. You're not really farming or, oh, you're just a  home-cooked. You're not really a chef. And I think those are the conversations that women need to  kind of talk about is how there are plenty of women who are in these industries that are  
**0:32:52-0:33:06:**  amazing leaders with so much knowledge, but it's easily undermined by, again, cultural stigmas  that make them think that it's not so great. And many women as a result suffer with imposter  syndrome and all of these different things in agriculture and food systems. That's just really  
**0:33:06-0:33:21:**  tragic. But some of the most brilliant people that I've known in agriculture and farming and  even food are actually women. So hopefully that builds more representation for women in food  systems. And it's why I really appreciate this podcast because I get to reach out to people who  
**0:33:21-0:33:36:**  are like-minded in a similar community who might have had these experiences and would have something  to relate to. And you have had the chance to be on so many of these panels and in so many discussions.  So have there been any women in those environments that have really stood out to you that have really  
**0:33:36-0:33:52:**  inspired you or surprised you in some way? Oh, I think it's all of the women who are leading  within sustainability, environment and food systems. I think one of them is, well, looking  out to them, one of them is Ingrid Anderson, who is currently the executive director of U-NEP. And  
**0:33:52-0:34:06:**  you know, she's this woman who's very, he was in an environment, she's really efficient. She does  these amazing things in her own industry and has amazing accomplishments. And as well as Dr. Agnes  Calibata as well, it's brilliant how she's leading dialogues and a lot of conversations in food  
**0:34:06-0:34:22:**  systems. I really look up to them. But there's also the young women who are leading the sustainable  food systems movement right now at U-NEP, who I consider friends like from Isha Safaliah and  Lana Waijanet, who are young women who are about my age and are absolute powerhouses when they speak  
**0:34:22-0:34:38:**  and have such great knowledge. So it's really great to look up to people like that and hear  similar stories that I can identify with and relate to. Lovely. I can imagine, given the  breadth of work that you've done, the visibility that a lot of it has had, that there are many,  
**0:34:38-0:34:54:**  many demands on your time from all different directions. How have you learned to manage that,  to set boundaries and to say no when it's necessary? I think that's something I'm still  working on. I think it's been a challenge. Year 2020 kind of blindsided me because I realized that  
**0:34:54-0:35:08:**  all of these speaking engagements come one after the other. And it was a challenge to continuously  make different speeches of new original content every single time when you probably do three,  four or five a day. And I realized that it was taking up more time than I wished it would.  
**0:35:08-0:35:22:**  So I learned that I have to prioritize and I have to really align my message. And also,  as you mentioned, set those boundaries. It's still something that I'm learning because, you know,  in the traditional format, you'd probably have one public speaking engagement every week or so.  
**0:35:22-0:35:39:**  And now it's probably at least once a day because of all of it's more accessible. So with  accessibility, you have a bigger reach, you have huge audiences, and that's wonderful. But also,  you have to start learning that you have to manage your time better. So usually I set public speaking  
**0:35:39-0:35:53:**  engagements in the mornings or to the evenings on certain days. And of course, as I mentioned  earlier, I have days when I choose not to at all and say, these are the days that are non-negotiable,  that I have to do what I do, either rest or work on my work. And these are the days that I can speak.  
**0:35:53-0:36:10:**  And usually with online engagement, I try to avoid speaking for, say, 90 minutes because I  find that that's really long and audience engagement is quite short. So I tell people that  if I speak, I'd lessen it to 15 to 45 minutes because then you have a much more meaningful  
**0:36:10-0:36:22:**  conversation because you cut down to the chase and people are still engaged and interested.  So it's a matter of that. It's either limiting the time or saying not now, but maybe on these days,  it would be more ideal. But that's what I know so far. So if anyone does have tips,  
**0:36:22-0:36:39:**  please do reach out to me and let me know. Constant journey for all of us, right? To  not only learn the tips, but implement them. Yeah. Especially when you're so passionate about what  you do. Oh yeah. So this podcast is called The Grateful and I like to ask all of my guests,  
**0:36:39-0:36:57:**  what does living a great and full life mean for you? Oh, that's a good question. I think  for me, living a great and full life is really being a steward to the creation around us and  being able to even just like change one person's life for the better so that they can learn to be  
**0:36:57-0:37:15:**  more grateful and appreciate nature and all the resources we have and use it to maximize  the resources and help someone else too. So to really live a great and full life is to cultivate  an environment of respect, of honor, and to lead a life of integrity and stand for  
**0:37:15-0:38:20:**  values that are meaningful and positively influence everyone else around you.  My very best to get your questions answered here on the show music in this episode came from blue  dot sessions.  