---
title: Food And Leadership For A Better World With Prof Corinna Hawkes Ep 8
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### The Great Full  (2021-02-01)  
### Author(s): Michelle Grant  

**0:00:00-0:00:09:**  Hi, I'm Michelle, and welcome to The Great Full Podcast, a place where we contemplate  how we can eat, live, and lead each day to build a more sustainable world.  I have to say that what I love the most about hosting this podcast is the chance to speak  to very cool, inspiring people who have found how they want to make their mark in the world  and are passionately going about it.  
**0:00:30-0:00:36:**  And that's how I feel about the guest I have on today's show as well, Professor Corinna  Hawkes, who is the director of the Center for Food Policy at the City University of  London.  And Corinna has really dedicated her career to working out how we can design and implement  policies that help everybody on the planet access a healthy diet from a sustainable food  
**0:00:54-0:00:55:**  system.  And I love what Corinna writes about her work on her blog, where she shares a lot of really  interesting and practical tips about how we can create a world where everybody can eat  well.  And this is what she says about her motivation to have a career in the food space.  
**0:01:13-0:01:18:**  Eating better has the potential to make the world a much better place.  Eating enough of the right kind of food enables children to grow as they should and helps  adults live in good health and fulfil their potential.  Eating is a source of enjoyment, of pleasure, a source of celebration and community, of  what we have in common.  
**0:01:35-0:01:39:**  It's a way of staying engaged with the earth that feeds us.  Food is a vital part of our economy, providing jobs and supporting the livelihoods of millions  of people who spend their days growing, gathering, harvesting, moving, processing or selling  our food.  Food is also political, a means of helping us all figure out where we stand on the key  
**0:01:56-0:01:59:**  issues facing the world today.  I thought that was such a beautiful summary that also connects to why I work in the food  space, and it just gives a really nice depth to the motivation that comes across so clearly  when you chat with her.  And Corinna's research is always interdisciplinary and really looks at how we can create policies  
**0:02:18-0:02:22:**  that prevent malnutrition and build sustainable food systems.  And she works from the city policy level all the way through to the international arena.  She's been involved in, chaired and contributed to more panels, reports and global processes  than I possibly have time to share with you here.  But just to name a few recent ones, the Global Nutrition Report in 2018, the groundbreaking  
**0:02:46-0:02:52:**  Eat Lancet Report that set scientific targets for a diet that's healthy for people and  planet, and she's also chair of London's Child Obesity Task Force.  And as I said, the list continues on.  So that's just to say that her work in the food system space is so important, and I was  so happy to chat with her and find just a shared interest in a range of things from  
**0:03:13-0:03:18:**  not only improving policies to build healthy food systems, but exploring the role of women  in leading change and the importance of being open and vulnerable about the challenges we  all face when we want to create change in the world and normalising the relationship  we might have with overwhelm in that process.  I really love chatting with Corinna, and I hope you enjoy our conversation as much as  
**0:03:36-0:03:37:**  I did.  I was reading that you are on the Childhood Obesity Task Force in the UK, and that got  me thinking just about how important our connections to food are as children.  And so I was wondering what early interactions did you have with food that you think have  shaped your path or influenced the work that you do today?  
**0:03:58-0:04:05:**  Well, I was thinking how indulgently nice it would be to spend many hours discussing  with friends and colleagues our childhood memories, because that question immediately  makes me think of many, many different memories, because food was incredibly important when  I was younger and growing up.  And they're bittersweet.  
**0:04:20-0:04:23:**  There's some very positive memories and some negative memories.  But I think all of them, definitely all of them, are linked with my mother.  She was way before her time.  I was born in the early 1970s, right at the start of the 1970s.  I grew up in a town in the north of England, and way, way before her time in understanding  
**0:04:41-0:04:50:**  the value of food, of food that was delicious and healthy, and also food that protected  the environment.  And she was passionate about good food when nobody else was passionate about food, at  least that I knew.  Maybe they were some of the bigger fancier places, but not where I came from.  
**0:05:04-0:05:06:**  And so all the memories that I have are around that.  And she died when I was 18.  And so her approach to food is a major reason why I'm involved in food.  And I've spoken about this quite a lot before, because I think it's something that I want  to be open about, because it indicates that food is something that's quite personal to  
**0:05:25-0:05:27:**  us.  And there are just millions of memories that I have.  I remember going to Alligator.  Alligator was a whole food shop in York that has been around.  I don't know if it's still open, but I remember going shopping at Alligator and all the sacks  
**0:05:44-0:05:47:**  of beans and oats and flour.  I remember going to York Market and shopping for fruits and vegetables.  I think one of the most enduring memories that I have as food as a child was being laughed  at for my packed lunch at school.  And being laughed at as a child is never a pleasant thing.  
**0:06:08-0:06:15:**  And I remember even what they looked like sitting around that table in an ordinary school,  in an ordinary hall, and people saying, why have you got brown bread?  What are you doing eating a carrot?  And like, what's that?  What's that?  
**0:06:27-0:06:28:**  I had some dried fruit.  So my mother obviously was unusual and wanted me to have healthy food.  And kids just laughed at it.  They thought it was weird.  Now I think my mother was very courageous and brave for persisting with giving me healthy  
**0:06:45-0:06:52:**  food that I actually liked.  And yet even in the face of this society that hadn't kind of yet grasped about the importance  of it.  But the other thing that I also remember is how my mother used to manage financially.  I come from a middle class background, but my father didn't have a job, didn't earn very  
**0:07:13-0:07:14:**  much really.  And so there was a constant concern about money and spending money when I was growing  up.  And about my mother managed to always buy the cheap version of delicious food.  I actually relate to a lot of those points from my own childhood of having a mother who  
**0:07:31-0:07:37:**  was before her time in terms of healthy eating and the kind of shame of carrying the carrot  sticks into the birthday party.  But now being so grateful for that because it's shaped so much of how I eat and how I  engage with food.  And as you were talking, I could hear you touching on different elements, the environmental  
**0:07:49-0:07:55:**  impact, the nutritional aspect, the health aspects, the cultural aspects.  And you were recently a part of this Eat Lancet commission that looked at defining a diet  that is good for people on the planet in a more holistic sense.  And I think that the waves that that created were much bigger than any similar report that  we've seen in any recent times.  
**0:08:13-0:08:18:**  There was also a lot of pushback or questions around it.  So I'm really interested to know, what would you like people to take away from this body  of work?  What do you think are the most important messages in the Eat Lancet report?  The most important message for me was that everybody has a responsibility for affecting  
**0:08:36-0:08:40:**  change in our food systems.  And that might involve each of us eating a bit differently, but it mainly involves, I  think, those who have responsibility for making decisions that affect the food system, for  taking full responsibility for those decisions and thinking and rethinking about the system,  the food system, from a system that just produces enough food to a system that produces nutritious  
**0:09:06-0:09:12:**  food and focuses on that within environmental limits.  That's all that report really was saying, that we need to think about the food system  differently and what it's for and what its purpose is.  So the purpose of the food system is to feed the world well and to make sure it does so  in a way that is sustained for future generations, which means it needs to do it sustainably.  
**0:09:34-0:09:38:**  It's a very simple message, but it's quite different from saying we need a food system  that produces enough calories for everybody.  The way that I put it is that in the current food system is focused on producing calories  and cash, enough food and enough profitability and income for the actors in the system.  And of course, the system needs to be economically viable, but economically, it's out of whack.  
**0:09:59-0:10:08:**  And the economics are not aligned with producing nutritious food from sustainable food systems.  And so we need to move away from a calories and cash model to a nutritious foods from  sustainable food systems.  And you touched on the economic aspect there, and I think that's what I keep coming back  to.  
**0:10:22-0:10:26:**  It took me years of working in the space to come to this kind of essential understanding  that well, actually underlying all these big, sticky social and environmental topics is  the fact that cheap food is the basis of our political economic system.  And unless we change that, we're not going to be able to fundamentally change things.  So how do you think we can start tackling this elephant in the room, the need to change  
**0:10:44-0:10:46:**  the economic system?  Yeah, and I agree with you 100 percent that unless we change the economics of the system,  we're not fundamentally going to achieve what we need to achieve.  We can achieve a lot, but we can't really have this transformation agenda that is talked  about so often.  
**0:11:05-0:11:09:**  So I wrote an article on this for the conversation recently because it's something that I've  been preoccupying me for quite a long time.  And I think the issue is to get the supply and demand cycle lined up.  So in other words, I don't really like to use economics terminology, but staying within  economics terminology, we need to be in a situation where people are demanding, people  
**0:11:28-0:11:33:**  are wanting to eat healthy foods and they have the capacity and means to be able to  afford it and prepare it and so on.  And that demand needs to be met by the supply of those foods.  So we need to have what is now a vicious cycle and convert that into a virtuous cycle.  How do you do that?  
**0:11:49-0:11:52:**  The first thing is that people need to have the capacity to be able to afford it.  So there's a whole anti-poverty agenda that has to be part of this economics, this rethinking  economics.  And the second thing is that we need to have financing for healthy food.  There's absolutely trillions that is spent in the food system right now.  
**0:12:09-0:12:13:**  It's not focused on nutritious, healthy foods.  It's focused on producing enough calories or it's focused on producing money for certain  actors who want to make money.  So if we were to reorient our financing in the food system, that could be agricultural  subsidies.  
**0:12:28-0:12:30:**  It could be public procurement.  It could be the investments that are made by the private sector.  If we were to reorient those and ask questions and say, right, how is this money that is  being spent?  How is that actually impacting nutritious food?  
**0:12:45-0:12:47:**  It's probably not having much of an impact.  So we need to reorient the way that we're spending money, which is a very practical  thing because it's fundamentally saying, I'm going to come into work and have a job that  involves spending some money in the food system.  I'm going to think differently about it.  
**0:13:03-0:13:07:**  The third thing that really needs to happen is to make junk food less attractive.  It's so easy to like junk food.  It's just so easy to like it.  And all of us get tired and want to gorge out on these kind of sweet treats and so on.  It's just a human reaction to how palatable it is.  
**0:13:25-0:13:31:**  So we really have to come down hard and say everyone's always going to like this, but  we need to make it less attractive to people.  And so we need a small amount of regulations and restrictions that level the playing field  so that big food companies are disincentivized from producing it in the first place.  And then we need to have a reorientation of the way the whole incentives for companies,  
**0:13:52-0:13:55:**  small and large, to produce profit.  And that is really fundamental to the way our economy operates.  And to do that, that means we need to alter the nature of competition between those companies.  So there's another whole agenda around that.  And I'll stop there.  
**0:14:09-0:14:13:**  But there's some very practical things that can be done.  It sounds like, I've talked about this before and people say, oh, are you trying to smash  capitalism?  Well, I mean, we are asking questions.  The Financial Times, the World Economic Forum is asking questions about the nature of  
**0:14:25-0:14:26:**  capitalism.  So are we trying to rethink capitalism?  Yes, we are.  Is it an agenda where we can take some practical steps?  Yes, it is.  
**0:14:35-0:14:36:**  And we can take those steps now.  It doesn't have to be one of these things that we're just shouting on the street with  our fists out.  There were some practical things that can be done to take it forward.  Yeah.  
**0:14:45-0:14:46:**  Yeah.  And I think it's so important for us to normalize this conversation.  Like you say, a lot of big organizations are really asking these questions and we should  all be able to do that without being.  Yeah, I agree.  
**0:14:56-0:14:57:**  Or whatever.  I've had all kinds of things said whenever bring this up.  Yeah, exactly.  I really do agree.  And I mean, I think the other point here is about what does success actually mean and  
**0:15:09-0:15:13:**  how do we measure success?  And thinking about and really redefining what those metrics of success are can also go a  long way in terms of understanding what it is that we're aiming to achieve.  I mentioned about purpose of the food system before.  If we get clear on that, that would set a broader framework for what it is that we're  
**0:15:35-0:15:36:**  trying to achieve.  Because I think understanding purpose is important from a policy level, from a personal level  and from a food system level.  And I think what you've just said is equally as important for us as individuals as it is  for us collectively in the system, getting clear on what success actually means for each  
**0:15:53-0:15:57:**  of us and what is purpose for each of us in our lives can also help us, I think, connect  to that at a more collective level.  You mentioned some nice concrete measures we could engage with more on the economic  side of things.  I'm really interested to know what you think are some of the most, let's say, innovative  
**0:16:11-0:16:16:**  or bold actions being taken around the world on food systems and policy.  Yeah, I mean, when it comes to boldness, I don't see the boldness that's really required  because there's always a reason not to do something.  And that's because there's so many conflicts in the food system.  If you make this change, it's going to have an impact on someone else because it's a connected  
**0:16:35-0:16:36:**  system.  And so it is inevitably going to have an impact on someone else.  And that means politics comes into play straight away.  And politics matters.  It's always going to matter.  
**0:16:46-0:16:48:**  It's always there.  But it does mean that boldness does tend to drift away rather unless you have very, very  strong political commitment to effecting change.  So I don't see as much boldness and courage as I would like to see.  The changes that I'm most interested in at the moment are at the city level.  
**0:17:09-0:17:14:**  I do think that city governments have got some, they've got limited power in some senses  and they've got more power in others.  And I think we're seeing some really interesting actions being taken by cities, which are all  about putting food at the center and saying this matters.  I'm proud of the work that London has done, for example.  
**0:17:30-0:17:37:**  But I also think there were some fantastic examples in smaller cities in Europe and some  small and large cities throughout Latin America and Asia and Africa that are really trying  to do things.  I'm very fortunate to be leading a project in Cape Town, the province of the Western  Cape in South Africa at the moment.  
**0:17:53-0:17:58:**  And I've been hearing from our close colleagues there in South Africa at the University of  Stellenbosch at the University of Cape Town about the work that the city of Cape Town  and the Western Cape Province is doing to try and put food at the center of the COVID-19  response, for example.  And these are conversations that you never hear at the national level.  
**0:18:14-0:18:18:**  And it's because they're trying to bring food together into one.  So I get kind of excited about that.  But in terms of other actions, I honestly think there were communities doing wonderful  work which takes a lot of bravery and it takes a lot of effort and they have like no resources.  But they're trying to do things because they believe in helping their communities.  
**0:18:38-0:18:42:**  And I think that's really where we should be looking to not we need to do much more  than community level actions.  But I'm saying that the boldness and the courage of these things, they get no attention.  And yet there's just people that are trying to do the right thing.  And that's we can learn from that.  
**0:18:56-0:18:59:**  Yeah, because they deeply care.  And I guess that links to something else I've been thinking about after working in this  space for a really long time and sort of exploring what it means to create change.  I'm just increasingly interested in how the fact that all the change we want is effectively  human change in the end and that we need to put more attention there on the human side  
**0:19:18-0:19:22:**  of things and also reflect more on how that starts within each of us.  And I'm wondering what your thoughts are on this and what do you think we need to focus  on in terms of building the capacity of the next generation to lead change from the inside  and to be change agents in this complex and sometimes overwhelming food system space?  Well, I'm glad you asked about this because it's an area that I've become increasingly  
**0:19:42-0:19:46:**  interested in in the last few years.  And a few months ago, I established or initiated with a colleague a new initiative, which we're  tentatively calling the Next Generation Leadership Initiative for a Well-Knowished World.  And it's just starting and we'll see where it goes.  But the reason for doing that is because I could see that it's a bit like it's one of  
**0:20:13-0:20:20:**  those things like big ideas and economics cross-cutting the lack of more sustained and  bold action with the lack of the right type of leadership.  What do I mean by the right side of leadership?  We're trying to work that out.  I have some clear sense when I see leadership, I think is not the right type of leadership  
**0:20:35-0:20:40:**  and what the right type of leadership is, but we're trying to pull that together.  And I think unless we empower mid-career and early career professionals with the audacity  to lead in the way that they believe will lead to a better world, we will not succeed.  What I see is younger professionals coming through the system, I was the same, saying  this is the way that you lead.  
**0:21:03-0:21:05:**  You lead by the way that this person leads.  They're successful.  Therefore, I need to be like that person in order to succeed.  They're often men, not always men, but often are.  And I think that if we're really going to make the change, we need to give people the  
**0:21:21-0:21:26:**  power to say leadership can be different to how it has been in the past.  For example, we see an enormous amount of incompetence in our current leadership.  So just the basics of saying, by the way, being a leader is being competent.  Just the absolute basics.  Second, being a leader is being courageous, but what does that courage actually mean?  
**0:21:45-0:21:47:**  And how does it play out in practice?  What does it involve for our daily decisions?  So this is something that probably my leading passion at the moment is trying to better  understand this and trying to communicate that and trying to engage this people, particularly  women, but it's not just women, around this issue.  
**0:22:05-0:22:09:**  Because at the end of the day, we get up in the morning, those of us who work, we get  on with our work or we look after our kids or we go to school or with students or we're  struggling like mad in a terrible situation of deprivation.  And we just have to live our life and we take one step, we take another step.  We do one thing, we do the next.  
**0:22:29-0:22:35:**  How can we take those daily steps in a way which is different, which is going to fulfill  our purpose in life as individuals, but also fulfill the greater purpose of a better food  system that is going to be good for the world?  We have to better understand how we make those changes in our everyday lives.  But we also have to fight to break down the structural barriers which prevent that from  
**0:22:55-0:22:56:**  happening.  Absolutely.  We need action on both sides.  I think about that a lot too, like what can we do in our everyday to make living and leading  more intentional?  
**0:23:06-0:23:10:**  And I'm very excited to hear you talk about that because that's my leading passion at  the moment too.  And I think as an aside, we'll have to talk further about this and how we can maybe join  forces on this topic.  So we've talked to the policy level, we've talked a bit at the individual level, and  
**0:23:21-0:23:26:**  I really believe we need change at multiple levels across the system.  And that's not just in terms of how we eat, but also in terms of how we live and how we  lead.  And for me, that really starts on the inside.  How do you work with this in your day to day life, let's say taking more intentional steps?  
**0:23:42-0:23:51:**  Well, I mean, on a most practical level, I work hard.  And everybody I know works hard.  So I think being very applied to what you do is important.  I also make sure that I'm spending time making sure that we, well as a family, have one daughter  married.  
**0:24:11-0:24:16:**  And I think that is important to try and live one's values in that sense.  But that's their quite general point.  I think it's difficult to say, I mean, I think I'm someone who's struggled.  Many people struggle.  And clearly I'm a professor.  
**0:24:32-0:24:38:**  I live a fairly privileged life compared to the vast majority of the world's population.  But I've struggled, struggled a lot.  And I think staying in touch with that struggle is the most important thing.  Because it keeps you grounded with other people.  I have to admit, I'm always a bit suspicious of people who don't struggle.  
**0:25:01-0:25:02:**  Is life that easy?  Normally you find that they do and they've just got on the surface.  There's something about struggling that enables us to share things with our fellow human beings  and to stay in touch with that.  And I'd like to see a situation where there's more spaces to admit that struggle and be  
**0:25:24-0:25:29:**  open about it rather than say, ah, you know, I've got it all sorted out and I know what  I'm doing and I'm headed in this direction.  I've got everything planned.  I'm all really sorted out.  I'm not.  
**0:25:39-0:25:43:**  And I don't want to be ashamed of that.  So I think just maybe staying in touch with that struggle and staying grounded.  I mean, there's a big conversation at the moment about underrepresentation of communities.  Women, of course, and other gender identity issues as well as black and Asian and other  ethnic communities, representation from the global south.  
**0:26:03-0:26:08:**  And I think, you know, should I be giving space now to other people?  And absolutely.  That's one of the reasons I want to develop this initiative and work with others and collaborate  with others doing the same thing.  But I'm not ready to lean out yet.  
**0:26:21-0:26:23:**  I'm going to be 50 next year.  I'm just going into the decade.  I think I can really get something done after building up my experience and struggling.  But unless I really stay in touch with myself and stay in touch with my struggles, I will  risk going up at this high and mighty level and not being in touch and not staying grounded  
**0:26:45-0:26:49:**  with really what the struggles are on the ground.  And that's another huge passion of my mind is the research.  Most of the research that we do in my Center for Food Policy is lived experience research,  which is trying to understand how people experience their food system.  And I feel privileged to be working with a team of researchers on this because I learned  
**0:27:06-0:27:08:**  so much from that.  I'm a great believer that we need to take that evidence and translate it and interpret  it.  Staying grounded, recognizing that we all struggle and not feeling guilty too much about  that, I think is the way I would answer your question.  
**0:27:28-0:27:31:**  So that's a very long winded answer.  I love what you said.  And two of the things I pick up from it is that we need space for both authenticity and  vulnerability so that we can really connect as human beings and connect to ourselves.  Because when we disconnect from that, then we firstly don't necessarily have much of  
**0:27:47-0:27:52:**  an impact and we're not very happy in the process of trying to do it because we're just  living disconnected from everything.  What you also brought up, you know, is this idea of having it all together is something  that many people experience when trying to work in a complex system.  And that's this feeling of overwhelm.  
**0:28:05-0:28:11:**  Overwhelm with like where to start, where to focus my energy, how to not burn out in  the process of trying to tackle all these things.  Would you have any tips for how you deal with overwhelm?  I struggle with feeling overwhelmed.  I feel privileged to do the work that I do.  
**0:28:25-0:28:30:**  But I also find the number of projects I'm involved with overwhelming.  And what I struggle with most is I have a strong desire to make a difference.  One can only do what one can do.  And I don't want to assume that I can make a difference on my own.  I can't.  
**0:28:42-0:28:45:**  It has to be part of a much broader collective effort.  But I feel overwhelmed by the fact that I don't really feel I'm making enough of a difference.  And a constant sort of need to want to make more of a difference.  And maybe that says something about my personality and psychology.  I don't know.  
**0:29:01-0:29:06:**  But it's certainly not said in the idea that I'm some kind of selfless person who's trying  to save the world.  It's very personally, it's very driven by my own desire to live and just to affirm life  every day.  So I think the only thing I can say is someone who really struggles with that and the only  
**0:29:20-0:29:29:**  tips that I have is to remember that you can only do what you can do.  And to try and remember that everything that you do, if it's done for the right reasons  for the right purpose, that's all one can do.  And also to accept that one is going to make a lot of mistakes.  I certainly make a lot of mistakes.  
**0:29:49-0:29:53:**  And I beat myself up for making those mistakes.  It's a really bad idea to beat yourself up.  Don't do it.  It's a complete waste of time.  I mean, it just doesn't help anything.  
**0:30:02-0:30:05:**  It's something that I have to work on in myself.  I'm not doing enough.  I should be doing more.  I should have made a different decision.  Never use the word should.  
**0:30:12-0:30:18:**  I say this because I'm working on this for myself right now.  It's the idea that let's just focus on achieving things, not on ruminating.  It's a terrible habit.  Don't get into it.  Yeah, I think that rumination is a big challenge for so many people.  
**0:30:31-0:30:35:**  It's like a whirlpool that just pulls us in.  And I've been reading something recently around how much we learn through making mistakes  and just trying to embrace that.  Like, well, what did I learn here?  And let's keep going.  
**0:30:46-0:30:51:**  I want to read out a quote from you that I found somewhere that says, this is leadership,  getting things done by building coalitions, motivating collective action with purpose,  staying energized and positive when things get tough.  I really love this quote and I think it kind of summarizes some of the things that we talked  about.  
**0:31:04-0:31:08:**  What are your most important practices for staying energized and positive, even when  things might feel challenging and overwhelming?  Well, it's funny about the staying positive.  I lost my mother when I was 18.  I mentioned her earlier, who was very progressive when it came to food.  
**0:31:24-0:31:29:**  And there's nothing like keeping me positive and energized than knowing that what I'm doing  would have mattered to her.  And I'm taking work that she never had the chance to do.  And the fact I'm taking that work forward, there's nothing that gets me going than that.  And that sounds a bit negative, as if I have to see something negative in order to turn  
**0:31:45-0:31:46:**  it into a positive.  But it shows that I have a very strong personal mission.  And I think when you have a strong personal mission that aligns with a world out there,  a collective of people who are working towards the same goal, it's incredibly motivating.  And however tired I am or however annoyed I am at something I'm doing, that will motivate  
**0:32:07-0:32:08:**  me.  The second element of staying positive and energized is reaching out to my community.  Every day, I thank my lucky stars to be working in such a marvelous community of people.  I work in a global community all over the world.  And the people I work with are just wonderful.  
**0:32:27-0:32:29:**  They're just wonderful people.  And I mean just the people I meet who are really young and the people I meet who are  senior.  And all of them are taking action and doing things.  And sometimes when I'm feeling a little bit de-energized and deflated, I'll send a text,  
**0:32:44-0:32:48:**  I'll send an email, I'll give someone a call.  Just staying connected is really important for staying energized.  It's so positive.  And all of us who work in this field are fortunate to be part of this collective.  Absolutely.  
**0:33:02-0:33:08:**  So this podcast is called The Great Fall and I like to end with asking each of my guests  this question.  What does living a great and full life mean for you?  Living adventurously.  I love adventure.  
**0:33:17-0:33:21:**  I'm the opposite of someone who wants a steady and stable life.  I like to always be having new ideas, challenging myself with new ideas, new places, new things  and living life adventurously and always moving forward on that path and never feel that I'm  staying still.  That to me is affirming life.  
**0:33:42-0:33:53:**  And just always acting in a way which is saying I can make a difference and I can try.  And even though who knows what difference one makes, I don't know.  So the combination of living adventurously and living with a mission and a purpose and  living with integrity.  Living with integrity is incredibly important to me.  
**0:34:11-0:34:14:**  What integrity means to different people, it varies.  But if I'm living in a way that's aligned with my values, that helps a lot.  That also helps keep me positive because sometimes living with your values is hard.  Really hard.  And again, I don't mean that I'm such a wonderful person with such a wonderful set of values.  
**0:34:33-0:34:39:**  I'm just as an individual, I just believe that we can be better people and sleep better  at night if we do that.  So that's also very important to me.  Wonderful.  You do a few of these podcasts.  
**0:34:46-0:34:49:**  Just before we finish, is there anything you want to share?  Any question that you're never asked that you wish you were?  I think I'd like to say to all the women out there that we are the ones who largely work  in the food system.  We feed our kids.  
**0:35:12-0:35:16:**  We feed our communities.  We're most of the farmers and producers in the world.  We're the ones doing the rubbish jobs in food processing and food retailing.  And I'm talking globally here.  And we should take power in the food system.  
**0:35:31-0:35:37:**  I think the matter for leadership is a matter of good practices, good leadership practices.  And men can have them, women can have them, everyone can have those practices.  It's not about saying that there doesn't need to be equality.  But I think there's so much more that women could do precisely because we can stay grounded  in that experience and that everyday experience.  
**0:35:59-0:36:09:**  So I would really love to see more power in the hands of women who are grounded in that.  Whether it's a very, very poor farmer in a developing country, whether it's just somebody  who feeds their kids and thinks it's just everyday and ordinary.  But we need to do more to bring those experiences out and to talk about our experiences.  Because unless those experiences are reflected in policy and practice, the changes aren't  
**0:36:32-0:36:34:**  going to happen.  So I really do believe that now is the time for women to develop that confidence and for  us to change the structures that enable women to have that confidence and to gain skills  where they need to be gained and to connect where connections need to be made in order  to affect change into the food system.  
**0:37:00-0:37:05:**  And I certainly, as a woman myself, want to be part of that effort.  And when I think how much struggle I struggled earlier on in my career, which I did because  I was trying to manage husband, child, moving around the place, having made the wrong choices  when I was younger, I just really hope that we can help each other in that effort.  That's beautiful.  
**0:37:26-0:37:29:**  All of that resonates with me, every single word.  So thank you so much.  And thank you for listening to today's show.  If you are also interested in the conversation that we've just had about the role that women  can play in building more sustainable food systems and a more sustainable world, you  
**0:37:46-0:37:51:**  are interested to explore what that means for you and how we can support one another  in that process.  Then I just wanted to make sure that you know about a program that I run called Be The Change.  Questions for the next round are just about to close.  And we bring together a group of aspiring women leaders from around the world who want  
**0:38:06-0:38:12:**  to work out what's my role in tackling these big challenges and how can I step into that  in a way that's also personally fulfilling and sustainable for me.  So in the course of this four-month group coaching and leadership development program,  we explore how to build a sustainable foundation for yourself.  We explore how to build community and build communication skills so that we can really  
**0:38:33-0:38:37:**  get our message across and bring people along for the journey.  And finally, we look at callings and courage, trying to help you get some more clarity on  where your specific skills, gifts and interests interface with the needs that there are in  the world and how do we build the courage that we need to step into taking on those  leadership roles.  
**0:38:55-0:39:01:**  This is not only an individual journey for you, but you're a part of a really motivated  and inspiring group of women who support each other through the process and help each other  learn and grow.  You can find out all about Be The Change on the website and you'll find the link in  the show notes.  
**0:39:13-0:39:17:**  If you have any questions at all, don't hesitate to send me an email or drop me a  voice message via the link on the webpage and I will get straight back to you.  Applications are open for just a few more days, so head straight over and check it out  if you're interested.  Thanks again for listening to the show.  