---
title: Imposter Syndrome And Changing The Status Quo With Michelle Grant Founder The Great Full Ep 16
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### The Great Full  (2022-01-16)  
### Author(s): Michelle Grant  

**0:00:00-0:00:20:**  How do you, suffering from this imposter syndrome, take steps to manage it, that it doesn't jeopardise  the value that we can offer to the world?  Hi, everyone. Welcome to the Grateful podcast. I'm your host, Michelle Grant. And this is  
**0:00:20-0:00:38:**  a place where we explore how we can build more sustainable lives, communities and food  systems. I often do episodes where I have conversations with inspiring changemakers,  learning not only more about the challenges they're trying to tackle and how they're doing  
**0:00:38-0:00:53:**  so, but also getting some insights into the leadership lessons they've learned along their  journey. In this season, I'm also starting to offer some solo episodes like this one,  where we dive deeper into topics that tend to come up when we decide we want to play  
**0:00:53-0:01:09:**  a role in creating change and start trying to step into that.  So to get started today, let me ask you this. In the course of your work and in trying to  make an impact in the world around you, have you ever had the thought, I actually have  
**0:01:09-0:01:28:**  no idea what I'm doing and sooner or later people are going to find out? Have you maybe  doubted your abilities and sometimes felt like a fraud at work? Have you repeatedly  asked yourself, can I even do this? Can I live up to these expectations? Do I deserve  
**0:01:28-0:01:48:**  to be here? Do I belong here? So if you've ever grappled with these questions, felt held  back by them in some way, you're not alone. And it's also why I wanted to pick this up  in today's episode and explore what's behind it, which is this concept of imposter syndrome  
**0:01:48-0:02:07:**  or imposter phenomena, as I prefer to call it. And I chose this topic for today's episode  because it pretty much always comes up in the leadership trainings and in the different  coachings that I do. And usually it goes something like this. We're coming to the end of an intake  
**0:02:07-0:02:28:**  discussion with a new coaching client. And I'll ask something like, is there anything  else that would be helpful for me to know as we start this coaching process together? And the client usually, she  usually replies, well, I think I might have imposter syndrome. A kind of shameful confession  
**0:02:28-0:02:43:**  is what it feels like. Almost like it's a disease that they have and they don't really  want to mention it, but they think they have to because it's relevant. And I hear this  so often that I really wanted to pick this up as a topic in one of these solo episodes.  
**0:02:43-0:02:59:**  So today we're going to dive into this imposter syndrome. And I say syndrome with air quotes,  so we're going to explore that term more. Explore who actually experiences this and  try and understand a bit better what we can do both individually and collectively to try  
**0:02:59-0:03:17:**  and tackle it and help ourselves learn how to dance with it. Most of all, I hope today  that you can realise that if you experience imposter phenomenon, it's not your fault.  You're not alone with it. And there are absolutely things that we can start working on immediately  
**0:03:17-0:03:39:**  to help us find a new way to interact with this. So to get started, what is this imposter  syndrome anyway? And as I sat down to prepare this episode, I actually reached out to my  community and asked if anybody would like to share their perspective on what they think  
**0:03:39-0:03:57:**  imposter syndrome is, how they experience it, if and how it holds them back and what  they would like to learn about it. And I got responses back from around the world, from  Argentina to Namibia to Switzerland, people from really different backgrounds with really  
**0:03:57-0:04:15:**  different lived experiences, but having a lot of similar perspectives in terms of how  this phenomenon is impacting them and their work, their ability to make an impact in the  world. So here's a couple of snippets of things that people shared with me.  
**0:04:15-0:04:38:**  The imposter syndrome is a feeling of not being enough, of not being sufficient, not  adequate, not deserving of the position that I have, mostly in the professional context,  so rarely in the personal context. And part of it is a conviction that even if I get positive  
**0:04:38-0:05:01:**  feedback, something must be wrong. And at some point they will realize, either colleagues  or supervisors, that I actually don't deserve to be there. And that I am actually not an  expert or I actually don't know these topics. And just a feeling of inadequacy and at the  
**0:05:01-0:05:25:**  same time adding a lot of pressure to yourself to try and reach standards that are probably  not reachable. But in those situations you just don't see it.  For me imposter syndrome is when someone is fully prepared, fully capable of delivering  
**0:05:25-0:05:48:**  a service, subject matter, presentation, whatever it is, and feels inadequate, feels nonetheless  not good enough. But it's all part of a different issue. It's not to do with lack of preparation,  of lack of capabilities, it's to do with belief that maybe they're not good enough.  
**0:05:48-0:06:07:**  So these are the things we're dealing with when we talk about imposter syndrome. I've  heard it defined as when other people's views of your competence exceed your own confidence,  which is a nice succinct way of saying it. Valerie Young, who is a researcher who did  
**0:06:07-0:06:28:**  her PhD on imposter syndrome, defines it in the following way. Imposter syndrome is when  you have a persistent belief in your lack of skills, intelligence or competence. And  you think that other people's praise and recognition is not deserved. You think that your achievements  
**0:06:28-0:06:46:**  are normally due to chance or perhaps external factors. You doubt your ability to repeat  past successes and you often feel disconnected from your successes. And when something goes  well or you are successful, you tend to feel relief rather than joy, relief that you weren't  
**0:06:46-0:07:08:**  found out you got away with it this time. I think for me it shows up especially when  I have to revise or go through my previous work or accomplishments or articles that I've  written when I read, I always get shocked. It's my work.  
**0:07:08-0:07:27:**  So imposter syndrome is that combination of things. It's not just about having self doubt.  It's that self doubt combined with feeling like a fraud, feeling like others perceive  you to be more competent than you think that you actually are. And imposter syndrome often  
**0:07:27-0:07:46:**  shows up for us in times of transition. So that might be stepping into a new role, taking  on a new challenge, saying yes to a high profile opportunity that comes your way. These are  the times when imposter thoughts tend to rear their ugly heads. But when it comes to defining  
**0:07:46-0:08:04:**  this into the term itself, I actually prefer the term imposter phenomenon. And imposter  phenomenon was the term that the researchers originally used when they defined this concept  and over time it's been changed into imposter syndrome. The problem I have with imposter  
**0:08:04-0:08:22:**  syndrome is putting syndrome in it makes it sound very clinical. It makes it sound like  disease. It makes people feel like it's something that they have and it's their fault in some  way. And that all leads to everyone thinking it's their own individual problem rather than  
**0:08:22-0:08:40:**  us actually seeing it as a societal challenge related to some systemic issues which we'll  talk more about in the moment. There's actually nothing wrong with you if you're suffering  from it. It's not a disease, it's simply a phenomenon which is very common and to tackle  
**0:08:40-0:08:55:**  it we need to have both empathy for ourselves and for others and have a bigger picture of  what's really going on.  So who actually suffers from this imposter phenomenon? A lot of people believe that imposter  
**0:08:55-0:09:12:**  phenomenon is something that primarily happens to women, something that mostly women are  experiencing. But research actually shows that's not at all the case. The psychologist  Gail Matthews estimates that more than 70% of people experience imposter thoughts at  
**0:09:12-0:09:32:**  some point in their life and that's across gender, race and socioeconomic status. Now  here's the thing. The first study that was done on imposter phenomenon was back in 1978  and that's actually when the term was first coined and that study only included women.  
**0:09:32-0:09:48:**  And so that was really the beginning of the story that imposter phenomenon is something  that infects or affects women. But actually research has shown that imposter thoughts  or imposter phenomenon shows up as often for men as it does for women.  
**0:09:48-0:10:06:**  Here's what's interesting though. The impact of imposter phenomenon is different on men  than it is to women. Women have been shown to be more held back by imposter thoughts  and this might be because women are more likely to internalize the doubts and questioning  
**0:10:06-0:10:24:**  of themselves which comes along with this phenomenon and to ruminate on it and to have  it impact their actions, the activities they do or don't engage with. And research also  shows that women experience more self-doubt than men. And here I think it's really important  
**0:10:24-0:10:41:**  because that's normally where the story stops that again this is a problem of women that  they have more self-doubt and that's something that they need to overcome. But I think we  need to ask the question what leads to a situation in society where women routinely doubt themselves  
**0:10:41-0:10:57:**  and their abilities more? What messages are we getting from society that we need to question  our competence more or that we are more incompetent? And when you look at the research around that  it shows that women are more likely to be doubted by others and to have to work harder  
**0:10:57-0:11:20:**  to prove themselves. So it's no wonder that these doubts are then internalized more as  well. Here's the interesting thing though it's not only women who are more held back  by imposter syndrome. If you represent a historically disadvantaged social group, if you're an immigrant  
**0:11:20-0:11:38:**  in a foreign land, or if you represent a minority then you're more likely to experience imposter  thoughts and be held back by them. And so here too we need to look at the bigger systemic  issues that are leading to this. And a wonderful place to start on that topic is with an article  
**0:11:38-0:11:57:**  by Rushika Thulsen and Jodie Ann Bury in the Harvard Business Review last year. It's one  of the most read articles in the history of the Harvard Business Review and the title  of the article was Stop Telling Women They Have Imposter Syndrome. And I'll pop a link  
**0:11:57-0:12:13:**  to it down in the show notes so that you can download it and read it which I would highly  recommend to do. In this article they explore the systemic issues at the intersection of  race and gender when it comes to imposter syndrome. Saying for example, when employees  
**0:12:13-0:12:33:**  from marginalized backgrounds try to hold themselves up to a standard that no one like  them has met and that they're often not expected to be able to meet, the pressure to excel  can become too much to bear. For women of color for example, universal feelings of doubt  
**0:12:33-0:12:52:**  become magnified by chronic battles with systemic bias and racism. And when we look at these  systemic aspects, we start to see that actually these imposter feelings are understandable.  When you've been socialized to see that the best way to get ahead when everybody around  
**0:12:52-0:13:07:**  you has a different lived experience, looks different to you, the best way is to try and  conform and assimilate and maybe hide parts of you that you don't see fitting in with  those who are in power, then it's understandable that you can feel like a fraud and doubt what  
**0:13:07-0:13:23:**  you do bring to the table. And then when you see these things happening and hear someone  talking about imposter syndrome, you start to think that, ah, this is a problem with  me, I have these issues, rather than appreciating the systemic issues that are leading to it.  
**0:13:23-0:13:40:**  I think this is the really tragic part of this story because the very people who are  more likely to have imposter thoughts and to be held back by them are the very people  who have a different perspective to the status quo, who have a different lived experience,  
**0:13:40-0:13:58:**  who have diverse ideas and gifts to share with the world and to contribute to tackle  these collective challenges that we're facing. And all of this means that the voices that  we really need at the table are being the most held back by imposter syndrome. And that's  
**0:13:58-0:14:19:**  becoming a barrier to a lot of people who need to be in leadership roles actually being  there. And here's another interesting thing about who's impacted the most by imposter  phenomenon. Actually, certain places are known to breed imposter thoughts. And academia is  
**0:14:19-0:14:40:**  a classic example. Academia is renowned for using complicated language and jargon to explain  things, leaving people to feel intellectually excluded, even when the concepts that are  being described aren't actually that complicated. In academia, you're surrounded by people who  
**0:14:40-0:14:57:**  are extremely smart, and that makes it easy to question your own intelligence in comparison  to those around you. Especially given the fact that academia really only focuses on  one type of intelligence and one way of learning. And if you rely on any other forms of intelligence  
**0:14:57-0:15:13:**  or have any other ways of learning, or any other forms of neurodiversity, then you immediately  don't fit in with what is the status quo. And that leaves you questioning yourself and  if you really belong there. The academic environment is notorious for being really competitive,  
**0:15:13-0:15:30:**  where critiquing research is the norm. And that can really feel hostile and unwelcoming  and can really feed these doubts of questioning your own competence and questioning if you  belong and questioning how people perceive you. Especially if you have a different background  
**0:15:30-0:15:51:**  to the status quo that surrounds you. And let's be honest, the academic hierarchy is  still largely populated by people who fit a description that Prenee Brown once used  as pale, male, and Yale. And for anybody that doesn't tick at those boxes, then it's completely  
**0:15:51-0:16:11:**  understandable that imposter thoughts come up. And finally, the academic environment  has a lot of people in management roles, in supervisor roles, in teaching roles who haven't  necessarily had a chance to be coached or trained in ways to manage people that's empowering,  
**0:16:11-0:16:30:**  to give feedback in a way that's encouraging, rather than in ways that just feed more self-doubt,  which is often the case. But it's not only academia that's a breeding ground for imposter  syndrome. Anywhere where there's systemic bias, a lack of diversity and inclusion, it's  
**0:16:30-0:16:47:**  really easy to understand in these settings that anyone who has a different lived experience  to those in the current leadership quickly feel like they don't belong. And these healthy,  normal self-doubts we have as humans combined with these fears of being a fraud and lead  
**0:16:47-0:17:04:**  to people really being held back by these imposter thoughts. So now we know imposter  phenomenon is not something that's only experienced by women. It can be experienced by people  across all race, gender, and socioeconomic groups. However, it does tend to hold women  
**0:17:04-0:17:25:**  and those from historically disadvantaged groups back more, and there are systemic reasons  for that. And I know personally that coming to understand that imposter phenomenon wasn't  just something I was dealing with personally, but realizing that many people were experiencing  
**0:17:25-0:17:44:**  it and that there were systemic reasons for it really helped me have a completely different  relationship to those feelings when they came up. And actually I first came across imposter  phenomenon about four or five years ago when I was starting to write a book. I was working  
**0:17:44-0:18:00:**  with a coach to try and overcome what I thought was writer's block. But after our first session  together, she actually gave me a book on imposter syndrome because as she was listening to me  describe what was coming up for me, what was getting in the way of me actually writing  
**0:18:00-0:18:17:**  and sharing my voice, she could see the patterns of all of these things that are associated  with imposter phenomenon. And so when I read this book, I was just fascinated by this concept  and started to dive into it a lot more. And of course, seeing it come up so often in coaching  
**0:18:17-0:18:33:**  clients also has just inspired me to kind of keep exploring ways that we can work with  it. And the more that I learned about it, the more I could look back and see the places  in my life where it had been holding me back or creating unnecessary suffering. For example,  
**0:18:33-0:18:51:**  the time I got a new position, which had quite a lot of responsibility and I was young, a  woman and a foreigner in the country taking it up. And I felt plagued by a lot of doubt  about my capabilities. If the hiring committee had made the right decision, if I was going  
**0:18:51-0:19:10:**  to live up to their expectations and in response to that just worked myself to the bone trying  to prove that I could be capable and found myself dressing in a way that I thought professional  women need to be dressing so that I would look the part and all of these kind of really  
**0:19:10-0:19:26:**  energy draining behaviors, which were probably not at all necessary. And in hindsight, I  can look back at and more objectively see it didn't actually make logical sense, but  at the time it really had an impact on how I was living and working and what was going  
**0:19:26-0:19:42:**  into me trying to make an impact. And the more I learned about it, I could also see  that time when my team nominated me for a leadership award and I got into the finals  and I caught myself kind of quietly begging that I wouldn't win the award because I doubted  
**0:19:42-0:19:59:**  if I really was qualified to get it, if I really deserved it. And if I did, then, you  know, wouldn't everybody see that actually I shouldn't have it at all again, objectively  looking back, I see it differently, but at the time it actually held me back from sharing  
**0:19:59-0:20:16:**  more about the leadership practices I was engaging with that I'm actually passionate  about seeing more of in the world. So those are just a couple of examples and maybe you  want to hit the pause button right now and just reflect in your own life where has imposter  
**0:20:16-0:20:36:**  phenomenon shown up for you? How have you experienced it? And are there any ways that  you see it holding you back at the moment, holding you back from taking up roles that  could be a good fit for you from making an impact in the way you know you can or from  
**0:20:36-0:20:56:**  shifting and changing the status quo in the way that we need to.  And this I think is the interesting part to start to think about what impact is it having  both individually and collectively. And this is some of the things that people in my community  
**0:20:56-0:21:07:**  had to say about this.  You spend too much time in your head thinking about it. So that's, that's, what's not good.  You're wasting mental energy on something that's preventing you from actually growing  
**0:21:07-0:21:25:**  into a certain area or showing up. So yeah, it's a waste of energy completely. I feel  like it doesn't happen with other people. And when I heard other people say that, oh,  I had a bit of imposter syndrome, I would think, oh no, you know, I think you don't  
**0:21:25-0:21:38:**  notice it so much in other people. And it does, it does sound like it's surprising when  other people mention it to me.  How does it show up? Wow, it's very strong. The way it does show up with me, it paralyses  
**0:21:38-0:21:59:**  me. It makes me think that I will forget everything, that I won't be able to talk or to express  myself properly or, or even that my accent was going to get so bad that I will be totally  incapable of expressing myself clearly. I'll stop myself from doing what I want or what  
**0:21:59-0:22:21:**  I would like to offer to the world because I constantly think that I'm not good enough.  Sometimes I get so paralyzed, you know, after writing something, after sending to the papers,  I don't want to read it like for a while because I'm scared of what I'll find or the mistakes  
**0:22:21-0:22:42:**  that I'll find after reading it or that I'll judge myself that it's not good enough.  For me, it manifests as a feeling of stress. And when I'm stressed, I'm just not inspirational  or inspiring. I can't contribute to the kind of change that I want to contribute to. I  
**0:22:42-0:23:01:**  don't have the energy to contribute. So I think it stands between me and yeah, a more  balanced life almost and a balanced life that will allow me to get more people to make the  world a more sustainable place.  
**0:23:01-0:23:21:**  And that's the thing. If we start with looking at ourselves, basically imposter phenomenon  leaves us feeling like crap. It's linked to increased likelihood of depression or anxiety.  It can leave you stuck in rumination and repeating thoughts which are not helpful. And it just  
**0:23:21-0:23:39:**  basically drains the limited energy that you probably have. As we talked about before,  it can also hold us back. This doubts about ourselves and if we can live up to others  expectation sometimes leads us to stop taking on new or bigger challenges. And when these  
**0:23:39-0:23:55:**  feelings come up, often what we do to try and deal with them actually makes things worse  and holds us back even more.  One common thing that we typically do to try and manage imposter syndrome is to work ourselves  
**0:23:55-0:24:13:**  to the bone to prove ourselves and to try and get external validation. But the thing  is, even if you get that positive feedback, you're often not really going to believe it  anyway. So this behavior doesn't really help us in the end. Another thing we might do is  
**0:24:13-0:24:29:**  not really try our best. We doubt that we can do it anyway and kind of tell ourselves,  well, if I don't try that hard, at least I have an excuse as to why it didn't work and  others won't think it's just about me being incompetent.  
**0:24:29-0:24:50:**  The last thing that a lot of us might do is either procrastinate or just feel really paralyzed  by these doubts and imposter feelings and not actually be able to take action in the  way that we want to. So we might feel these impacts on ourself quite profoundly, but it  
**0:24:50-0:25:06:**  doesn't end there because it also has a bigger impact on society.  If we faced disadvantages and are more likely to experience imposter phenomenon and be held  back by it, then our perspective is less likely to be shared. We're less likely to take on  
**0:25:06-0:25:23:**  new roles, take on new challenges, or really step into our full potential as a leader because  the action we take when we experience imposter phenomenon and the structural issues in the  system around us are not really enabling us to step into our leadership potential.  
**0:25:23-0:25:43:**  And so basically all of this stops diverse voices having space and it perpetuates the  status quo, which we all know needs to change. When we're talking about the impacts of imposter  phenomenon though, I do think it's important to see that it's not all bad. Having a healthy  
**0:25:43-0:26:02:**  amount of self doubt and checking the gap between our own views and the views and perspectives  of others around us is in no way a bad thing. Healthy amounts of doubting and respect for  the opinion of others, I think that can all help us be more open and collaborative and  
**0:26:02-0:26:20:**  can even be a catalyst for us to learn and grow together. And we know that the flip side  of this, that arrogance and overconfidence are actually inversely related to leadership  talent that helps us realise that the goal isn't to eliminate all of these feelings of  
**0:26:20-0:26:43:**  self doubt or being a fraud, that in small and healthy doses, it's not a terrible thing.  So how then can we manage this in a way that feels healthy and sustainable and allows us  to not be so held back by it? I think it's really important when we come  
**0:26:43-0:27:00:**  to think about how to manage imposter syndrome, that we move away from just seeing it as a  problem of the individual to actually a systemic issue that we all need to tackle. And they  highlight that really nicely in the Harvard Business Review article that I mentioned earlier.  
**0:27:00-0:27:19:**  They say that we need to move away from putting the blame on individuals and to realising  the systemic issues at play. It's not about fixing the person, but about the cultures  and workplaces that breed it. What is it about our workplaces that are reinforcing self doubt  
**0:27:19-0:27:41:**  and lack of belonging for certain groups? How can we create cultures and workplaces  that embrace and make space for diverse leadership styles? I also think that we do need to explore  how we as individuals can work with what we've internalised from these systems. What are  
**0:27:41-0:28:01:**  some approaches we can take to working with ourselves so that we can also change our relationship  to this experience? This is really important because changing systems can feel overwhelming  and it takes time and actually to engage with it effectively, we need to be able to work  
**0:28:01-0:28:21:**  with our own internalisation of this imposter phenomenon as well. In parallel to looking  to change systems, we can start with where we're already empowered and that's with working  with ourselves. So how can we support ourselves to start working with this imposter phenomenon  
**0:28:21-0:28:41:**  while also trying to shift the system? Before we jump into some concrete practices  to work with imposter phenomenon, I just wanted to quickly let you know about something that  I run where we dive into topics like this. The programme is called Be The Change and  
**0:28:41-0:28:56:**  I absolutely love running it because I get to interact with amazing women from all around  the world who are really passionate about leading change and building a more sustainable  world, but want to explore what their own role in that looks like in a way that's not  
**0:28:56-0:29:13:**  only impactful but also fulfilling and joyful and actually sustainable. So Be The Change  is a four-month group coaching and leadership training programme for aspiring women leaders  who are working in the fields of sustainability or food systems. Basically, people are really  
**0:29:13-0:29:29:**  passionate about making the world a better place. Over the four months together, we go  on a journey to put a healthy foundation in place so that you know you can take care of  yourself and show up to make your contribution from this place. We explore how we can bring  
**0:29:29-0:29:45:**  others on board when we want to drive change and the tools and skills that we need for  that like empathetic listening or managing difficult conversations. And then finally  we look at what your calling actually is and how we can build the courage to step into  
**0:29:45-0:30:03:**  it. Where's that sweet spot between what brings you alive and where there's a deep need in  the world. And in general through the programme, we're really celebrating and making space  for new approaches to leading change that embrace more feminine styles of leadership  
**0:30:03-0:30:21:**  and that support you to actually show up authentically so that you can do work that you love while  also living a life that you love. If you join the programme, then you join a community of  awesome women from all around the world and also continue learning and exchanging with  
**0:30:21-0:30:36:**  each other in the community after the programme ends. So if this sounds like something you  would love to be a part of and you feel like it's exactly what you need to start off the  year, applications are now open for the next round which is going to get started mid February.  
**0:30:36-0:30:51:**  I've put a link in the show notes so just click on that if you would like to find out  more and how to apply. Or you could also just Google the grateful be the change. Feel free  to reach out to me if you have any questions. I'm always happy to chat with people who are  
**0:30:51-0:31:09:**  thinking about joining the programme. So let's get back to some tips to help us navigate  this imposter phenomenon. Tip number one, as cheesy as it sounds is, remind yourself  of your awesomeness. I know the first time I did this it felt awkward and that's just  
**0:31:09-0:31:28:**  an indicator that you probably need to do it more. So the invitation to you is to write  a list of accomplishments or things that you can be proud of and do it from the perspective  of your 14 year old self. So there's no limit to this list, just sit down, give yourself  
**0:31:28-0:31:43:**  a certain amount of time and start thinking about all of the things that you can and get  them down. The reason that I suggest to do it from the perspective of your 14 year old  self is one of the challenges with imposter phenomenon is actually knowing what's enough.  
**0:31:43-0:32:00:**  We constantly lift the bar for ourselves once we achieve something then we lift the bar  higher and that feels like that's not attainable and so on and so forth. But if you would actually  look back from the perspective of a younger version of you at everything that you have  
**0:32:00-0:32:16:**  been able to do of all the things that you've managed that in the beginning you didn't think  you were going to be able to, you have quite a different perspective on things. And this  list can be made up of anything, it's anything where you face doubts but even though those  
**0:32:16-0:32:32:**  doubts were there you were able to move forward, you were able to learn something new and you  were able to try until you worked it out. This might be something small like learning  a new recipe when cooking felt really overwhelming. It might be getting a driver's license or  
**0:32:32-0:32:48:**  it might be leading a huge project that had the impact that you were really hoping that  it would. The important thing is this isn't just a once of activity so once you've made  the big list turn it into a daily practice where every evening you spend just a few minutes  
**0:32:48-0:33:02:**  and jot down in your journal something that you managed either during that day or during  the week that you didn't think you would be able to to begin with. And what we're trying  to do with this is start to help yourself work with doubts when they come up. So instead  
**0:33:02-0:33:19:**  of them paralyzing you, you're able to see ah, here are the doubts again, here are the  feelings of being like a fraud, I've been here in the past and I've been able to learn  and grow and move forward.  
**0:33:19-0:33:37:**  Second tip is reframe your relationship to competence. I really love this tip because  I think it's been the biggest game changer for me when it comes to working with imposter  thoughts when they arise. And I got this practice from a book that I mentioned before by Valerie  
**0:33:37-0:33:58:**  Young called Secret Thoughts of Successful Women, which is actually all about imposter  syndrome. And in that book, she outlines really well how often the suffering that we experience  around imposter phenomenon is really linked to the relationship that we have with competence.  
**0:33:58-0:34:19:**  If we look at the dictionary definition, competence is actually having the capacity to function  or develop in a particular way. The challenge here is that we've often come to internalize  that particular way part of that definition in a way that's not actually really healthy  
**0:34:19-0:34:39:**  or realistic. And this might come from our upbringing, from what we've seen modeled around  us, from what we've got praised for or criticized for. And often we've developed this relationship  to competence, which is not actually realistic or healthy. And we're also really unconscious  
**0:34:39-0:34:58:**  about that. So starting to bring some more consciousness to what our relationship to  competence is and how it contributes to feelings of doubt or impostering, that's really been  a game changer for me. So that's why I want to share it with you now. And in this book  
**0:34:58-0:35:15:**  that I mentioned, Valerie Young actually profiles five different competence archetypes. These  are just different ways that we frame competence that are usually unrealistic and that get  in our way when it comes to imposter phenomenon. Let me start by just sharing these five different  
**0:35:15-0:35:31:**  competence archetypes with you. And as I'm going through them, perhaps you want to make  a note of which ones you think are relevant for you in terms of what you think it means  to be competent. The first archetype is the perfectionist. And a perfectionist believes  
**0:35:31-0:35:55:**  that you must deliver things perfectly 100% of the time and anything less than perfect  is unacceptable. Often perfectionists tinker and tweak and optimize things for a long time  and don't share or launch anything before it's impeccable. And perfectionists, when  
**0:35:55-0:36:13:**  they have these standards with themselves, they often project them onto others. And that  can often mean being disappointed with the work of others, having difficulty delegating  because it leaves you feeling frustrated and disappointed. So for those who have this perfectionist  
**0:36:13-0:36:32:**  view of what it means to be competent, it can really help to reframe that and understand  that competence is much more about making progress, about learning and growing, about  being able to collaborate with others, about forming connections necessary to do that.  
**0:36:32-0:36:53:**  The second competence archetype is the natural genius. And natural geniuses believe that  being competent is about having some inherent intelligence or ability, and they believe  that success should be effortless. They think that they should be able to complete everything  
**0:36:53-0:37:14:**  with ease and also speed, even when that thing is completely new. And they feel that when  they can't, that's an indicator that they're not intelligent or capable enough and their  imposter alarm goes off. So if you frame competence like the natural genius, then it's really  
**0:37:14-0:37:36:**  important to start reframing it around effort being important, understanding that we can  actually learn and grow at any age. None of us have a fixed ability or a fixed intelligence.  We know human beings can increase their capacity for complexity, their ability to do things  
**0:37:36-0:37:54:**  throughout their entire life. And so making a mistake or struggling is not an indicator  of any inherent lack inside of you. It's just an indicator that this is something that you  still need to learn and with the right support and the right environment, then that's possible.  
**0:37:54-0:38:12:**  The third competence archetype is the expert. And this is one that's pretty prolific, especially  for anybody who spent time in academia. The expert believes that being competent is basically  knowing everything there is to know about a particular topic. They think that they should  
**0:38:12-0:38:31:**  be able to understand and remember all the information that comes their way and that  they have to have all, and I mean all, the qualifications in a field before they feel  competent to speak or act or share their opinion at all. Experts might read a job description  
**0:38:31-0:38:50:**  and if they don't tick every single one of the boxes and have a lot of experience in  all of the areas necessary, they'll immediately disqualify themselves and not apply. The challenge  with the expert archetype is that when you actually are an expert, you're even less likely  
**0:38:50-0:39:06:**  to see yourself as one. And probably anyone listening that has a PhD can relate to this.  The more and deeper you dig into a topic, the more you realise you don't know. And so  it's a really difficult cycle to be in if you have this expert mindset because you basically  
**0:39:06-0:39:22:**  can never achieve the status that you think is necessary to be able to contribute to things.  And so experts often don't attempt things that they probably could do because they don't  think they're expert enough. There's always another course to take, a training to do,  
**0:39:22-0:39:40:**  a book to read, or some sort of article to integrate before they can actually say anything.  And I was listening to an interesting interview with Kevin Coakley who is a researcher on  imposter phenomenon and he talked about the irony of the fact that this is the focus of  
**0:39:40-0:39:58:**  his research. He really is an expert in it, but he has a lot of trouble accepting that  he's an expert on the topic and he's fully aware of the irony of feeling like an imposter  while researching imposter phenomenon. So anybody who has this expert competence archetype,  
**0:39:58-0:40:16:**  reframing it in a way where competence does not require you to know everything, where  you can be comfortable not having all the answers, where you can trust what you do actually  know and trust in the intentions with which you're showing up to do something, when you  
**0:40:16-0:40:35:**  can realize that there's actually no end to knowledge and so it's unrealistic for you  to have that as the end goal. And helping yourself to understand that not knowing something  is not a weakness, it's actually an opportunity to connect with others who do know it and  
**0:40:35-0:40:50:**  perhaps collaborate together. The fourth archetype is the rugged individualist and these are  people who believe that true competence is about being able to do it all on your own  and that you really shouldn't need help. If you need help then that's a sign of being  
**0:40:50-0:41:11:**  incompetent. And the challenge with this one is it leads to people overworking themselves  and never asking for support. So rugged individualists can be helped by reframing competence more  around the understanding that it isn't knowing and doing it all yourself, it's about identifying  
**0:41:11-0:41:30:**  the resources you need and asking for them to get things done. And here resources can  be time, equipment, other people, funds, spaces, all kinds of other things. The final competence  archetype is the superperson and these are people who believe that they need to do multiple  
**0:41:30-0:41:48:**  roles masterfully at work, at home and anywhere else. So it's not just about how well they're  doing things but about how many things they do. They believe that well if I were really  competent I would be able to do it all. I would be able to be a perfect mother, a perfect  
**0:41:48-0:42:07:**  boss, the perfect salsa dancer, the perfect violin player, the perfect recycler, I don't  know what it is but whatever role you're playing that you can do it all simultaneously and  perfectly. And this is particularly prevalent for women due to these cultural expectations  
**0:42:07-0:42:24:**  around juggling work and motherhood along with the limited social support structures  one would actually need to be able to do that, like affordable childcare or reasonable school  hours and all of those things that we still don't have. And so this competence archetype  
**0:42:24-0:42:39:**  can be particularly debilitating for people needing to juggle multiple roles especially  people doing so to just make ends meet. It can be completely crippling to expect that  being competent is being able to do all of those things perfectly. And so for anybody  
**0:42:39-0:42:58:**  that has a superperson confidence archetype reframing it so that you can see that you  can still be competent and say no, that you can still be competent and delegate and that  actually being competent needs rest and being able to ask for support that can be really  
**0:42:58-0:43:17:**  helpful as well. So as you heard all those different archetypes which one do you think  you have? The perfectionist, the natural genius, the expert, the rugged individualist, the  superperson or perhaps some delightful combination of many of them which I know was definitely  
**0:43:17-0:43:36:**  the case for me. When I looked at this I could see that perfectionist and the expert were  two narratives that were really strong for me around how I determined if I was competent  or not. So I found myself doubting my competence whenever I didn't do something 100% perfectly  
**0:43:36-0:43:54:**  or whenever I didn't know the answers to all of the things. And so taking this challenge  on and reframing what competence meant to me I came up with the following statement.  Competence is trying my best within healthy boundaries and learning something along the  
**0:43:54-0:44:13:**  way. Now you can probably agree that's a way more realistic way to frame competence than  what I had been doing in the past. It puts the emphasis on learning, it reminds me to  try my best but it also reminds myself what's enough so that I can keep some healthy boundaries.  
**0:44:13-0:44:31:**  And when things don't work out or maybe they don't go how I expect them to I can always  ask myself well did I try my best within my boundaries and did I learn something and if  I can say yes to those things then I can accept that I was competent and I don't get stuck  
**0:44:31-0:44:44:**  in this loop of questioning my own competence. And if I answer no to any of that then I have  some clear areas to look at. Well next time could I prepare more? Could I understand the  context better or the needs of others better? Could I set better boundaries? Could I be  
**0:44:44-0:45:07:**  more open to what I can learn from the mistakes that I've perceived to have made here? And  basically all of these competence resets are just helping us to move our focus away from  performance and more to things like enjoying the process. To move our focus away from holding  
**0:45:07-0:45:27:**  knowledge already to actually be more interested in what we're learning and how we're learning.  To move away from putting pressure on ourselves to look good to focusing on if we're trying  our best and how we're showing up.  
**0:45:27-0:45:48:**  The next tip is flip your perspective. So I know for me in times when I've been kind  of paralyzed by self-doubt if I can perform how others are expecting me to I'm kind of  caught up in my own story a lot. I've often at that point lost perspective of what others  
**0:45:48-0:46:05:**  around me need and I've also lost perspective of what's the bigger picture of what I'm actually  trying to do here. Because normally it's work that's somehow related to having an impact  or creating a shift or making a change in some way. And so in those moments what can  
**0:46:05-0:46:26:**  be really helpful is to just step back and ask ourselves what's actually more important  to me here than my own self-doubt? Who am I actually trying to serve and what do they  need in this moment? And I know for example when I'm teaching or facilitating or giving  
**0:46:26-0:46:47:**  a keynote presentation this can be incredibly helpful because it takes my fixation away  from my own anxiety or concerns and puts it firmly on the audience and asks me to shift  my perspective there and to what they actually need and that often helps me come back to  
**0:46:47-0:47:03:**  the bigger picture of what's going on and get out of this internal rumination that we  can get stuck in.  The last tip when it comes to working with ourselves is to just simply become more aware  
**0:47:03-0:47:21:**  of when these imposter thoughts are showing up for us and having some little exercises  that we can do in that moment to give ourselves a bit of a different perspective. The first  step in creating change is always becoming aware of it so just start to notice when you  
**0:47:21-0:47:40:**  have these feelings of self-doubt or feeling like a fraud or an imposter and simply see  when are they showing up? How am I feeling when that's happening? What emotions are coming  up? What thoughts are coming up? How do I feel in my body? And with time you'll start  
**0:47:40-0:48:00:**  to be able to notice it in real time like ah here are imposter thoughts this is what  they feel like here they are showing up again and to simply observe them as if you're kind  of sitting on your own shoulder and looking at what's going on more objectively. This  
**0:48:00-0:48:16:**  helps us do something that's called self-distancing and it helps us to sit more in the seat of  an objective observer and that means we're less paralyzed or absorbed by these thoughts  and sensations when they come up.  
**0:48:16-0:48:33:**  Once you become aware of how they are showing up for you, you could develop a little practice  for yourself. For example if you notice that when I'm really ruminating on imposter thoughts  my stomach gets really tight and my chest gets really tight and so in that moment I'm  
**0:48:33-0:48:55:**  going to stand up and shake things out a little bit in my body and take a few nice long deep  breaths or I'm going to open the window and look up to the sky and take a few nice big  deep breaths and remind myself what quality or value is really important for me right  
**0:48:55-0:49:11:**  now in terms of how I show up and what would that feel like in my body. There are endless  practices you could design here but anything that helps you reconnect with your body or  reconnect with your breath no matter how small it is can be really effective at helping you  
**0:49:11-0:49:32:**  create some distance from these thoughts that can otherwise paralyze us.  So these are all examples of small things that we can do that can sometimes have a really  big impact on how we navigate imposter phenomenon when we see it showing up in our lives and  
**0:49:32-0:49:47:**  although they're small practices they can really go a long way to helping us not be  so held back from it. But as I talked about before we can't just end with working on imposter  syndrome for ourselves because it's not just us that's suffering from it it's actually  
**0:49:47-0:50:07:**  a systemic issue and so I just wanted to share a few thoughts on that as well around how  we can create some bigger shifts within our organisations to get more to the root of imposter  phenomenon. So if you're listening to this and you're a manager or a leader it can really  
**0:50:07-0:50:26:**  be helpful to be transparent about these feelings with your team if you're experiencing them.  So really creating an open space for everybody to talk about if and how they experience imposter  phenomenon and what you can collectively do to support each other. You can also look at  
**0:50:26-0:50:44:**  the bigger conditions in your organisation or in your team that might be triggering imposter  thoughts in the people that you work with. You can ask yourself what am I potentially  doing that's contributing to this dynamic and you can come together and create space  
**0:50:44-0:51:02:**  to ask how can we create a culture where people feel safe to take off their armour, to be  vulnerable to discuss topics like imposter phenomenon and what needs to change. And I  think imposter phenomenon is a really great indicator in the sense that if there are really  
**0:51:02-0:51:22:**  high levels of this in an organisation it's really a sign that it's time for larger changes,  for a shift in the organisation. And that really means entering into a change process  where there's space to genuinely listen to people's experiences with empathy and to co-create  
**0:51:22-0:51:38:**  ways to move forward, moving from just the individual all the way through to the organisational  level. So I keep mentioning this HBR article which tackles this topic but they actually  wrote a really great follow-up piece which was about what we can do in our organisations  
**0:51:38-0:51:56:**  to collectively tackle this issue. And they say that leaders must create a culture for  women and people of colour that addresses systemic bias and racism. Only by doing so  can we reduce the experiences that culminate in so-called imposter syndrome among employees  
**0:51:56-0:52:14:**  from marginalised communities. Or at the very least help those employees channel healthy  self-doubt into positive motivation which is best fostered within a supportive work  culture. And linked to that then is really widening the definition of leadership and  
**0:52:14-0:52:29:**  the words we use to describe leaders. And this is something that we explore in the Be  The Change programme because I think it's so important for us to shape for ourselves  what relationship we have to the word leadership and what we want it to mean for ourselves  
**0:52:29-0:52:46:**  if we're to step into it. So this episode ended up being a little bit longer than I  intended but I hope that it's helped you to see that you don't need to feel alone if you're  experiencing imposter phenomenon. You might feel like it's something very personal that  
**0:52:46-0:53:02:**  you have to deal with all alone but it's absolutely not true. You are not alone with these thoughts  and we won't overcome it on our own because it's really linked to some systemic issues.  And we need to tackle this collectively because it's holding back the very people we need  
**0:53:02-0:53:20:**  to lead change at the moment. The very people who are going to change and challenge the  status quo which we know is not sustainable at the moment. We need to face imposter phenomenon  so that people who have historically not had a seat at the table now do and that these  
**0:53:20-0:53:35:**  diverse perspectives and knowledge and experience are actually integrated building a more sustainable  world needs new and different forms of leadership and we're only going to see that if we can  overcome things like imposter syndrome or else we're never going to be able to change  
**0:53:35-0:53:52:**  the status quo. So I hope this episode gave you some food for thought. I hope it gave  you some small practical tips you can get started with and some bigger questions too  that you can now start discussing with people in your team with your friends with your colleagues  
**0:53:52-0:54:10:**  because the first step is getting rid of the stigma and the shame around this topic and  realizing that it's something so many people grapple with and it's collectively holding  us back from building a more ethical sustainable and even joyful future on this planet. Thanks  
**0:54:10-0:54:26:**  so much for listening to this episode of the Great Fool podcast. If you found it useful  please share it with a friend who you think could also use some support to explore imposter  phenomenon. If there are any topics or challenges you're facing in your quest to lead sustainable  
**0:54:26-0:54:42:**  change please drop me an email at podcast at thegreatfool.com and we'll try and get  your questions answered on a future episode.  