---
title: Leading The Chocolate Revolution With Christoph Inauen Choba Choba Ep 5
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### The Great Full  (2020-12-04)  
### Author(s): Michelle Grant  

**0:00:00-0:00:09:**  Hi, I'm Michelle, and welcome to The Great Full Podcast, a place where we contemplate  how we can eat, live, and lead each day to build a more sustainable world.  My guest on the show today is Christoph Inouein, and he's one of the co-founders of a chocolate  company called Chobba Chobba.  But Chobba Chobba is no ordinary chocolate company.  
**0:00:27-0:00:33:**  Born out of his experience that unequal power relationships underlie so many of the issues  that we see in the chocolate industry, Christoph and his co-founder Eric set out to revolutionise  this, and they did it together with 36 farmers from the Peruvian Amazon who are co-owners  in the Chobba Chobba brand.  So I chatted with Christoph about what it was that took him out of the more traditional  
**0:00:51-0:01:02:**  chocolate industry and led him to create an entirely new model.  So we first met, I was thinking about it, about eight years ago, and at the time you  were working for a pretty big chocolate producer, and you struck me as being very passionate  about your work, working on sourcing more sustainably, more ethically, and then all  of a sudden I saw you were doing your own thing.  
**0:01:20-0:01:27:**  Can you tell me about that moment where you decided that actually we need to do things  completely differently, we need to change this system at a deeper, more fundamental  level than what's happening across the industry?  Yeah, I think I can tell you about that very specific moment because I think there was  really one very specific moment.  
**0:01:43-0:01:47:**  I was travelling to Peru with Eric, the other co-founder of Chobba Chobba.  At that time he was a client of mine, and we were visiting again some farmers we had  been working with for around eight years, and we were implementing with them sustainability  programs, certifications, and over the eight years we had developed a real friendship with  them because we were always sleeping at their place and drinking a beer in the evening and  
**0:02:11-0:02:13:**  playing football.  And one day basically they took us apart and they said, hey Chris, hey Eric, we've been  selling you our cocoa beans for now eight years and you told us to do this sustainability  program and that and that, but we feel that this has somehow not enough impact on our  lives and at the same time you guys are telling stories about sustainability and basically  
**0:02:43-0:02:49:**  putting our faces on products and can we not do something different?  Can we not do something where actually we are at an eye level and where we have a voice  and where we can basically do really something together and you don't do something for us,  but we do something together.  And I think that triggered quite a lot within Eric and within myself and that caused a lot  
**0:03:13-0:03:21:**  of discussions between Eric and myself and we decided to quit our jobs and to try to  do something very different.  And I think that's quite a critical point, right, because a lot of us might dream about  doing something different or think about doing something different, but actually taking the  jump and doing it is something else.  
**0:03:33-0:03:38:**  What do you think was the most important thing that allowed you to really take action on  this idea?  I think the most important thing that allowed me to do that was the know-how that I don't  take so much risk.  I mean, I live in Switzerland, I have a very good CV, we have an economical, stable situation.  
**0:03:55-0:03:59:**  I would at any time find another job, I think.  And so this probably together with, of course, with the discussions with my wife where I  said, okay, I try it and the next two years I'm not going to earn so much.  And we made an agreement that I have two years to make it run where she would basically bring  most of the money home.  
**0:04:19-0:04:21:**  Let's say I think that gave a certain stability.  And maybe there was another element that came in.  I was reading books about what people, if they are at the very last minute in their  life and they look back, what do they regret?  And most of the people actually say that they regret that they have not taken more risks  
**0:04:43-0:04:46:**  to do what they wanted to do.  And I think if I project that to my life and if I want to be happy, I think that's something  I really did not want to be at the end of my life and look back and say, hey, why did  you not take that risk?  And even knowing that it was not such a big risk.  
**0:05:01-0:05:05:**  So maybe these are the two, three elements that made me go.  Very nice.  So I'm actually looking at some of your beautiful chocolate in front of me with this amazing  packaging and I realised that I don't yet know what Chobba Chobba means.  What's the meaning behind the name?  
**0:05:16-0:05:22:**  Well Chobba Chobba is Quechua and it means I help you and you help me.  So it's the two ways.  It's not development aid or it's not helping somebody.  It's really making business at eye level.  And the funny anecdote about that was that Eric and I, we presented to the farmers that  
**0:05:39-0:05:41:**  co-founded Chobba Chobba with us.  We presented them some really nice branding, marketing names, et cetera.  And at the end they said like, what are you talking about?  Can you not just name it Chobba Chobba?  That would be so much easier and so much better.  
**0:05:56-0:06:01:**  So yeah, we decided yes, go with Chobba Chobba because it is really born also grassroots  and bottom up.  Fantastic.  Yeah, and it's a memorable name.  It's certainly nothing else like it on the market.  
**0:06:08-0:06:14:**  So you use the term rather boldly, chocolate revolution to describe what you do.  What is it about Chobba Chobba's work that makes it revolutionary?  Well I think you have to understand that in the broad picture of how chocolate business  works.  So today chocolate business works like this, that you have very roughly said, you have  
**0:06:30-0:06:35:**  a handful of very big Western companies.  They're driven by shareholder value.  That basically dominates the market and they have to say.  And on the other hand, you have 6 million small scale cocoa farmers that produce the  main raw material, the cocoa for chocolate production.  
**0:06:53-0:07:01:**  And so there is an extreme, let's say, power imbalance between these one handful companies  and the small scale farmers.  It's actually not so much different from colonialism.  It's a very neo-colonialist system that we face today.  And so within that context, the revolutionary approach is that we give cocoa farmers a completely  
**0:07:21-0:07:24:**  different position within the industry.  At Chobba Chobba, the farmers, they're not raw material suppliers, but they own 26% of  the shares of the brand.  So they're very integrated into the chocolate brand, the final product.  They have a voice, they take the major decisions about the brand development together with  
**0:07:44-0:07:46:**  us.  And so basically we have a fully vertically integrated brand with own cocoa production  they prove in Amazon on around 100 hectares with 35 families that are integral part of  the brand and all together we sell the final product.  So I think the revolutionary part is really about the role and the position of, in my  
**0:08:06-0:08:11:**  opinion, the main actor or the actor that allows us at all to eat chocolate, the cocoa  growers.  And that's what I love about your model is that you're getting to the foundations, which  is changing the power structures.  And I think that unless we start to tackle these power issues in food systems, we're  
**0:08:23-0:08:27:**  not actually going to have the transformational change that we need to see.  So, and I ask you this question, not because I think that's such a big emphasis for any  small businesses to say, how are you going to scale?  And I don't necessarily mean how are you going to scale as an organization, but how can we  scale up these approaches and these changes to influence a bigger part of this industry?  
**0:08:46-0:08:49:**  Well, I think there are different questions within there, as you mentioned, I think there's  one, how can we scale it within our business?  And of course that can be scaled.  I mean, there are similar businesses like us, for example, in Bangladesh created by  Muhammad Yunus that have very similar structures, equity structures than we have, for example.  
**0:09:05-0:09:10:**  And then there's the question of how can we scale that into the industry?  And then there's a third question that is as important to me as the second one, which  is how can we multiply such models in general and across the industry?  And I feel that these kinds of models that we are prototyping, I think they have the  potential to go beyond our industry.  
**0:09:28-0:09:34:**  So I have been talking to some people working in the textile industry that wanted to create  a brand with organic cotton farmers from Western Africa and with ladies producing the clothes  in Bangladesh, you know?  And so I think there is also that potential of creating new businesses beyond our industry.  And if you come back to our industry, I think it goes a lot through inspiration.  
**0:09:54-0:09:59:**  I mean, we are in touch with the industry players.  Last week I received from one of the major Swiss chocolate brands from the head of sales,  I received a very nice message about he loves what Jobbattrob is doing and the sustainability  and quality at the end will win and just wishing me a lot of energy for that path.  So I feel there's a lot of inspiration we from our side we can do.  
**0:10:24-0:10:31:**  And then it's really, it's really, let's say, very specific to the company how this can  be implemented, implemented there.  I mean, it's not so easy to just say the biggest manufacturer in the world that is owned by  XY shareholders to change and give some shares to the farmers to give them a voice.  We are just so completely different versus what has been established in the world in  
**0:10:52-0:10:58:**  the past 100 years that our main tools that we use cannot so easily be just implemented  into the big existing structures.  And so when it comes to creating broader change across the industry, what role do you think  consumers have to play?  I think consumers have a vital role to play on chocolate, but way beyond chocolate, right?  
**0:11:14-0:11:20:**  It's like by picking the product, you make a statement and you make, you decide what  has the legitimacy to remain in the market.  And in this sense, buying new brands like Jobbattroba or products that are sustainably  produced is an extremely critical factor.  In this journey that you've been on, particularly in the chocolate industry, how has that influenced  
**0:11:35-0:11:41:**  how you act as a consumer in other parts of your life or maybe with other types of food?  I mean, I was quite aware already before I started that journey with Jobbattroba, but  it has for sure accelerated a bit my behavior, let's say.  So what is really important to me is to know where my food comes from and also teach that  to my kids.  
**0:12:02-0:12:09:**  So I go to the local market, not every Saturday, but I try to go every Saturday with my kids  and to buy there from a local farmer that has his Demeter farm and really try to also  buy the ancient varieties, not only because it helps to protect the biodiversity, but  also because of the universe of flavors that are around.  It's so interesting to discover those flavors.  
**0:12:30-0:12:35:**  So I think it, of course, had an impact on that.  I want to know where I buy my food from, from which farmer.  And then, of course, the normal things for me are to buy organic and to buy seasonal  as much as possible and to buy if I buy meat or dairy products that I exactly know where  it comes from, how it is produced, etc.  
**0:12:56-0:13:01:**  And you just use this keyword biodiversity there, which I think is interesting to dig  a little deeper on because I understand that biodiversity conservation and supporting more  diverse varieties of cocoa is kind of central to your work.  Could you talk a bit more about how biodiversity is central to what you do?  Yeah.  
**0:13:16-0:13:22:**  So actually, our production cocoa production area is in the Peruvian Amazon, which per se  is already quite a bi-diverse area.  So we produce there on around 100 hectares and there's a first thing that is important  to us is that we produce more and more in organic agroforestry systems in diverse system,  our cocoa.  
**0:13:40-0:13:46:**  And then the second thing is around our farms, we are basically an area where there's still  quite a lot of primary forest.  So we are part of bigger projects with different stakeholders to protect that primary forest  that still exists.  So that's something that is really important to us.  
**0:13:59-0:14:05:**  And the third element within there is that within that primary forest and on certain  plots of our farmers, we found around 120, 130 old cocoa varieties.  So we have set up a book where we have been collecting data about them, taking pictures  and describing them, and now we're analyzing them in detail in order to a protect them,  but be also in the long run.  
**0:14:30-0:14:38:**  And that's like a 10 years project to produce chocolates out of some of those old varieties.  And already today, you know, these 120, 130 varieties that we have and that we protect,  we have a harvest, a blended harvest of around 800 kilos per year.  And out of that every year, we produce a chocolate, a limited edition chocolate that is called  Nativo.  
**0:14:57-0:15:03:**  So native trees that we then sell our web shop and in certain shops.  And I think when we talk about diversity, it's important to consider the social aspect  too.  And if we think about chocolate, you know, it has such a rich and also troubled history.  You know, it was first discovered by indigenous people of Mesoamerica and, you know, through  
**0:15:18-0:15:22:**  colonization spread through the world and also through colonization was tied to these  production systems that have a lot of social issues around them.  And there are a lot of challenges with that.  But one aspect is that we also lose this cultural connection, the stories and the richness of  human interaction with this plant.  
**0:15:37-0:15:39:**  What do you have to say about this?  What have you experienced working with the farmers and what are their perspectives on  the cultural element being lost?  Yeah, I mean, you know, a very close connection to the forest and to plants in general in  the region we are, is something very, very, very important to the people.  
**0:16:03-0:16:10:**  And at the same time, it is already also getting lost on not only in terms of cocoa, but generally  in terms of plants.  So we have one or two shamans that are like the father of one of our cocoa farmers, a  shaman.  And if you walk with him through the forest, it's just so amazing because he knows every  
**0:16:27-0:16:31:**  plant he can tell you this is for to heal your wounds.  This is for this, this is for, you know, it's just so much wisdom around, but which is at  the moment really being a lot more and more lost because young people, they're not so  interested about it.  And they prefer to buy an aspirin when they have a headache.  
**0:16:49-0:16:56:**  And so there's already that, I think that cultural heritage of know-how of the plants  that is somehow getting a bit lost, not only there also, I mean, in Switzerland, it's probably  the same thing.  You know, if I've talked with my grandma and if I see what I have in terms of know-how  from the plants, that's very different.  
**0:17:11-0:17:20:**  And in terms of cocoa, yeah, I think the area we are, cocoa is really, it's the origin of  cocoa and there is a lot of, a lot of tradition with cocoa that is somehow getting lost, which  is also in my opinion, very much linked to the structure again, of the chocolate industry,  who has the say in what we do with cocoa.  It's really Western dominated by big companies and by big, massive business interests.  
**0:17:43-0:17:48:**  And it's not so much by the cultural or the farmers that have really something to say  in what they would like to do with that, with that plant.  So I think that's also, we will be back to the, to the power relations.  Absolutely.  Yeah.  
**0:17:58-0:17:59:**  And the agency.  So in this, this chocolate journey you've been on, what part has brought you the most  joy?  What have brought me the most joy?  I think the most joy has brought me to see the cocoa farmers taking on their new responsibilities  
**0:18:18-0:18:20:**  and their new role.  You know, I think I remember well, when I went with Eric to Peru the very first time  when I was working in the industry, we sat together with them and, and they stood up  and said, basically, hi, I'm Oswaldo.  I'm a cocoa farmer.  
**0:18:35-0:18:38:**  And today it's like, they get up and say, hi, I'm Oswaldo.  I'm an international chocolate entrepreneur.  And you know, this change in self-confidence, I think, yeah, this makes me the most joy,  I think, besides of course, the very amazing chocolates we produce.  And I have the big luck to taste them basically every day.  
**0:18:55-0:18:56:**  Yeah.  I think that's something that really fulfills me a lot.  Do you ever get sick of chocolate?  No.  Okay.  
**0:19:01-0:19:02:**  Yeah.  I don't think that could ever happen to me.  And so in this really close relationship you've built now with, I think it's 36 farmers in  the region, right?  What some of the most important lessons they've taught you about life and leadership?  
**0:19:15-0:19:18:**  Well, I think many.  So one thing is that to really remain positive in your life and to see the good things.  Basically all of those cocoa farmers, they were actually coca farmers in the nineties.  So most of them lost family members due to the violence that was in the region through  the narco traffic or through the drug transportation and the Colombian mafia that, that, that came  
**0:19:42-0:19:46:**  and bought basically the coca.  So and they, you know, they still have that ability to focus on positive things in life  and they, they keep on, they have a big humor and so they have a very, a lot of drive and  they were and still are in a very difficult and vulnerable situation.  So I think that's something I learned a lot.  
**0:20:07-0:20:15:**  And another thing is that, is, you know, that area is, it's so amazing in terms of you drive  three hours by in a wooden boat, you drive into the Amazon and after, after half an hour,  you don't have any access anymore with your cell phone.  So you basically look three times on yourself and then you realize, okay, now I can really  put it aside for a week.  
**0:20:31-0:20:35:**  And then you arrived there people, they're so they're available.  They're so centered.  They're like, they take, they really take time for important decisions.  So I think these are things that, yeah, where I learned a lot.  Yeah.  
**0:20:47-0:20:48:**  Yeah.  The value of slowing down is a big lesson we can all learn from her.  And so in working together, what are some of the things you understood differently when  you started this collaboration?  Well, I think there are many things.  
**0:21:00-0:21:04:**  If you start, you know, to work with cocoa farmers from the Peruvian Amazon and you,  you joined to build up an international chocolate business, there's so much there's the realities  that are so, so completely different, right?  So and I think at the same time, that was the interesting part of it.  So I think there were many, many, many things, but what has helped a lot in getting into  
**0:21:22-0:21:27:**  the same picture is we bring every year two to three farmers, you bring them here to Switzerland,  show them their clients, show them the business, show them the entire supply chain so that  they basically get educated and understand what it means to be to be a shareholder of  that brand.  And I think that's an eye opener for them.  
**0:21:40-0:21:46:**  And for us, it is absolutely crucial to be able to manage the chip altogether.  And that happens the other way too, right?  You take people from Switzerland to visit the farms.  Yeah, of course.  Interesting.  
**0:21:53-0:21:57:**  Talking to you now more as an individual, personally, what's been one of the biggest  challenges for you in co-founding such a different organisation?  And what have you learned in facing those challenges that could be useful for other  people wanting to do something different?  Yeah, I think one of the most challenging was for me that, you know, everyone tells  
**0:22:17-0:22:20:**  you it can never be successful.  I mean, starting from your parents that say, oh, you have such a great job in the industry.  Why are you, you know, and you starting something new, that's the risk.  There's so many arguments you hear why you should not do that.  And to stay stubborn with your idea.  
**0:22:36-0:22:41:**  I think that was quite a big challenge in the beginning and step by step, I could let  it go.  But I think that was probably my biggest challenge in the beginning.  Yeah.  Yeah.  
**0:22:48-0:22:49:**  What do you think supported you through that?  What was the most important in helping you?  I think what supported me a lot is that I was in a duo with Eric.  I think we supported each other a lot at that time, still today.  But at that time, especially, and then also, I think the exchange and the power that came  
**0:23:04-0:23:09:**  from the farmers that I really wanted to do that, you know, I think that was really pushing  me to try it.  Yeah.  I think it speaks to the power and energising force that collaborative and collective action  can bring, right?  
**0:23:19-0:23:21:**  It's not not you just trying to do it on your own.  You know, I imagine that you juggle a lot of things trying to run an organisation like  this plus anything else in your life.  What do you think are the most important practices for you to integrate doing what you love with  living a life that you love?  
**0:23:33-0:23:35:**  I think that's a very good, very good question.  I think for people like me that have a high intrinsic motivation to change the world a  little bit to the left or to the right, there is a risk that work takes a lot of space in  your life.  So I think what I've learned on my journey on and I'm still learning, of course, is to  
**0:23:55-0:23:58:**  set myself limits.  Specific example, I set myself the limits that I want to be 90% of the evenings I eat  at six o'clock with my kids.  So that's non-negotiable.  So I think having the priorities of what for me a great life means and but then implementing  
**0:24:16-0:24:22:**  some limits to really be able to live, I think was something really important to me.  And of course, I'm you know, I'm still on a journey with that.  We all are.  But I think we need to talk about it more so we can learn from each other.  And what you mentioned is so important is understanding your priorities and setting  
**0:24:35-0:24:39:**  boundaries around that, but then actually holding those boundaries is where it gets  tough right in that moment of something super urgent.  But no, I've committed to be home with my kids.  And that's, that's what I'm going to do.  So you actually almost answered my last question, because I like to ask all my podcast guests  
**0:24:52-0:24:55:**  as this is called the grateful podcast.  What does living a great and full life mean for you?  I think first of all, it means to be happy with myself.  I think that's the first and most important thing out of which in my opinion, comes the  whole energy for the rest.  
**0:25:10-0:25:17:**  So to be happy with myself and consider that as a journey and go step by step and reflecting  on it and become happier and happier.  I think that's, that's the first element for me.  A second element is, is that's quite linked to the first one is to be an example for for  for my kids or to try to be an example for my kids and to be a good husband.  
**0:25:33-0:25:38:**  I think that's something that is really, really also still in my very small circle, but I  feel it comes out of the small circle where afterwards you can change the big circle.  And then the third element that is really important to me is that I have a purposeful  work which allows me to, to, to be fulfilled and to be able to change the world a little  bit to the left or to the right.  
**0:25:58-0:26:03:**  I think these are three critical elements for me that, that yeah, means living a great  and full life to me.  Wonderful.  So I know that you've become a bit of a podcast pro recently, and I'm wondering if there are  any questions you wish you were asked or things you want to talk about that nobody asks you  
**0:26:15-0:26:17:**  on these podcasts.  I think there is quite a lot of questions always about the social impact and the business  model and how you structure that.  And quite often I feel we forget to talk about the product itself.  And because that's something that, that there's really a second dimension of what we want  
**0:26:40-0:26:47:**  to change because in the industry, I was quite, or I sometimes frustrated to see how the recipes  are created and how much stuff actually isn't chocolate.  If I take, if I take cooking chocolate, you can see there's vanilla in there.  There's a soy lecithin.  There's palm oil.  
**0:26:57-0:27:03:**  There is so much stuff in that chocolate that which you can buy usually in the supermarket  that in my opinion is just absolutely not necessary.  And in this sense, it was really our ambitious to, to grow a great quality cocoa that we  grow ourselves and to be such a high quality that you only need three ingredients for the  chocolate.  
**0:27:17-0:27:22:**  So today, basically all our basic couvertures and our basic chocolates, you find just our  beans, a little bit of raw cane sugar and, and cocoa butter, and that's it.  And I feel, yeah, that element of analyzing a bit, what actually is in our chocolates.  I feel that's worth a whole, a whole podcast per se.  What's really amazing at the moment, what's happening in Switzerland and elsewhere is  
**0:27:44-0:27:47:**  that there's a whole new movement popping up.  So we are probably in Switzerland, we probably did the biggest alternative brands, but there's  so many new brands popping up like L'Alfolore in Zurich, Bintu Bar Maker, like Ochfev in  Geneva.  Like there's so many, this movement about alternative ways to more sustainably make  
**0:28:06-0:28:09:**  chocolates and also to make better quality.  I think this also deserves a lot more attention in podcasts, but in media in general, in my  opinion.  I think you might've seen that the subtitle of my book was sustainable eating with purpose  and joy.  
**0:28:20-0:28:22:**  And for me, I'm always looking, how can we combine these two things?  And when I look at and eat your products, I always think that's such a perfect combination  of purpose and joy because you really, it's such a joyful experience from the packaging  to the flavor itself, to knowing the story behind it.  It's yeah, it's a rare combination of the two.  
**0:28:40-0:28:45:**  Thanks so much for listening to this episode of the Great Full Podcast.  If you liked it, then please go ahead and subscribe and share it with a friend.  And I would love to get your questions answered here.  So if there's something that you would like answered or explored on this podcast, just  send me an email to podcast at the great full.com and I'll do my very best to get your questions  
**0:29:05-0:29:07:**  answered here on the show.  And that's it for this episode of the Great Full Podcast.  Thanks for listening.  And I'll see you next time.  Bye.  
**0:29:26-0:29:27:**  Bye.  Bye.  Bye.  