---
title: Nature Protects Us When We Protect Nature With Dr Jessica Hernandez Author Fresh Banana Leaves
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

<script src="https://cdn.podlove.org/web-player/embed.js"></script>
    <script>
        document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', function () {
          if (document.readyState === 'interactive' || document.readyState === 'complete') {
            podlovePlayer('#player', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/The Great Full/Nature-protects-us-when-we-protect-nature-with-dr-jessica-hernandez-author-fresh-banana-leaves.json', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/The Great Full/config.json').then(registerExternalEvents('player'))
          }
        })
  </script>

### The Great Full  (2022-04-25)  
### Author(s): Michelle Grant  

**0:00:00-0:00:17:**  So we want to consume the indigenous knowledge and indigenous science, but without the people.  And I think that one of the messages that I would like to share is that indigenous science  cannot be implemented without indigenous peoples leading those efforts.  
**0:00:17-0:00:29:**  Welcome to the Grateful podcast.  My name is Michelle Grant, and I'm really happy to have you here as we explore together  how we can build more sustainable food systems, communities and lives, and what leading that  
**0:00:29-0:00:46:**  change can look like.  My guest for this episode is Dr. Jessica Hernandez, who is the author of an amazing new book,  which is called Fresh Banana Leaves, Healing Indigenous Landscapes Through Indigenous Science.  
**0:00:46-0:01:05:**  And this was one of those books that you know is special because you have to pause as you're  reading it and put it down to digest what you're taking in and to just reflect on how  what she's sharing is reshaping how you're viewing the world and helping you understand  
**0:01:05-0:01:20:**  systems and things at play which you maybe weren't fully aware of.  So I was so impressed by this book that I immediately wanted to talk to Jessica and  get the pages of questions that I had written down, answered and she was kind enough to  
**0:01:20-0:01:32:**  join me here on the podcast to do that.  Jessica's work is really amazing because it's grounded in indigenous culture, science and  wisdom, and how that can heal indigenous landscapes.  
**0:01:32-0:01:53:**  And she is really amazing in being able to integrate the Western sciences that she's  trained in with indigenous sciences and indigenous wisdom from her background and experience.  And she weaves that work into her role as a postdoctoral research fellow at the University  
**0:01:53-0:02:01:**  of Washington.  And she's also a climate justice policy strategist at the International Mayan League.  I really appreciate the work that Jessica does.  
**0:02:01-0:02:14:**  And I hope after this you'll all race out and buy the book because I think it's one  that everybody should read.  Your book has this really beautiful title, Fresh Banana Leaves, and it immediately intrigued  
**0:02:14-0:02:24:**  me as to what it meant.  And I really loved learning about the story behind it in the book.  So could you start by sharing how you came to this name, the story that it's linked to,  
**0:02:24-0:02:34:**  and the message that it encapsulates so beautifully?  Yeah, thank you for your question.  So I think that one of the premises of why I came up with the title Fresh Banana Leaves  
**0:02:34-0:02:47:**  was because I wanted this book to kind of center my dad's story as an indigenous Maya  Chorti man who was unfortunately a child when he was forced to fight in the Central American  Civil War.  
**0:02:47-0:02:59:**  So the story is titled Fresh Banana Leaves just because he shared a story with me that  kind of resonated a lot with me and hasn't really been erased from my mind ever since  he shared it with me.  
**0:02:59-0:03:13:**  It was the story of when he was 11 years old, he was forced to either join the guerilla,  which was the opposing team against the government, or join the army.  And as a result, you know, because the army was using a lot of violent tactics, especially,  
**0:03:13-0:03:21:**  you know, tactics that they had learned from the United States, from Canada, he decided  to join the guerilla, right?  Because as a child, he understood oppression, but he didn't really understand the message  
**0:03:21-0:03:35:**  behind the Central American Civil War that was against settler governments and oppressive  tactics.  So when he was 14, three years into being a guerilla member, his encampment was bombarded,  
**0:03:35-0:03:43:**  and he saw everything being destroyed.  So his first instinct as a child and somebody who was trying to survive was to run under  a banana tree.  
**0:03:43-0:03:59:**  And this banana tree was unique because it was the banana tree that he had built a relationship  with it was a tree where he used to climb to escape his reality to escape, you know,  his like present the conditions that he was facing because war is something that's really,  
**0:03:59-0:04:06:**  you know, it's not a fairy tale, right?  Especially when it comes to the child's perspective and children who are being forced to fight  in this war.  
**0:04:06-0:04:13:**  So in as soon as he went under this banana tree, he saw a bomb drop right on top of the  banana tree.  So he thought his life was going to end.  
**0:04:13-0:04:28:**  But you know, in a mystical way, right, because I think that that's the best word that sometimes  describes the relationships that indigenous peoples have with nature, especially using  the Western languages, the banana tree, its leaves wrapped the bombs to prevent them from  
**0:04:28-0:04:37:**  igniting right.  So oftentimes, you know, people are like, Oh, it probably was a malfunctioned bomb or  it wasn't meant to explode because it wasn't really a bomb or something.  
**0:04:37-0:04:47:**  But I think that it shows that because my dad had built this relationship with banana  tree where he used to talk to the banana tree where, you know, he kind of cared for banana  tree.  
**0:04:47-0:04:52:**  He used to play with it.  He used to sing along to the tree.  It prevented the bomb from igniting.  
**0:04:52-0:05:05:**  And I think that given the metaphor, right, of how the banana leaves kind of wrapped the  bomb and prevented it from igniting, kind of gave him a fresh start to be able to escape  from El Salvador or make it eventually to the United States to seek refuge.  
**0:05:05-0:05:18:**  So that's why he entitled it Fresh Banana Leaves because it gave him a fresh start.  And it's the reason why I was able to write this book and, you know, exist as a person,  as a daughter of someone who was saved by banana tree.  
**0:05:18-0:05:32:**  I think you just summed that up so beautifully in your book with what your dad taught you  of nature protects you if you protect nature.  You're like, that's the most beautiful message that just keeps coming through in it.  
**0:05:32-0:05:42:**  So, yeah, the story really touched me.  So thank you for sharing it.  Before we dive in, I think you touch so many important concepts in your book that actually  
**0:05:42-0:05:52:**  shape our everyday lives and concepts that many of us aren't actually that familiar with  or don't grow up learning about.  I don't want to make you feel like a dictionary here, but I was just wondering if it would  
**0:05:52-0:06:02:**  be okay if we first unpack a couple of terms so that people are familiar with them when  they come up in the conversation.  And the first one that I think is really important, you are an indigenous scientist.  
**0:06:02-0:06:14:**  So could you help listeners understand what you mean by indigenous science?  Yeah, so I think that has like a dual definition, right?  Like the most straightforward definition is that, you know, I'm an indigenous woman trained  
**0:06:14-0:06:23:**  in the Western sciences.  I have a master's, a PhD that kind of solidify or validate that training and that knowledge  that I acquired.  
**0:06:23-0:06:39:**  But with an indigenous scientist, we have responsibilities.  We have a calling to continue kind of uplifting our ways of knowing our communities, especially  when it comes to Western sciences and the discourses, right, that continue to in a way  
**0:06:39-0:06:49:**  weave out our communities.  Indigenous science tends to be more holistic, right?  Because as comparison to the scientific method is not just binary where it's, you know, linear  
**0:06:49-0:07:01:**  where we follow a scientific method.  It kind of puts our spirituality, our medicine at the core of that.  And as a result of that, indigenous science heals because when we talk about our spirituality,  
**0:07:01-0:07:14:**  our medicine being at the core of the science that we do, there's trauma that we have to  heal from, especially as indigenous peoples, especially for our indigenous communities.  So I think that as a part of that, that was kind of like the message that I was trying  
**0:07:14-0:07:30:**  to amplify in the book is that indigenous science heals because we have to put our spirituality  and medicine at the core of it as opposed to science that continues to in a way tell  us to remove ourselves from the science we're practiced because, you know, in the name of  
**0:07:30-0:07:41:**  objectivity.  But it's ironic, right, because when we look at the foundations of science, the scientists  that founded those fields of studies that we continue to in a way worship their theories  
**0:07:41-0:07:51:**  and numerical equations were not objective, right?  They were all either going against a religion's regime at that time that wasn't allowing them  to practice their science.  
**0:07:51-0:08:02:**  It all depends on the theory that we're talking about.  They were trying to escape the political persecution that some of them were facing because they  were practicing the science that wasn't necessarily accepted by many churches, especially from  
**0:08:02-0:08:12:**  their countries.  So it kind of shows that regardless science is subjective in that sense, but you know,  the foundations of science are not necessarily objective.  
**0:08:12-0:08:18:**  Yeah.  Yeah.  And the oppression and persecution is linked to another really important concept in your  
**0:08:18-0:08:30:**  book, which is settler colonialism.  So could you just help people understand what's meant by that term?  Yeah, so settler colonialism is like a byproduct of colonization, right, where colonization  
**0:08:30-0:08:45:**  brought wealthy European countries to kind of colonize the Americas, especially through  introducing diseases that were not necessarily present in our communities.  So you know, that kind of wiped out a lot of our indigenous members, community members.  
**0:08:45-0:09:01:**  It also introduced violence, right, where, you know, we did have intertribal wars.  There was, you know, arguments between tribes, like, when we look at history, right, the  Aztecs were also a really powerful regime that, you know, was in a way taking over tribes.  
**0:09:01-0:09:12:**  But I think with settler colonialism, it introduced a violence, right, because the Aztecs were  not necessarily leading a genocide.  They were actually trying to conquer other communities, but they wouldn't wipe them out  
**0:09:12-0:09:18:**  completely.  And with colonialism, it was the opposite.  They were trying to wipe out all the indigenous peoples.  
**0:09:18-0:09:27:**  It also introduced, you know, the notion of boarding schools where there were unfortunately  violence towards indigenous children.  They ripped them off so that they can assimilate them.  
**0:09:27-0:09:42:**  So I think settler colonialism is the byproducts that we have as a result of colonization,  and that, you know, ranges from the government structures all the way to capitalism that  continues to play a big role in our societies.  
**0:09:42-0:09:50:**  And in particular plays a massive role in how we connect with nature and how we see  ourselves in relation to nature.  So the last term is eco-colonialism.  
**0:09:50-0:10:02:**  Could you share your understanding of this and how that's linked to your work?  So I always say that eco-colonialism kind of has three layers, right?  The first layer being that as indigenous peoples, we don't have a right to steward or caretake  
**0:10:02-0:10:19:**  for our lands, especially when we talk about the context of the Americas, even though,  you know, a lot of our communities fight to regain that right, it's not necessarily granted.  So you know, you have mostly white cisgender men who continue to govern our natural resources.  
**0:10:19-0:10:29:**  The other one is oftentimes, while people understand that our traditional ecological  knowledge or like I like to call it our indigenous science, it's important and can help heal  our landscapes.  
**0:10:29-0:10:38:**  We're not offered a seat at the table.  And when we are offered a seat at the table, we're seen but not heard.  And that will be the second layer.  
**0:10:38-0:10:53:**  But their layer is just that when we talk about kind of like who is responsible for  healing our landscapes, usually indigenous peoples, yet when we are trying to, you know,  do that healing, there's not many resources offered to our communities to take that on,  
**0:10:53-0:11:03:**  right?  So it's also how wealth is distributed, especially when it comes to conservation or environmental  justice projects, it doesn't necessarily go towards the people who are most impacted.  
**0:11:03-0:11:18:**  It goes to, you know, these larger government entities that they don't necessarily do the  underground work that our communities are constantly doing.  So that's what I define kind of like eco-colonialism, right, that branch of settler colonialism  
**0:11:18-0:11:31:**  that is primarily impacting our environmental landscapes and ecosystems.  And as you just said, like has a massive impact on how we tackle sustainability and environmental  challenges too.  
**0:11:31-0:11:44:**  So for people who work in these fields, who are a large portion of the listeners of this  podcast, what would you like them to know about indigenous science?  And how would you like to see them engage with it and integrate it in the work that  
**0:11:44-0:11:55:**  they do from including indigenous wisdom and perspectives and lived experiences kind of,  yeah, making that connection?  So that's something that I have always kind of grappled with, right?  
**0:11:55-0:12:06:**  Because oftentimes, you know, as an indigenous person, I'm asked, you know, what is an indigenous  knowledge or science that we can integrate?  And I think that we cannot do that without removing it from indigenous peoples.  
**0:12:06-0:12:16:**  Because oftentimes, you know, in the Western ways of knowing, or the ways that we're taught  to think, we're taught to think of, you know, to consume, right, because, you know, capitalism  plays a vital role.  
**0:12:16-0:12:30:**  So we want to consume the indigenous knowledge or indigenous science, but without the people.  And I think that one of the messages that I would like to share is that indigenous science  cannot be implemented without indigenous peoples leading those efforts.  
**0:12:30-0:12:43:**  And I think that many of us, especially if we have the power and privilege to kind of  sit at these tables is to make space for indigenous peoples at that table.  I know that that might not be comfortable work, especially when we're advocating for  
**0:12:43-0:12:54:**  others to be joining our tables, right?  Because there's always somebody who wants to maintain the power and privilege, which  tends to be hierarchy in our organizations or in our structures.  
**0:12:54-0:13:05:**  And I think that, you know, advocating for making space will be like the ideal way that  we can move forward, especially to integrate indigenous knowledges, indigenous sciences  at the table.  
**0:13:05-0:13:17:**  Because one of the things that I even struggle with is that indigenous science cannot necessarily  be taught through a Western lens of education where we're like, oh, we're going to write  a textbook and we're going to learn all indigenous science or we're going to lecture on it.  
**0:13:17-0:13:27:**  It's something that we are raised with even as children to we're taught, especially in  our languages, right?  Because oftentimes when we try to translate things from our native languages to English  
**0:13:27-0:13:37:**  or Spanish, in my case, because that's our colonial language is kind of there are no  words to describe that.  And I think that it's important, right, to advocate for that inclusion and also use our  
**0:13:37-0:13:49:**  positionality to start listening to indigenous peoples, because some of us have the power  to just start listening because, you know, we are either leading our government or conservation  organization, environmental organization.  
**0:13:49-0:14:03:**  And I think that oftentimes, you know, indigenous peoples, especially those who are indigenous  to the landscapes we're trying to protect or conserve know what's best, right, especially  since they have that traditional knowledge that has been passed down since time immemorial.  
**0:14:03-0:14:16:**  Yeah, I think that point about education is so important.  And I was really happy to learn that you are actually teaching, as I understand it, climate  science and integrating your experiences as Western and indigenous scientists.  
**0:14:16-0:14:28:**  So what are the main messages you try and teach to students or try and engage students  within in these courses that you run?  Yeah, so in this course, one of the things that I integrate is place based education,  
**0:14:28-0:14:40:**  because oftentimes, you know, when we learn about climate science, it kind of leads to  those despair and doom narratives where we're like, oh, we don't know what to do, right.  But what I'd like to tell my students is that there's a lot of things that we can do, especially  
**0:14:40-0:14:52:**  at the local context, especially when we learn who's indigenous lands were, you know, settler  or occupied or kind of displaced towards, there's a lot of movements that those indigenous peoples  are leading.  
**0:14:52-0:15:05:**  And obviously, they will benefit from more efforts or from more people joining their  efforts and solidarity movements.  And I think that through, you know, integrating place based education, integrating, like case  
**0:15:05-0:15:17:**  scenarios that students can actually be like, okay, I learned the science behind it.  And I can actually not take action to support those place based case scenarios that we studied  or examples that we use.  
**0:15:17-0:15:28:**  And I think that that's the premises that I want to teach.  Because when we talk about climate science, when we learn about climate change, we only  learn the kind of like the non-human aspects, right, where we're looking at these graphs,  
**0:15:28-0:15:40:**  we're looking at these numerical data sets, we're looking at these simulations that are  being created through engineering and physics, but there's still that removal of humans from  that core concepts.  
**0:15:40-0:15:54:**  And I think that with integrating, you know, like, I'm going to teach them about, you know,  the CO2 graph, you know, that famous one that shows how CO2 concentrations are increasing.  I'm also going to teach them how CO2 is impacting the local indigenous communities here because  
**0:15:54-0:16:08:**  of the ocean acidification, or extreme weather events, the heat waves that we experienced  this summer in the Pacific Northwest, where it was all hot in the oceans that a lot of  our clams and shellfish actually boil to death.  
**0:16:08-0:16:17:**  And I think that that allows students to visualize the impacts because oftentimes, you know,  we're taught to remove again, ourselves from climate science and climate change when in  reality.  
**0:16:17-0:16:26:**  We're part of that equation.  And we're also being impacted even in ways that we might not necessarily, you know, have  visibly understood in our lifetimes.  
**0:16:26-0:16:38:**  So that's, you know, the premises of that class.  lucky students, I wish I could be one of them.  That actually links to a story that really touched me in your book, which was about the  
**0:16:38-0:16:50:**  concept of ecological grief and how that's an additional burden for indigenous communities  who, yes, we might talk about being impacted on the front lines of climate change, but  we don't always understand what that means.  
**0:16:50-0:17:04:**  Could you share a bit more about ecological grief and perhaps also this story that you  have in the book about the milpa system and how that's integrated?  Yeah, so the best way that I could explain ecological grief, especially in the book,  
**0:17:04-0:17:17:**  was like to imagine we have pets, right, and they all pass away.  You know, there's that grief that we're facing because we have that strong connection.  Unfortunately, we tend to have stronger connection with our pets, but not necessarily the living  
**0:17:17-0:17:29:**  things that are around us, right, whether it be like the squirrels or like the plants  and things like that, because, you know, it's just the way that we're taught, right, especially  in the society where pets are a part of our family, but then we erase everything else  
**0:17:29-0:17:38:**  that's living around us.  And I think we have ecological grief.  It's kind of looking at our plants and animal relatives as part of our family.  
**0:17:38-0:17:50:**  And I think that it goes back to our creation stories, because I know in Western religion,  there's a creation story where God created Adam and Eve.  And in our stories, our creator created us from the natural elements, from the animals  
**0:17:50-0:18:02:**  that were in that place.  So I think that oftentimes it shows that we are a part of nature.  Nature's a part of us, right, because when we lose like a jaguar, when we lose a corn  
**0:18:02-0:18:15:**  cob, when we lose corn species or these plants, we're also losing a relative.  And I think that, you know, we grieve in that sense.  And I think the example that I showed with the milpas was that in Oaxaca, when our communities  
**0:18:15-0:18:23:**  lost the milpas, the first thing that didn't come to mind was like, oh, we don't have any  food.  The first thing that came to mind was that grief, right, because they're like, oh, we  
**0:18:23-0:18:35:**  have lost a lot of our relatives due to extreme weather events.  And that case that I demonstrated in the book was because of hurricanes, right?  So the extreme weather events of like heavy rains and floods, they wiped out the entire  
**0:18:35-0:18:42:**  milpa and they were grieving.  That was the first thing that they were sad.  They were like, oh, we just lost our corn, poor corn.  
**0:18:42-0:18:54:**  You know, they use that kind of language.  And I think that that shows how when we lose our plant and animal relatives, we're grieving.  So there's like that kind of sadness that comes in our hearts and then it comes to the  
**0:18:54-0:19:03:**  realization like, oh, yeah, we actually don't have our food security anymore.  And I think that that's like a process, kind of like it has the seven steps of grieving,  right?  
**0:19:03-0:19:10:**  So.  Yeah.  And there are so many directions I want to go now, but let's stay with us with the milpas  
**0:19:10-0:19:19:**  and perhaps you could just share a bit more about the system, because I think it's a really  beautiful example of of generative small scale agriculture.  Yeah.  
**0:19:19-0:19:26:**  So the milpas are these holistic agricultural systems that do not necessarily require a  lot of human labor.  They're after restorative, right?  
**0:19:26-0:19:33:**  So like, for instance, in the summer seasons, they actually burn themselves so that they  can actually replenish the soil.  Right.  
**0:19:33-0:19:43:**  So it's something that is not necessarily found in many Western agricultural systems.  Right.  Because we tend to focus more on the monoculture where we're just planting the same crop.  
**0:19:43-0:19:56:**  But the milpas are like integrative systems that kind of have corn, squash, beans and  all of these plants that create a house, right, an ecosystem for animals.  So we have a lot of grasshoppers, armadillos, and those are also animals that we consume.  
**0:19:56-0:20:06:**  So I guess in the sense, you know, we pray to the milpa, we hold ceremonies when it's  time to harvest.  And we're also taught that, you know, we don't take more than we need.  
**0:20:06-0:20:12:**  We only take like if we have four people in our families, we will take four corn as opposed  to taking all the corn.  Right.  
**0:20:12-0:20:23:**  Because I think that, you know, Western societies, we're taught to take as much as we can, not  necessarily as much as we need.  And I think that through the milpas, right, holding that ceremony and traditional rituals,  
**0:20:23-0:20:36:**  it allows us to be a part of the milpa and also kind of think the milpa, right, our plant  and animal relatives were kind of sacrificing their lives to nourish our bodies.  And I think that that shows the relationship that we have even with our food sources where  
**0:20:36-0:20:48:**  we're not just there to consume our food sources.  We're also there to thank them and kind of, you know, embody that relationship that, you  know, we're going back to ecological grief is something that's stronger than, you know,  
**0:20:48-0:20:56:**  Western society can actually describe.  Mm hmm.  I've been thinking a lot lately how and if the sustainability crisis we face is actually  
**0:20:56-0:21:10:**  a spirituality crisis.  And I wonder what your thoughts are on that, given the way you've just talked about kind  of ritual and spirituality is woven into the bigger conceptualisation of who we are and  
**0:21:10-0:21:23:**  what our existence is and how that is in relation to nature.  Yeah, when I think of, you know, just how you phrased that, I think of the healing that  we also have to do as humans, because I think that oftentimes people don't understand that  
**0:21:23-0:21:32:**  everybody, whether you're indigenous to where you're living or not indigenous, you play  a role in the healing component.  Right.  
**0:21:32-0:21:41:**  And I think that oftentimes we tend to not understand that there's a healing that we  have to do.  That's why, you know, spirituality is very important and doesn't necessarily have to  
**0:21:41-0:21:48:**  be defined by a Western religion.  Right.  It's just the relationships that we hold with our plants and animals and the living world.  
**0:21:48-0:22:01:**  And I think that oftentimes, you know, we are just meant to work.  Even in many sustainability projects, we're like, oh, we're just going to do this.  But we don't necessarily take time to actually put ourselves into the project.  
**0:22:01-0:22:10:**  Right.  Like, how is this actually, you know, amplifying the fact that I need to heal?  What is it that is driving me to this project in particular?  
**0:22:10-0:22:20:**  And I think that oftentimes, because as, you know, Western science teaches us, we have  to remove ourselves from the work that we're doing and sustainability is a branch of Western  science.  
**0:22:20-0:22:31:**  It's not necessarily the destructive parts, but the restorative parts.  And I think that it still teaches us to remove ourselves from that.  And I think that as a result of that, we should start reframing the ways that we see ourselves,  
**0:22:31-0:22:38:**  especially in the work that we do, especially that work that falls within the Western sciences  framework or spectrum.  Mm hmm.  
**0:22:38-0:22:51:**  And I really love how you talk about not Western or indigenous science, but like, how can we  integrate the two?  So how do you think the two systems can complement each other?  
**0:22:51-0:23:02:**  I think that, you know, Western sciences has it has its benefits, right?  Because like, for instance, we live longer now.  We also have many technological devices that we don't necessarily have to facilitate our  
**0:23:02-0:23:12:**  everyday functions, like even being able to do this podcast.  It was something that if we look back in time, it wasn't necessarily something that we had  available.  
**0:23:12-0:23:25:**  And I think that as a result of that, it can be complemented and it can actually work together  to kind of solve solutions.  But I think where it falls short is that Western sciences don't tend to be very holistic.  
**0:23:25-0:23:38:**  When I talk about indigenous science and give a metaphor, I usually tell people that it's  like indigenous science is looking at the entire puzzle completed versus Western science  is only looking at three or four puzzle pieces.  
**0:23:38-0:23:49:**  So it's still missing those other interconnections that, you know, what is it that when we try  to save the salmon, how is that connected to the forest, to the trees?  How is that connected to the bears?  
**0:23:49-0:23:58:**  You know, where we're just focusing on that one species and unnecessarily looking at the  bigger picture.  And I think that Western sciences does have its benefits because we do have the technological  
**0:23:58-0:24:09:**  devices to be able to track animals, to be able to do all of those things.  But I think that is very reductionary.  So that's where indigenous science can come into play and complemented it to allow it  
**0:24:09-0:24:21:**  to see the world more holistically as opposed to just focusing on that one box, right, that  they have formulated around in their projects.  And I think that's what I find really beautiful about your story, because I really believe  
**0:24:21-0:24:35:**  that each of us find our way to make a unique contribution in the world when we can integrate  things that only we can through our lived experience.  And it feels to me hearing you talk, you know, you've found that place and you have a big  
**0:24:35-0:24:44:**  beautiful dedication at the start of your book.  I'm just going to find that quickly.  You said, I want to thank my guiding ancestors for motivating me to pursue the environmental  
**0:24:44-0:24:53:**  field as an indigenous woman.  And I'm sure that's not been an easy journey.  So what helped you to find that path and also find the courage to walk it?  
**0:24:53-0:25:06:**  Because integrating things that are normally disconnected is fraught with many, many challenges.  Yeah, so, you know, I had the privilege to go into higher academia, to go to undergraduate  and graduate school.  
**0:25:06-0:25:20:**  And I think that one of the motivators to pursue the line of work that I did was my  father and my family, my mother, my relatives kind of telling me stories, especially around  our environment that were not necessarily something that I had learned in the K through  
**0:25:20-0:25:31:**  12 educational system, right, when we were younger, the secondary or high school that  we attend.  So I think that the way that we're taught science, that we look at a plant cycle, humans  
**0:25:31-0:25:43:**  are removed from that plant cycle, right, even though there is a spiritual connection  or there is that sustenance connection or there is that medicine connection, right,  where some plants are used for medicinal properties.  
**0:25:43-0:25:57:**  And I think that as a result of that being a curious young girl, I was always curious  to understand why we were removed from those from those life cycles, right, especially  given that we're taught that, you know, our plants are our relatives, our animals are  
**0:25:57-0:26:07:**  our relatives.  But yet in the textbooks, we don't see those human interconnections with those plants or  animals because they focus just on that one piece, whether it be the plant or the animal.  
**0:26:07-0:26:17:**  And I think that going through higher academia, right, I took so many classes.  I was like, oh, at one point I wanted to be a cognitive science because I wanted to understand  the brain a little bit more.  
**0:26:17-0:26:27:**  But it was still kind of missing my interest, right, like I wasn't really excited to attend.  I was just excited.  At first I was, right, but once I started taking more classes, I was like, oh, this  
**0:26:27-0:26:36:**  is actually not what I wanted to do.  And then I took marine sciences classes.  And I think that understanding the marine life cycle and seeing because, you know, my  
**0:26:36-0:26:48:**  father was a fisherman when he was younger.  It allowed me to kind of be passionate about those classes, understanding the life cycle  of salmon or fishes or understanding the geochemical properties of the ocean.  
**0:26:48-0:26:58:**  And I think that as a result of that, I saw myself more connected to that because it was  a part of my life.  But yes, there were those disconnections where, you know, humans were still separated, where  
**0:26:58-0:27:13:**  indigenous communities were not necessarily something that was talked about in our classes.  And I think that as a result of that, it was just my determination to understand the world  from the Western lens, especially when it came to our environments and kind of complemented  
**0:27:13-0:27:27:**  with indigenous knowledge or, you know, teachings that I hold as a person.  That kind of motivated me to continue pursuing it, even though it wasn't like an easy task,  even though there was times where professors were invalidating my lived experiences, because,  
**0:27:27-0:27:38:**  you know, they were like, unless it's peer reviewed, published, it's not necessarily  something that, you know, has any validity in this class.  But I think that understanding that our lived experiences are important and vital, especially  
**0:27:38-0:27:50:**  to healing our landscapes, especially knowing that climate change continues to impact my  communities and also all communities around the globe.  It's something that kind of motivated me to pursue it and continue, you know, kind of  
**0:27:50-0:28:02:**  built that perseverance to continue, even though there were so many downfalls along  the journey.  Yeah, that that comment you just made about, you know, experiencing the invalidation of  
**0:28:02-0:28:12:**  different forms of wisdom makes me also think about imposter syndrome, which you mentioned  in the book.  And it's a topic I'm really interested in, not only personally, but also with the women  
**0:28:12-0:28:23:**  that I work with.  And I've experienced and read a lot about the intersection of being a woman in Western  sciences and how that is a breeding ground for imposter thoughts.  
**0:28:23-0:28:35:**  And I think there's an additional layer to it when you're an Indigenous woman in  the Western academic system.  So I would be fascinated to learn about how you have come to navigate imposter syndrome.  
**0:28:35-0:28:48:**  And also, I'm very aware that it's a systemic challenge and not just a personal challenge.  That said, what are some of the ways you have helped yourself to navigate it that might  support other women in similar situations?  
**0:28:48-0:28:58:**  Yeah, one of the things that has helped me navigate that and, you know, it's important  right that you mentioned that it's like sometimes it's a systematic problem, right?  It's not necessarily us.  
**0:28:58-0:29:07:**  It's just that the systems were created not with us and mine, right?  And that oftentimes happens if you're a woman, if you're non-binary, you're LGBTQ  plus, right?  
**0:29:07-0:29:20:**  Because it was created for cisgender men.  And I think that the imposter syndrome, it's important to acknowledge that.  But I think the premises of why I continue my work was because I always ask, kind of  
**0:29:20-0:29:29:**  question my intentions, right?  So I was like, if I'm here in this system where there's only white cisgender men in  this room, what are my intentions of being here?  
**0:29:29-0:29:38:**  Why am I here?  And I think that going back to, oh, yeah, my intentions are because I want to include  my community's perspectives.  
**0:29:38-0:29:51:**  I want to elevate their voices, right?  Because oftentimes we cannot speak for all of our communities as one person to elevate  their voices, to kind of break down some of the barriers that I face as a young woman  
**0:29:51-0:30:02:**  going through this field.  And I think that grounding myself in those intentions, going back to that spirituality  question where intentions are rooted in our spirituality, I was able to continue in those  
**0:30:02-0:30:11:**  spaces, especially when the imposter syndrome will hit, when I would be like, oh, I'm  the youngest person and I'm the only woman here, I'm the only person of color in this  room, why am I here?  
**0:30:11-0:30:18:**  Right?  Like I'm questioning that.  And I think that grounding myself in my intentions and what is my life goals, especially not  
**0:30:18-0:30:27:**  necessarily my personal life goals, but my life goals for my community and also for the  future generations, right?  Because we tend to think a lot for the future generations.  
**0:30:27-0:30:41:**  That allowed me to kind of continue navigating those systems and continue to add the layer  of the imposter syndrome to our well-being.  And I think that grounding myself in my intentions and questioning my intentions kind of gave  
**0:30:41-0:30:54:**  me the extra energy to deal with those issues or those events.  I think that's a beautiful tool to navigate in life.  So as I read your book and as I hear you speak, what it makes me think about a lot is this  
**0:30:54-0:31:02:**  concept of good ancestry.  So I think you're a beautiful example of that.  What does being a good ancestor mean for you?  
**0:31:02-0:31:13:**  I think being a good ancestor means that we're not going to be perfect, right?  So we're not going to always navigate the world without making mistakes.  But I think that part of being a good ancestor is to accept that we make mistakes and also  
**0:31:13-0:31:27:**  try to see how those mistakes can be ratified in the future.  And I think that oftentimes when we talk about becoming a good ancestors, we tend to put  people in this like perfect narrative where they're like, oh, they're perfect.  
**0:31:27-0:31:39:**  So one mistake they create is like, you know, it's like the world is ending.  But I think that oftentimes, you know, as humans, we all have flaws.  So it's kind of like understanding that we have flaws that do not strive for perfection,  
**0:31:39-0:31:52:**  right?  But I think that is to strive for better solutions, better ways of being or better alternatives  to life that will not necessarily support us or benefit us, but it will benefit the  
**0:31:52-0:32:03:**  future generations.  So I think that, you know, keeping the future generations in mind where we're not necessarily  saying, oh, the youth are now responsible to kind of take on this movement because,  
**0:32:03-0:32:11:**  you know, oftentimes we are kind of relying too much on our youth.  But, you know, it's also something that we can start doing as well.  Right.  
**0:32:11-0:32:22:**  Because oftentimes in the sustainability discourses or the climate justice discourses, people  are always telling me that they're motivated by the youth.  But I'm like, if you're motivated by the youth, why are you not taking the same actions as  
**0:32:22-0:32:30:**  the youth so that you can support them, so that you can walk along them?  Because it's not their responsibility to kind of fix our mistakes.  Right.  
**0:32:30-0:32:39:**  And I think that that goes back to embracing the mistakes that we do.  And I think that oftentimes, you know, we fail to do that.  So we're like, oh, the youth are just going to fix the whole world and things like that.  
**0:32:39-0:32:49:**  But I think that youth should also be allowed to be youth, right, to be children, to not  have their childhood robbed from them.  And I think that that kind of roots itself back to how my father had his childhood robbed  
**0:32:49-0:33:00:**  from him because of war.  And I think that understanding that I don't want children to lose their childhood or to  lose their, you know, them being children and looking at the world innocently is one  
**0:33:00-0:33:16:**  of the reasons why I work alongside the youth, why I also participate in some of their actions,  why I support them, why I mentor them, and also why I continue to in my communities elevate  our youth as well as our elders, because, you know, they are the future, but they're  
**0:33:16-0:33:25:**  also not the only ones responsible for creating a better future.  We can also take actions.  And I think that that's how I see that as well.  
**0:33:25-0:33:35:**  That's beautifully put.  Something that really interested me is, if I understand correctly, your mother's community  is a matriarchal society.  
**0:33:35-0:33:50:**  I was just really interested to know what lessons you take from that and in particular  in terms of leadership and how we might want to change our leadership.  Yeah, so the Zapotec Nation, we're made up of different pueblos, right?  
**0:33:50-0:34:03:**  So not all the pueblos still follow the matriarchal societal norms because, you know, patriarchy  has infiltrated some of the pueblos.  But for my mom's pueblo is still a matriarchal because our women continue to lead the tables.  
**0:34:03-0:34:18:**  Our women continue to tell us how to do things, especially our elders, our matriarchs.  And oftentimes, you know, the ways that I describe that is like if we were in a room  that's, you know, sometimes primarily men and there was only two women, the woman would  
**0:34:18-0:34:26:**  have to speak first before the men get to speak.  And that includes women from all the three generations, whether it be our elders, adults  or youth.  
**0:34:26-0:34:32:**  And that's different, right?  Because in patriarchy, we're taught that we have to be submissive when we have to go last  after the men.  
**0:34:32-0:34:43:**  And I think that is basically the flip side of that, where, you know, women have the lead  at the table and the men have a seat at the table.  And I think that that goes back to the realities that, you know, as women, we have a stronger  
**0:34:43-0:34:54:**  relationship with nature, with our environment, whether that be the nurture component or whether  that be just a spiritual component where we are more interconnected to nature and our  environments.  
**0:34:54-0:35:05:**  And with the matriarchal society, even in our tribal council, in the Mexican tribal  council, we have fought for a woman to always represent us.  So sometimes our women tend to be like one of the only few women alongside all these  
**0:35:05-0:35:17:**  indigenous men because, you know, in other communities, patriarchy plays a big role where  they're like, oh, the man should lead that.  And I think that when we look at many environmental movements, especially that have come from  
**0:35:17-0:35:27:**  indigenous communities, it has always been woman led.  But because of patriarchy, the men have been given that platform.  The men kind of became the face of that movement.  
**0:35:27-0:35:37:**  I think that oftentimes that's because of patriarchy and how the media continues to  follow the man.  But I think that being in my mother's community was always being in a bubble because, you  
**0:35:37-0:35:52:**  know, as a young girl, I had, you know, that authority that not necessarily I had at my  school classrooms or back, you know, back in Los Angeles where I was being raised, because  there was patriarchy, patriarchal norms.  
**0:35:52-0:36:07:**  But I think that for my father marrying my mother, I think that one of the things that  he taught me was that he had to lose that patriarchy because he no longer could be patriarchal,  especially when it came to my mom's family where he received refuge in my mom's pueblo,  
**0:36:07-0:36:14:**  especially after he escaped the war.  So I think that is a beautiful thing to look at.  But it's also a confusing thing to be a part of because it's like that little bubble where  
**0:36:14-0:36:23:**  women play a big role in the leadership, in the hierarchy.  It's beautiful.  Thanks for sharing that.  
**0:36:23-0:36:37:**  What are some of the indigenous led movements that are trying to change how we steward our  land that are really inspiring you at the moment?  Yeah, so one of the movements has always been the Zapatistas movement, and that was also  
**0:36:37-0:36:46:**  led by women.  And I think that one of the things that inspires me is that they were able to reclaim their  lands by burning all the land deeds in the communities towns.  
**0:36:46-0:36:56:**  And as a result of that, right, there was no ownership of the land.  The land kind of went back to indigenous peoples.  For some reason, the government didn't necessarily enact any violence against them.  
**0:36:56-0:37:10:**  So it was really like a peaceful resistance movement.  And I think that one of the reasons why I am motivated by that movement is because one  of the first things that they did was do a declaration of a woman rights where, you know,  
**0:37:10-0:37:18:**  women were given the rights to hold leadership positions, to also join the army.  Right.  Because oftentimes when we talk about armies, women were not necessarily allowed to join  
**0:37:18-0:37:30:**  armies because they were like, oh, your role is to kind of take care of the soldiers.  And I think that it also gave them the right to choose whether they wanted to have kids,  the right to choose their spouse or whether they wanted to get married.  
**0:37:30-0:37:41:**  And I think that is it motivates me because it also kind of goes back to the notions of  being a matriarchy.  So I guess that movement kind of inspires me because it continues to centre women's  
**0:37:41-0:37:50:**  rights, especially in a patriarchal world.  Yeah, very nice point.  So my background has been in food and sustainability and food systems.  
**0:37:50-0:38:08:**  And I would love to hear your thoughts on this, because obviously our modern day agricultural  system is in stark contrast to a lot of indigenous practices and values.  What do you think our food system would look like if it was returned to indigenous people?  
**0:38:08-0:38:19:**  Yeah, our food systems will not rely so much on the monocultural agricultural systems where  we're just like, oh, we're just going to use these hundreds of acres of land to just plant,  you know, tomatoes.  
**0:38:19-0:38:29:**  It's going to be more holistic.  It's going to be more richer landscapes where we have tomatoes and we have other plants  that are necessarily providing an ecosystem for other animals that we can also consume.  
**0:38:29-0:38:40:**  I think it will also allow us to kind of remove ourselves from taking all that we can to just  taking what we need.  And I think that sometimes that comes in conflict with capitalism because we were always trying  
**0:38:40-0:38:52:**  to make a profit, especially to live in this society.  Stewing our lands will also mean that sometimes, you know, the women are going to probably  be making the decisions, whether we dismantle patriarchy or whether, you know, the matriarchal  
**0:38:52-0:39:04:**  communities come and kind of advocate for that.  I think that is going to allow us to heal our landscapes as well, because we can share  stories, we can kind of share those healing practices that our communities have where  
**0:39:04-0:39:20:**  we share our stories with the elders, where the elders kind of give us a bias, especially  when we're having a bad day or we're having mental health crises like, you know, our elders  can sometimes ground us into our worlds to kind of heal from anxiety or depression.  
**0:39:20-0:39:29:**  And I think that oftentimes when I have anxiety, I'm like, oh, it's probably because I'm not  grounded in my communities right now, right?  Because I'm living in the city, you know, going back and forth, working.  
**0:39:29-0:39:42:**  And I think that that allows me to ground myself back again.  And I think that, you know, it would be a beautiful kind of utopia sometimes thinking  about it, because we know that we have longs ways of going to get that right to steward  
**0:39:42-0:39:50:**  our landscapes back again as indigenous peoples.  This topic of grounding, I think, is really interesting, maybe also for you personally  at the moment, because you have so many different roles.  
**0:39:50-0:39:57:**  You've just had a book come out.  You've been on many, many podcasts.  I can imagine the demands on your time are really intense at the moment.  
**0:39:57-0:40:11:**  So what are you doing to help yourself stay grounded and manage your time and energy and  yourself through this process?  Yeah, one of the things that I do, especially my line of work, is that, you know, when I  
**0:40:11-0:40:22:**  finish my time working, I do self-care.  Like it doesn't matter whether I'm done with whatever I was working on.  And I think with being in academia, it teaches us that we don't necessarily have to value  
**0:40:22-0:40:28:**  our time.  We have to value the fact that we finish a product.  So, you know, we're working on this paper.  
**0:40:28-0:40:37:**  We're like, it doesn't matter if it takes like 24 hours, you have to work on the paper  until it's done.  And I think that for me, it's like setting those boundaries with time, right?  
**0:40:37-0:40:49:**  Because time is something that cannot necessarily be given back to us, that it cannot be rewarded.  Especially, you know, in this pandemic where we have lost so many relatives and we're still  grieving as, you know, as a global society.  
**0:40:49-0:40:59:**  And I think that oftentimes I also talk to my parents every day because, you know, we  don't necessarily live together.  But that's something that it's important for my family is to keep that line of communication  
**0:40:59-0:41:10:**  moving forward.  And I think, you know, being in community with my relatives, my parents on the daily  basis allows me to stay grounded to my roots despite being displaced, right, despite not  
**0:41:10-0:41:21:**  necessarily living with them.  And I think it's also a matter of like, you know, reading other stories or books that  are not necessarily elevated that do not make it as the New York Times bestsellers, right?  
**0:41:21-0:41:33:**  Because they're the books that not many people are picking up.  So it's reading more books on like the Black experience, African-American experience that  is not necessarily my lived experiences, but other stories that are important to elevate,  
**0:41:33-0:41:42:**  especially as we talk about healing, as we talk about climate change and, you know, healing  ourselves and healing our landscapes.  So those are my self-care practices.  
**0:41:42-0:41:52:**  Beautiful.  So this podcast is called The Great Fool.  What does living a great and full life mean for you?  
**0:41:52-0:42:08:**  I think living a great and full life is going back to that question, right, where we are  embracing our flaws, where we are not necessarily just embracing them, but actually doing something  to ratify our mistakes, right, to kind of put ourselves in the front and center of the  
**0:42:08-0:42:23:**  work that we do, where it's, you know, putting our spirituality back in the core of the work  that we do, especially as scientists or people who are working in the Western science branches,  where it's kind of like working towards becoming a good ancestor as opposed to becoming the  
**0:42:23-0:42:31:**  richest ancestor.  And I think that oftentimes they both come into conflict.  And I think living a grateful life is kind of, you know, part of ourselves that are not  
**0:42:31-0:42:43:**  necessarily something that is out there in the world, right, where there's no easy answers  or, you know, there's no easy solutions.  And I think that, you know, as long as we are happy with the life that we live, that's  
**0:42:43-0:42:50:**  kind of like living the grateful to that extent because our lives are also shortened.  Yeah, that's lovely.  Well, thank you so much.  
**0:42:50-0:42:59:**  I can't tell you how much I appreciate your time and the work that you do and that book,  which is a masterpiece, and I really hope everyone reads it.  So we'll definitely put a link to it in the show notes.  
**0:42:59-0:43:15:**  And I would say everybody listening to yourselves a favor and get a copy of it.  Thanks so much for listening to this episode of the Great Full podcast.  If you liked it, then please go ahead and subscribe and share it with a friend.  
**0:43:15-0:43:30:**  And I would love to get your questions answered here.  So if there's something that you would like answered or explored on this podcast, just  send me an email to podcast at the great full dot com, and I'll do my very best to get your  
**0:43:30-0:43:53:**  questions answered here on the show.  And that's the big take in this episode came from Blue Dot Sessions.  