---
title: Restoring Nature And Ourselves With Clara Rowe Ceo Restor Ep 13
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### The Great Full  (2021-11-07)  
### Author(s): Michelle Grant  

**0:00:00-0:00:05:**  It's this active choice, right?  How we're involved in the way that nature restores itself.  We can choose to be a part of that, we can choose not to be a part of that, and the real  
**0:00:14-0:00:15:**  choice is about us.  Yes, it's about nature in the short term, but really it's mostly about us and the  way that we will or will not have a future with the way that the earth continues to change.  
**0:00:25-0:00:33:**  Hi, everyone, and welcome to season two of the Great Full Podcast.  My name is Michelle Grant, your host, and I'm so happy to have you here as we continue  on our journey to explore how we can build more sustainable food systems, communities  
**0:00:43-0:00:44:**  and lives.  Gathering the wisdom of thinkers and doers to help each of us understand the big challenges,  decide how we want to shape solutions, and explore what leading change on our own terms  
**0:00:56-0:00:59:**  might look like.  In today's episode, I'm chatting with the amazing Claro Rowe, who is the CEO of a new  organization called Restore.  
**0:01:08-0:01:12:**  You can think of Restore like Google Maps, but for nature.  So it aims to massively scale up our efforts to restore ecosystems globally, and in the  process to tackle the challenges of climate change and biodiversity loss.  
**0:01:24-0:01:29:**  So Claro recently started as a CEO tasked with building up Restore, and she came to  Switzerland to do that via a number of different countries.  She actually grew up in Costa Rica, went on to study at the Yale School of Environment,  
**0:01:38-0:01:43:**  and then worked in Latin America for over 10 years with the Earthworm Foundation.  So Claro recently moved from Mexico to Zurich, Switzerland to join forces with the Crowder  Lab at ETH Zurich, and to bring Restore to life.  
**0:01:53-0:01:57:**  Claro and I were actually introduced by a colleague we have in common, and he told us  that we must meet each other.  We have so much in common.  
**0:02:00-0:02:05:**  And after our first chat, I completely understood why and had so many more questions for her  that I thought the second time we meet, I'd bring you along with us so you could join  our conversation.  
**0:02:10-0:02:16:**  I chatted to Claro just before the global launch of Restore, which happened very recently.  And since the launch, they've already connected 75,000 restoration sites around the world,  and were actually named as a finalist in the Earthshot Prize.  
**0:02:25-0:02:30:**  This was established by the Royal Foundation of the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge to really  incentivize change and help repair our planet in the next 10 years.  So I was super happy to chat with Claro before she headed off to shake William and Kate's  
**0:02:40-0:02:48:**  hand at the Earthshot Prize ceremony, and to learn more about her journey to Restore.  I was wondering if you could describe the work you do as if you were talking to a child  to help us understand a little bit what the potential impact is and how you're doing it.  
**0:02:58-0:03:01:**  I love that question.  If I had to describe it in the most simplest terms, I would say Restore is trying to help  make the world greener.  
**0:03:09-0:03:14:**  It's trying to help get trees in the ground and other plants that are so important to  us and that are so important to the natural world.  We know that that needs to happen for us because, you know, trees breathe CO2 the way that we  
**0:03:24-0:03:28:**  breathe oxygen, and that means that they help us fight climate change.  They also keep our communities cool by giving us shade and their roots hold soil and protect  us from floods.  
**0:03:36-0:03:40:**  So there's all of these ways that we really need them.  And they also create places for lots of things that we love, for the animals that we love,  for the systems that we love.  
**0:03:45-0:03:49:**  And so we're trying to help make that happen faster.  Whenever I look at pictures that you have on your different profiles, you always look  outdoors with a hat on and with a backpack, and it seems like you live and breathe the  
**0:03:58-0:03:59:**  outdoors.  So it makes sense you're in that line of work.  And I also know from chatting to you, you've had an interesting upbringing that perhaps  
**0:04:04-0:04:05:**  influenced that.  Could you share with us what you think it was about your upbringing that shaped what  you've studied and what you've gone on to work in?  
**0:04:12-0:04:13:**  Yeah.  So I was born in New Hampshire in the US.  I was born at home in this like really literally a log cabin.  
**0:04:20-0:04:22:**  And we lived in a really rural area.  Like at that time, there wasn't running water there.  And my parents had like, you know, a light bulb that was in the house.  
**0:04:30-0:04:34:**  And so like, that was my very, very early age.  And so we were outside all the time.  And then they moved to Costa Rica to another small town up in the mountains.  
**0:04:40-0:04:47:**  And Costa Rica is this place where protecting nature has become a part of the identity and  a part of the economy.  And so growing up in a place where that is such a core part to what a place can be really  
**0:04:55-0:04:58:**  shaped kind of my understanding of what I wanted to do.  And seeing that the way that people and the way that the environment interact, you know,  there were coffee farmers, and there was tourism beginning to grow and spread.  
**0:05:06-0:05:09:**  And there was also areas set aside in the way that all of those things came together.  And the struggles that that meant was very real to me when I was very young.  And I also think that it gave me the sense of also what it means to be from a place with  
**0:05:20-0:05:26:**  undue power in the world and what it means to carry that with you and how to do that  in the most respectful way possible.  And I do try to hold that with me, as I've worked in many parts of the world.  
**0:05:34-0:05:36:**  I'm sure I don't always do it perfectly.  But that that's something that I was very aware of from a very young age is what it  means to be in a place that isn't yours.  
**0:05:43-0:05:46:**  And that has been influenced by the place that you were originally from in ways that  maybe aren't always the best.  And you went to a Quaker school, right?  
**0:05:52-0:05:55:**  Tell me a bit more about that and how that's shaped you.  Yeah, I went to this small Quaker school.  There's I guess a few parts to it.  
**0:06:00-0:06:03:**  One is what it means to be a Quaker school and one is what it means to be this Quaker  school in this particular place in Costa Rica.  But you know, Quakerism is very focused on what it means to see good in everyone, see  
**0:06:14-0:06:19:**  God in everyone, if that's your particular belief.  And to kind of move through the world simply and peacefully.  We once a week at school participated in Quaker worship, which is silence essentially and  
**0:06:28-0:06:32:**  kind of the opportunity for you to connect with what you want to connect with.  And I think a lot of a lot of those things resonated with me.  And and we were set in was a really small community.  
**0:06:40-0:06:43:**  We had combined grades, you know, with 10 to 12 people in them.  So I knew the same people so well for all of my life.  And I also knew people of many ages, you know, the community was one where we all came together  
**0:06:51-0:06:53:**  K through 12.  And so that also I think, meant that I got a sense of what it means to be older and younger  and interact with all of those people at the same time.  
**0:07:01-0:07:06:**  And those contemplative practices from schools, have they carried forward for you or?  In some ways, I, I don't go to Quaker meeting, almost ever anymore.  But I do look for spaces of quiet.  
**0:07:19-0:07:27:**  And a few years ago, I kind of set myself this challenge of writing a haiku a day.  And that for me has been a very abbreviated contemplative space that I try to make every  day which is just an opportunity to try to take the essence of whatever has happened  
**0:07:38-0:07:42:**  and turn that into 17 syllables.  And so that's one little way.  Being outside for me is a big one.  
**0:07:46-0:07:47:**  Yeah.  But I always crave it more.  Yeah.  
**0:07:50-0:07:54:**  So we were connected through Scott, who was the founder of Forest Trust, now Earthworm  Foundation, and I actually wrote to him and said we were chatting today.  And are there any questions I should ask you?  
**0:07:59-0:08:03:**  And he was like, Firstly, she's awesome.  A real change maker.  And then he said, I should ask you about the work that you did in Guatemala.  
**0:08:07-0:08:09:**  Could you tell me more about that?  Yeah, of course.  So Earthworm Foundation's work is to partner with companies who are trying to make change  
**0:08:18-0:08:22:**  through their supply chains, often through commodity supply chains.  And so I came to Guatemala through palm oil, and through palm oil supply chains.  And we often think about palm oil in Southeast Asia, but Guatemala is growing to be one of  
**0:08:35-0:08:40:**  the largest palm oil producers in Latin America and therefore largest producers outside of  Indonesia and Malaysia.  And it's largely controlled by a few big companies, often old family companies.  
**0:08:50-0:08:55:**  And so a lot of the challenges associated with producing that palm oil are around the  conflict that big landowners have with local communities, and the impacts that there might  be because of contamination, some because of past deforestation, not the way that we  
**0:09:04-0:09:09:**  see in Southeast Asia, and often human rights associated with palm oil plantations and the  fact that you have many, many workers.  And so my work there was really about trying to create the space for change, for change  
**0:09:19-0:09:23:**  in the way that companies were interacting with communities for change in the way that  companies were treating their workers, and doing that through the leverage of international  supply chains who are asking for change, but doing that in a context where there was a  
**0:09:30-0:09:36:**  lot of polarization between local NGOs, civil society, the companies that are working there  and the communities themselves.  And so getting down into knowing that people forming relationships, opening up that space  
**0:09:44-0:09:50:**  for change through a combination of the pressure that they're feeling, but also hearing and  listening to their problems, and then figuring out what does it mean to actually change how  things are being done.  
**0:09:55-0:09:58:**  So I could spend an hour talking about it.  It was an incredible experience to really sit with such a range of different people  who have such different perspective about what's good and what they should do and what's  
**0:10:07-0:10:10:**  possible in this part of the world.  What was the most moving or fulfilling impact for you that came out of it?  There are really tangible things like we watched worker housing go from being 1.5 square meters  
**0:10:23-0:10:30:**  per person to being three square meters per person from having no drinking water in the  field all day and there being serious dehydration issues to there being clean potable water  throughout the plantation.  
**0:10:36-0:10:39:**  So some very concrete things there.  And then less tangible things where we saw company owners who actually started to listen  to workers and get worker complaints and do something about them and start to think differently  
**0:10:50-0:10:56:**  about the role that they could play and the role that they should play.  And it's slow and it's not perfect, but it's pretty incredible to see what can happen patiently  over time.  
**0:11:06-0:11:10:**  And what do you think was critical to that in bringing all of these diverse actors with  really different positions together?  What do you think was key to actually help them move forward towards a common goal?  
**0:11:18-0:11:24:**  I think one is being able to kind of live in gray spaces, live in the in between and  come into situations without judgment.  So even if you may have an opinion about how things should work out, being willing to sit  
**0:11:32-0:11:37:**  with what it is that each group is bringing to the table, helping people see things through  the same eyes often means like going to the field all together, all of those different  people and having a shared understanding of what happens, you know, joint fact finding  
**0:11:46-0:11:51:**  in some way that you're able to work with from there.  And then you went to Mexico, right?  And then I went to Mexico.  
**0:11:56-0:12:00:**  And what brought you then from Mexico to Switzerland to set up Restore?  So a number of years ago, I went to graduate school with the now founder of Restore, Tom  Crowther.  
**0:12:10-0:12:13:**  So we were at the Yale Forestry School together.  And actually, the paper that counted all the trees on earth, the trillion trees paper was  something that was born out of that time at Yale and a whole group of friends collaborated  
**0:12:22-0:12:26:**  on it, even though Tom was the lead author on that and kind of the key driver of that  idea.  And so we had that history.  
**0:12:31-0:12:36:**  And then last year, Tom called me up at some point and said, I'm starting this thing, you  know, and here's the idea and would you want to come lead it and so I molded over and I  came and I visited and I ultimately decided that it was a great challenge and that actually  
**0:12:47-0:12:54:**  I had seen this shift, not shift, but perhaps expansion in the way that the companies we  were working with at Earthworm Foundation were thinking about their impact.  So it used to be very, I'm focused on protecting forests, right, no deforestation and protecting  
**0:13:03-0:13:04:**  human rights.  And then with a shifting climate focus, there was this, how do I become carbon neutral?  How do I actually restore supply chains to be carbon sinks rather than emitters?  
**0:13:14-0:13:19:**  And so I saw this kind of opportunity to think about that, and from a different perspective,  and to kind of help accelerate what it means to have restoration at scale through supply  chains or in other places from a different perspective.  
**0:13:26-0:13:29:**  And so that felt like a really exciting kind of challenge to take on.  Very cool.  And we find ourselves at the start of the UN decade for ecosystem restoration, right?  
**0:13:35-0:13:41:**  So tell me a bit more about how Restore plays a role in that and how you hope to jointly  contribute to both climate change and biodiversity conservation.  Yeah, Restore had a beta launch at the beginning of the UN decade of ecosystem restoration.  
**0:13:51-0:13:54:**  So we really are kind of trying to help build on that momentum.  And I think momentum is a big piece of it.  You know, restoration could, in theory, contribute up to 30% of drawing down current emissions,  
**0:14:03-0:14:07:**  which is huge, but that means doing it at scale.  And so Restore is really being built to be able to enable and accelerate that restoration  and to help it happen at scale, right?  
**0:14:16-0:14:20:**  It's this digital platform that hosts lots of ecological information that helps you understand  what restoration can happen.  It helps you monitor it over time, helps you connect with other people doing restoration.  
**0:14:27-0:14:33:**  And it's really centered on the individual or group on the ground doing that work and  how we can be as useful as possible to those people doing that work.  And we see that as a kind of bottom up solution to scale.  
**0:14:45-0:14:49:**  And it's funny to say bottom up when we're a tech company, right?  When in many ways we're taking this big global perspective and providing global data.  But the way that we're trying to build the tool that we have is really focused on serving  
**0:14:58-0:14:59:**  needs on the ground.  So we hope we can bridge that gap in a way that helps ecosystem restoration happen more  quickly and more effectively.  
**0:15:06-0:15:07:**  Very nice.  So imagine that I'm a small NGO in Costa Rica or a group here in Switzerland and we want  to start a forest restoration project.  
**0:15:16-0:15:17:**  How do we interact with Restore?  How does it help us?  Yeah.  
**0:15:19-0:15:25:**  So Restore, depending on where you are in your project development, what you already  know may be useful to you for different reasons.  But let's say that you really know nothing yet about the particular area that you're  
**0:15:31-0:15:33:**  interested in restoring.  Can go on to restore if you know your GPS coordinates or you can simply identify it  visually.  
**0:15:39-0:15:44:**  You can draw a shape around that area that matches what you would like to restore.  And the platform will tell you what species of trees and other plants could occur there  naturally.  
**0:15:49-0:15:53:**  It's going to give you a sense of how much carbon is in the soil now and how much there  could be if it was restored.  A whole suite of other things.  
**0:15:56-0:15:59:**  You can look at elevation and temperature and precipitation.  So that gives you a starting point to think about what you might want to do to restore.  It also gives you some satellite imagery to say, okay, this is where I am today, but I'll  
**0:16:08-0:16:11:**  be able to track change over time and I'll be able to see that change.  I'll be able to share that change with others.  I might be able to share that with a funder and show that my impact is really working.  
**0:16:17-0:16:21:**  And then it taps you into this network of all the other people who are doing this kind  of work around the world.  So you can search for any other project in Costa Rica or any other project in the same  
**0:16:28-0:16:33:**  biome type that you are in and you can reach out, you can contact them, you can share lessons  learned, you can ask for advice.  And so again, depending on what you're looking for, a different range of things that restore  
**0:16:41-0:16:42:**  might be able to support you with.  Very nice.  And let's say I'm not running a project, but I'm just an everyday citizen concerned with  
**0:16:48-0:16:50:**  these topics.  Does it support me in any way to work out how I can make a contribution?  Yes.  
**0:16:56-0:16:59:**  And we hope to do that more over time.  So today, you can search projects for donation opportunities for volunteer opportunities.  If you are lucky enough to have a backyard, you could also think at that scale, you know,  
**0:17:12-0:17:16:**  what might I put in my backyard that's native that might support local biodiversity and  be a little part of that.  And what I hope in the future is that it is also able to help you visualize the other  
**0:17:26-0:17:30:**  ways that you have impact on the way that land is managed that you might not be thinking  about, right?  So the coffee that you're drinking in the morning, where's that coming from?  
**0:17:35-0:17:38:**  Is that shade grown coffee that has trees in there?  Is that coffee that is out in the sun and is actually not contributing to local biodiversity  from a connectivity perspective?  
**0:17:46-0:17:48:**  Same for everything that you eat, everything that you do.  And so as we build out, we really want to help people get a bigger understanding and  therefore take action around the way that they're having an impact on land.  
**0:17:57-0:17:58:**  Very nice.  And potentially improve transparency.  Absolutely.  
**0:18:00-0:18:01:**  Yeah.  If you have a sourcing location, you can actually see what's happening on the ground.  Exactly.  
**0:18:06-0:18:09:**  There are ways now that you can do that if you choose.  So there are coffee shops in Zurich that have heard about Restore and have said, actually,  you know, I'm single source, I know where my farmers are in Ethiopia, I'd like to put  
**0:18:18-0:18:21:**  that on Restore and show the agroforestry work that I'm doing.  So that is happening in very small scale ways.  And then we'd love to help accelerate that.  
**0:18:26-0:18:29:**  So it just becomes easier and easier and easier to see.  Very cool.  It also brings up questions of data privacy and data protection, right?  
**0:18:34-0:18:37:**  How is that factored into this whole platform?  Yeah.  So every user who's sharing their information on Restore has the ability to decide, do they  
**0:18:45-0:18:47:**  share it publicly or do they keep it private?  So if you have a particular site that you're working on, but for whatever reason, political  sensitivity, you decide that you don't want to share that, you can look at the data on  
**0:18:58-0:19:01:**  Restore, but simply set a switch that says private.  And that lives for you and for you to see and that won't be out in the world.  And so that's the way that we're trying to address it is through what is it that you  
**0:19:10-0:19:13:**  as a user want to be able to share?  But the basis is an open data concept or...  It is.  
**0:19:17-0:19:18:**  It is.  I mean, all of the information that we're providing on the platform today is open to  anyone.  
**0:19:22-0:19:27:**  The information that you share about your work, that's where you have the ability to  decide, you know, does the world see it or not?  Yeah.  
**0:19:31-0:19:36:**  That's interesting, as you say, in particular political contexts or...  Where there's land tenure dispute.  I mean, there's so many things that Restore can't do, right?  
**0:19:41-0:19:48:**  Restore can't tell you is, you know, is the restoration project here owned by the person  who's put it up there?  You know, we're not dealing with land tenure at this point.  
**0:19:51-0:19:55:**  We're giving warnings about the importance of paying attention to those things.  But the undertaking of, you know, mapping land tenure and dealing with all of the conflicts  isn't something that anyone has done at a global scale.  
**0:20:03-0:20:05:**  That's super interesting, though, to think of that layer of it.  And I imagine you really have to set clear boundaries with what you are and what you  aren't doing in such an undertaking.  
**0:20:11-0:20:12:**  Yes.  And it's interesting that we often...  We have these 10 principles on our website and, you know, they're a combination of what  
**0:20:20-0:20:22:**  are we and what are we not.  And I think that we continue to learn as we interact with more and more and more users  on our platform and simply people who are interested, what is most important for them  
**0:20:34-0:20:40:**  to hear to really be able to get to the heart of what we're doing and, you know, work to  consolidate that and get better at talking about that so that we avoid some of the common,  you know, misconceptions or barriers that might happen if we're not doing a good job  
**0:20:49-0:20:52:**  of saying who is it that we are and who is it that we aren't?  Yeah, which makes me think about this topic of communication generally.  And I was watching the TED talk of Tom Prado, who's the founder of Restore, and with quite  
**0:21:02-0:21:06:**  some vulnerability talks about some mistakes he made early on, particularly around this  One Trillion Trees initiative.  And he said, I made some naive and stupid mistakes in communication.  
**0:21:11-0:21:15:**  Could you tell me more about what happened there and what everybody's learned from it  in terms of communicating what you do?  Yeah.  
**0:21:19-0:21:25:**  So I mentioned the Three Trillion Trees from a number of years ago, and that was an attempt  to understand how many trees on earth there were.  And from there, Tom's lab went on in partnership with other scientific institutions to try  
**0:21:37-0:21:41:**  to estimate how many trees there could be in degraded land.  And that's where that one trillion number came from.  And that, you know, turned into so many pledges around the world to say, well, if this is  
**0:21:47-0:21:49:**  how many there could be, let's do it.  But the messaging and the concern around the messaging was planting trees versus natural  regeneration.  
**0:21:59-0:22:04:**  Number one concern about getting trees in the right places, making sure that, you know,  trees aren't getting planted on wetlands, right, and that that's not the right place  to do reforestation.  
**0:22:10-0:22:16:**  And so, you know, there was this beautiful, simple message, which is that we have this  ability to do a huge amount of forest restoration around the world and look at all of the trees  that we could bring here and look at the carbon impact that that could have.  
**0:22:26-0:22:32:**  That simplicity opened itself up to the criticism of, again, right trees in the right places,  avoiding monocultures, not destroying other important habitats at the expense of trees.  And so that blew up into what I think is ultimately a really positive conversation, which is,  
**0:22:42-0:22:47:**  well, how do we do it right, and how do we capture the imagination of everyone who can  be involved in this without letting that be too simple?  But it's meant, yeah, a firestorm in this particular niche of the, you know, of the  
**0:22:56-0:22:57:**  world.  Yeah.  Yeah.  
**0:22:59-0:23:01:**  And some might argue sometimes a firestorm is what we need, right, to, as you say, bring  all of these topics to the surface and actually work out how we're going to go forward.  Yeah.  
**0:23:06-0:23:07:**  Yeah.  And I guess there was potentially some criticism around a single focus on this as a silver  bullet that solves climate and biodiversity issues when we need this whole suite of practices.  
**0:23:16-0:23:17:**  Yeah.  It was really interesting to watch that from the sidelines.  Wow.  
**0:23:20-0:23:21:**  Yeah.  To me, in so many parts of my life, in so many parts of my work, the word and has become  so important.  
**0:23:29-0:23:30:**  Yes.  Like, it's not the but, right?  It's not either or.  
**0:23:35-0:23:39:**  How is it that we can restore and conserve and cut emissions, right?  Yeah.  Because those things are going to work alone.  
**0:23:42-0:23:48:**  And sometimes either we forget to say that in every conversation or we have implied it,  but it's too easy to focus in and then find what's wrong about that.  So we have to leave that space for the and.  
**0:23:54-0:23:55:**  Yeah.  I think we need that in our own lives as well.  Yes.  
**0:23:58-0:24:03:**  As human beings, we're so often, yeah, either or or but when, yeah, so often it's actually  an and that we need to be factoring in.  I'm interested to learn a bit more about your journey as well.  
**0:24:09-0:24:11:**  Because it's the first time you run an organization.  It is set something up coming into that.  What are some of the challenges you faced?  
**0:24:15-0:24:19:**  What are some of the hard lessons you've you've learned in the last, I guess it's a half a  year now, right?  Yeah, I started towards the beginning of the year.  
**0:24:24-0:24:26:**  So the months are racking up now.  I think one of the very first challenges that it actually took me a while to articulate  is what it means to come in to lead something when the idea was from someone else, right?  
**0:24:40-0:24:41:**  And of course, I know Tom really well.  And so we're able to dig into that quickly and easily.  But it's taken me time to get up to speed enough on the kernel of the idea to be a good  
**0:24:51-0:24:57:**  co-creator and then a good leader of the future direction.  And it's meant building in a lot of unstructured time together, right?  I kind of think about the traditional startup where friends were sitting around in a coffee  
**0:25:05-0:25:10:**  shop and like kicking around an idea for a few years before it actually started.  And that wasn't quite the order of things here.  And so that has been perhaps naively an unexpected challenge for me.  
**0:25:18-0:25:24:**  But but, you know, a good one to have to figure out what it means to own this idea myself  so that I am a part of really building what the vision is going to be moving forward.  I'm learning how to maneuver a board and a board that was kind of pulled together and  
**0:25:34-0:25:38:**  still needs to grow and still needs to be strengthened.  I'm learning how it is that I can balance what I need help with and all of the people  who want to help me and how it is that I can choose that and ask for help at the right  
**0:25:50-0:25:59:**  times and the right ways and be vulnerable enough to really take advantage of that help.  And I have a mentor from my past work who I've gone to often and, you know, realize  once you have that relationship, you know how to kind of work through problems with  
**0:26:07-0:26:08:**  someone.  It totally changes the game.  And so we're kind of rebuilding that in a new context from a new role has been a challenge.  
**0:26:16-0:26:17:**  Yeah, interesting.  And I can imagine all of that.  I mean, it's an ambitious project on its own.  
**0:26:22-0:26:29:**  And I can just imagine it not only that, but also moving into a new context, it could feel  overwhelming at times.  So what has helped you manage the overwhelm and navigate this ambitious project in a new  
**0:26:36-0:26:37:**  place?  Yeah, I know I don't get it right all the time.  No one does.  
**0:26:43-0:26:50:**  You know, being outside exercising is always a big one for me, taking time to write to  reflect when I can.  Finding those people that I can be vulnerable with and making sure that I don't hold all  
**0:26:56-0:27:01:**  of that in is really important.  Being patient with myself.  Yeah, I, I continue to kind of search for all of those things.  
**0:27:09-0:27:11:**  And I think bring them all together.  Some of them work at different times.  Is there anything any challenges that you feel you've faced in the last 10 years of  
**0:27:19-0:27:25:**  your career that you feel related to gender to being a woman leader in a conservation  space?  Not necessarily in the conservation space specifically, but I certainly have found myself  
**0:27:33-0:27:38:**  in situations where conservation intersects with other parts of the work that I do where  I am one of a very few women, you know, conservation and ag in Latin America, for example, conservation  and tech with Restore.  
**0:27:48-0:27:53:**  And it just means that it can be a bit lonely.  And I might feel or need to prove myself a bit more.  I think my biggest hope is that there are more of us in those spaces and in those intersecting  
**0:28:04-0:28:07:**  spaces, because I think it's, you know, good for those spaces.  I think it will be an important part of change.  And I think it will make it less lonely as well.  
**0:28:12-0:28:16:**  What do you think we need to bring more women to these spaces?  Oh, God.  I mean, there's Yeah, so many structural things to support women working and to support men  
**0:28:24-0:28:27:**  not working and to culturally make both of those things.  Okay.  Yeah.  
**0:28:29-0:28:30:**  I mean, those are the foundations.  And I mean, many, many other things on top of it.  Yeah, you were talking before about how important it is for you to spend time in nature.  
**0:28:38-0:28:44:**  And you also spend your life exploring restoration and regeneration in nature.  What does that taught you about these topics in your own life?  What nature can teach us to influence how we live and lead?  
**0:28:53-0:28:55:**  It's slow, it's diverse.  Just the way we can't only plant trees.  There's not one thing that will regenerate us.  
**0:29:02-0:29:07:**  You know, there are forests and wetlands and grasslands and all of those things are important.  And we can plant trees and we can simply fence off areas and watch them grow.  And that diversity in the way that restoration regeneration happens, I think is a big lesson  
**0:29:17-0:29:18:**  to me.  And and the scale of it, knowing that setting things aside and giving them time, you know,  giving myself time that will result in regeneration.  
**0:29:29-0:29:32:**  But there are things I can do to make it happen faster, right?  There's things that we can do to make restoration happen faster to create those enabling conditions.  What are those things for you specifically?  
**0:29:40-0:29:43:**  I think for me, they are.  I mean, we've talked about them a bit.  But you know, going out and taking a walk, taking out my camera and looking at the red  
**0:29:50-0:29:55:**  kites, the raptors that are right by my house and taking a moment to really focus in on  those, spending time with people that I like and playing games and laughing and like, remembering  what it's like to just completely let go of the weight of some of the work that we do.  
**0:30:06-0:30:12:**  And yeah, making sure that that there are many parts of my life that give me meaning,  not just my work.  I think that's a massive one.  
**0:30:16-0:30:17:**  Yeah, it's hard.  It's very hard.  Especially when you do care about your work.  
**0:30:21-0:30:22:**  Yeah.  I find there's just so much overlap then between work and free time and people and, yeah, the  conversations that you have in your free time end up being about work because you've met  
**0:30:31-0:30:35:**  there and you'll care about those things.  And I think it's this feedback loop of perhaps overblown importance.  It's not that I don't, I think that the work that I do is so important.  
**0:30:45-0:30:50:**  And I also think that when that becomes our world, it becomes the only thing that's important.  And there are all of these other things that are personally important, but I think that  we can get really trapped in that bubble of this is the only important way to spend my  
**0:30:59-0:31:00:**  time.  Yeah, I very much agree with that.  I know from talking to you, you also have this interest in personal development, leadership  
**0:31:05-0:31:11:**  development topics in parallel to the what of the work that you do.  So also the how we do it.  I was wondering if there are any books or people that have really influenced you in  
**0:31:17-0:31:19:**  that respect?  Scott is one.  Scott Poynton, who founded the Forest Trust, now Earthworm Foundation, he created a lot  
**0:31:26-0:31:31:**  of space at Earthworm for reflecting on what it means to nurture yourself in a way that  allows you to nurture the world.  And that was a really important part of shaping the organization and therefore shaping kind  
**0:31:39-0:31:45:**  of how I experienced work, and that I hope to bring that to restore as well.  It doesn't always work perfectly because, you know, we're human and we're, you know,  and we get busy.  
**0:31:51-0:31:56:**  But I think that's a thing that I come back to.  And, you know, he's the person who I sort of look to when thinking about how to be in  the in between and what it means to sit with things and with people who are different from  
**0:32:08-0:32:13:**  ourselves and have that be a part of change, and what it means to also pull inspiration  from unusual places and making change.  You know, what does it mean to take poetry and art and have that be a piece of individual,  
**0:32:22-0:32:23:**  even one on one change?  I think, you know, we can conceptualize that as part of culture and as part of what it  means to have massive change in the way that societies think about things.  
**0:32:33-0:32:38:**  But then there's this one on one element that he really draws out that is really important.  Yeah.  And I read a lot of fiction.  
**0:32:41-0:32:47:**  I love Barbara Kingsolver, you know, like that I've loved forever.  And they aren't books about leadership per se.  They aren't books that are telling you about how the world works in a typical way.  
**0:32:54-0:33:00:**  But they are so embedded in nature and people and small descriptions and interactions and  relationships and give me a lot of joy and encourage me to pay attention in ways that  I do think ultimately, are a part of leadership and are a part of keeping focused on the reason  
**0:33:14-0:33:19:**  that we're doing these things, which ultimately, I think makes us good leaders.  So not the typical book.  Yeah.  
**0:33:23-0:33:24:**  Beautiful.  So this podcast is called The Grateful.  So I always like to ask guests at the end of each interview, what does living a great  
**0:33:33-0:33:35:**  and full life mean for you?  Finding the space to be present and to be able to love the things and the people that  bring us joy.  
**0:33:47-0:33:53:**  And to be able to take that and give it back to those people to the world.  Yeah, lots of little little things seem to be the really actually the most important  part of it all.  
**0:34:01-0:34:03:**  Yeah, absolutely.  Lovely.  Is there anything I haven't asked you that you would like to talk about?  
**0:34:07-0:34:09:**  I think we have touched on this a bit.  But you know, for the restoration space, and I think this narrative is coming out more  and more.  
**0:34:15-0:34:20:**  And I think, you know, Tom is using some of the mistakes from that original Trillion Trees  paper to help change this narrative.  But restoration is so many things.  
**0:34:28-0:34:32:**  And that's the only way that it's going to achieve the scale that we need it to, to be  able to help solve our current climate emergency.  And so it's agroforestry.  
**0:34:39-0:34:41:**  It's regenerating soils.  Yes, it's forests.  And those are very important.  
**0:34:43-0:34:47:**  Then there's kelp forests in coasts.  And there are, you know, wetlands and peatlands and grasslands and there are savannas.  And so that's something that I just want to keep reinforcing is that restoration is so  
**0:34:56-0:35:01:**  many different things and so many ecosystems and so many different ways of doing it.  Yeah, really important message.  And I'll put the link in the show notes to this discussion around the Trillion Trees  
**0:35:08-0:35:11:**  paper and also the TED Talk that goes into detail what happened there.  And there was just a Guardian article last week that also talks a bit about it.  The headline is like, I never said to plant a trillion trees.  
**0:35:18-0:35:21:**  So, so I think that is also a good one.  Okay, fantastic.  I'll put them in the show notes in case anyone wants to go down the rabbit hole.  
**0:35:29-0:35:34:**  Thanks so much for listening to this episode of the Great Full podcast.  If you liked it, then please go ahead and subscribe and share it with a friend.  And I would love to get your questions answered here.  
**0:35:41-0:35:46:**  So if there's something that you would like answered or explored on this podcast, just  send me an email to podcast at the great full dot com and I'll do my very best to get your  questions answered here on the show.  
**0:35:56-0:35:59:**  And that's it for this episode of the Great Full podcast.  Thanks for listening.  And I'll see you next time.  