<script src="https://cdn.podlove.org/web-player/embed.js"></script>
    <script>
        document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', function () {
          if (document.readyState === 'interactive' || document.readyState === 'complete') {
            podlovePlayer('#player', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/The Great Full/Spicing-up-the-food-system-and-our-careers-with-meret-brotbek-soul-spice-ep-6.json', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/The Great Full/config.json').then(registerExternalEvents('player'))
          }
        })
  </script>---
title: Spicing Up The Food System And Our Careers With Meret Brotbek Soul Spice Ep 6
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### The Great Full  (2020-12-19)  
### Author(s): Michelle Grant  

**0:00:00-0:00:22:**  Hi, I'm Michelle, and welcome to The Great Full Podcast, a place where we contemplate  how we can eat, live, and lead each day to build a more sustainable world.  On today's show, I'm chatting with Merritt Brotbeck, who is a climate activist and also  
**0:00:22-0:00:32:**  a social entrepreneur.  Merritt's a director at Climate Kick, which is an EU-based knowledge and innovation community  that tackles climate change.  
**0:00:32-0:00:43:**  But I mostly spoke to her today about that second hat that she wears, the Entrepreneur  Hat.  So in this episode, she shares her experience as the co-founder and managing partner of  
**0:00:43-0:00:56:**  a spice company called Sol Spice.  And if you live in Switzerland or Germany, you may have seen their products on the shelves.  They're not only beautifully decorated spice blends that look amazing, but they also have  
**0:00:56-0:01:10:**  a really interesting story behind them.  And Sol Spice was really created to showcase another way to grow, trade, and use spices,  a way that's more ethical and sustainable and tries to create value for both producers  
**0:01:10-0:01:23:**  and consumers.  So today, Merritt shares her journey that's taken her from being a lawyer to an MBA graduate  to working at Unilever to eventually find her passion and calling at the interface of  
**0:01:23-0:01:41:**  food systems and climate change.  Preparing for this, I realised I have a bunch of your spices in my cupboard at home, not  only because they're delicious, but also because you have this really beautiful packaging.  
**0:01:41-0:01:51:**  And it stands out and catches the eye.  And I was wondering if you could tell me a little bit more about the message you're trying  to send with this lovely name, Sol Spice, and with the beautiful packaging that comes  
**0:01:51-0:01:57:**  with it.  Essentially, it's really in the name.  So it's really spices with a soul.  
**0:01:57-0:02:08:**  So spices who have a story, who come, who are not just any spice, but really who really  have a direct link to the origin.  And the packaging is really reflecting the same.  
**0:02:08-0:02:16:**  So every packaging has a unique pattern.  And for single spices, that unique pattern is related to the country of origin of the  spice.  
**0:02:16-0:02:31:**  So we always then look for, I mean, when we create a new spice and all the spices, for  instance, from Sri Lanka, a single spices will have a Sri Lankan type of pattern.  So it's really always trying to show that there is a link between the product inside  
**0:02:31-0:02:44:**  and the origin of it.  And in the packaging for us, it was really important that it also looks very valuable  because spices are actually super valuable and have been traded like gold in ancient  
**0:02:44-0:02:54:**  times.  And we really wanted that it looks like a little piece of jewellery that you have in  your kitchen and that you can really put it out and use it as decoration almost in your  
**0:02:54-0:02:59:**  kitchen.  So that's basically the concept behind it.  Lovely.  
**0:02:59-0:03:09:**  And it's funny you say that because I said I have in my cupboard, but actually I have  them lined up on the bench so that I can see them because like you say, it's almost like  jewellery for the kitchen.  
**0:03:09-0:03:18:**  And everyone does that.  I mean, everyone, everyone I know who has our spices really tries to put them out.  So it really serves a little bit of a decoration in the kitchen when you come in.  
**0:03:18-0:03:34:**  So that is, I think it can serve that purpose to enhance and embellish your kitchen decoration.  Not just the food, also the kitchen.  And you mentioned, you know, that spices have been traded for the longest time.  
**0:03:34-0:03:44:**  That's very interesting because when I think about spices, I immediately think about the  spice trade.  I think about colonialism and I think about the influence that that's had on these value  
**0:03:44-0:03:57:**  chains up until today and especially who profits from it and the impacts from it.  And so we have this, yeah, these products that have a kind of sometimes murky history  and a lot of challenges associated with them.  
**0:03:57-0:04:13:**  I'm really interested to hear from you what you think the biggest challenges are in the  spice industry today and how you're trying to tackle these with Soul Spice.  So the spice industry, I think to this date has been one that's been very slow to shift  
**0:04:13-0:04:22:**  and change and everything you say is absolutely right.  So it has been a rather sad history.  Like if you look at how spices were traded in the past and even if you go to these countries  
**0:04:22-0:04:36:**  and you see the history behind it, it is very closely linked to colonialism, to slavery,  to very, very dramatic practices and oppression techniques that were used by Western countries  at the time.  
**0:04:36-0:04:50:**  And I think to this date, it's not been, there has not been a huge demand for change like  on chocolate or tea and that's principally because there is basically used spices everywhere  and almost every product that you buy, you will have some level of spices in there because  
**0:04:50-0:05:01:**  it's really the primary flavoring, but in very, very small amounts.  And because of that, the consumers don't really care about which spices are in the product.  And so there hasn't been a strong industry push.  
**0:05:01-0:05:14:**  And then the big industries players that are in that, that only do spices like McCormick  and others, they are doing a little bit of sustainability, but it stays quite limited  compared to other industry players.  
**0:05:14-0:05:29:**  And there is not really a big push from the consumer to make that change.  And I think so that leads us still today to have quite an untransparent industry in spices  overall, a lot of price volatility and actually for the farmers, very, a lot of unclarity  
**0:05:29-0:05:40:**  on what is the price because of all these middlemen, high dependency on the market,  which is really, really changing a lot.  And then there is also for the consumer, a lot of contamination.  
**0:05:40-0:05:56:**  So really the practice of using a lot of pesticides and inputs in general for, for products in  general, but also spices, but because spices really are not massively processed, they,  they are plucked, they're washed and that's it more or less.  
**0:05:56-0:06:07:**  So a lot of the residues then tend to stay on the spice.  And that's why we really focus only on organic because we believe that's really the only  way to have unique quality.  
**0:06:07-0:06:21:**  And it really makes a difference between traditional spices and organic spices at the origin, because  it's a completely different agricultural technique and growing techniques as well.  Which is if you buy industrial spices, just really not the same taste.  
**0:06:21-0:06:31:**  And then the last problem, I think that it's not just with spices industry, but farming  in general, but we, but we see it a lot in within our farmer groups is that the population  of the farm is very old.  
**0:06:31-0:06:51:**  So most of the people, farming spices are certainly above 50, but often also above 60,  sometimes 70 with no real next generation taking over because the prices are so low.  And because there is not a real interest from the younger generation to take over that that  
**0:06:51-0:07:05:**  creates a real problem of how will we manage having still good spices and good ingredients  of agricultural raw materials in general, in the next generation.  That's just a brief overview of some of the things that we are trying to do differently  
**0:07:05-0:07:14:**  in our project, but it is quite a challenging concept.  That's what I find interesting about your model is you are trying to tackle different  aspects of this.  
**0:07:14-0:07:25:**  So the agricultural production, but then also seemingly quite a lot on the social economic  side.  Can you talk a bit more about that, the model you use and how you hope to have an impact?  
**0:07:25-0:07:37:**  Yeah.  So what we do differently or what we focused on is really working directly with farmer  cooperatives on the ground where farmers organize themselves into groups, own a cooperative.  
**0:07:37-0:07:45:**  And that's we, we then work with these cooperatives directly.  So this allows us really to completely get rid of middlemen and only work with the farmers  directly.  
**0:07:45-0:07:59:**  And that already removed a lot of pressure on pricing to make sure that everything we  pay really then goes to the farmer.  And we also really then support the farmers in going into niche products and high quality.  
**0:07:59-0:08:15:**  And that's also by really being very diversified on the ground.  So having really regenerative type of agriculture where multiple crops grow on the same plot.  So farmers really don't have just one specialty and it's not an industrial production, but  
**0:08:15-0:08:30:**  it's really grown almost you really feel when you're visiting our farm that you're in the  forest where you have a mix of ginger and turmeric, which grow in the ground mixed with  pepper, which is the wine or vanilla, which is another wine or then trees, which such  
**0:08:30-0:08:40:**  as cinnamon or nutmeg.  And this combination also allows the farmer.  I mean, it has really a short, medium and long-term investment because all these crops  
**0:08:40-0:08:49:**  grow in different times.  So a cinnamon tree takes four to five years and nutmeg tree even longer.  So it also is a real investment strategy by the farmers.  
**0:08:49-0:09:03:**  And we really try to push our farmers to be as diversified as possible.  And lastly, what we do then in Germany on the production, so all the production or all  the ingredients and control production center in Germany, which is basically a partnership  
**0:09:03-0:09:20:**  there that we have with rehabilitation center, which particularly works with people who have  psychological issues, particularly stress or burnout, who need a place where they can  start reworking again and get used again to having a normal job, essentially.  
**0:09:20-0:09:28:**  And there we have a very successful partnership since last year where they manage our entire  production.  So we train them to do the mixes.  
**0:09:28-0:09:35:**  They do the filling by hand, the replicating and the entire funding.  Really interesting.  It speaks definitely to the power of partnerships.  
**0:09:35-0:09:49:**  And so from this work so far, what's the kind of story about how SoulSpice has impacted  somebody's life that's touched you the most?  The thing impact is always difficult because when you're in the weeds of it, you don't  
**0:09:49-0:10:02:**  necessarily see anymore what the big picture is.  I do feel the biggest impact that we still have is that we were always able so far to  pay a premium of at least 20 percent, but often actually 100 percent on the crops that  
**0:10:02-0:10:17:**  we on the ingredients that we're buying and that we just really buy our raw materials  at a much higher price than what the market is buying.  And to give you an example, there is pepper, black pepper, goes as low as two euros a kilo.  
**0:10:17-0:10:32:**  And we, our farmers still pay 10 to 12 euros when they deliver high quality.  And I think, again, for us, this high quality is very important because if you do look at  the market prices, it's just very, very difficult to differentiate.  
**0:10:32-0:10:46:**  So we really work on acquiring and pushing the farmers to produce premium and to know  how to increase the level of premium quality that they're able to produce.  And through that, I still feel that for the farmers, the biggest leverage that you can  
**0:10:46-0:10:58:**  have is improving the price of what he produces, because many other things, that's the fundamental  of our work.  And then obviously we would like to do more and look at how can we help support the farmers  
**0:10:58-0:11:08:**  through other ways, but we feel getting the pricing right and consistently right, that's  really the basis.  And if we get that right, continue to get that right, I think we can really make a big  
**0:11:08-0:11:22:**  impact on these farmers.  And we've seen many farm groups that are more or older or that we also work with.  All their kids are going to university, they have pretty nice houses, and you can really  
**0:11:22-0:11:30:**  see that actually paying a better price or getting a better price actually makes a big  change in the lives of these farmers.  Absolutely.  
**0:11:30-0:11:44:**  And do you notice an impact the farming communities that you work with by paying a higher price?  Are you noticing yet that that's making farming as a profession more attractive to the younger  generations or is that something that's too early to say?  
**0:11:44-0:11:56:**  I think it is too early to say.  Also because I think it goes together with so many other factors in the country.  So I think it depends on what are the other, what are the alternatives that are available.  
**0:11:56-0:12:11:**  And I can fully understand that when farmers have sent their kids to university and that  they're super educated, that it's difficult for them then to come back and be a farmer  because we also don't see that really happening in Europe.  
**0:12:11-0:12:26:**  And I think the conscious choice that we see much more actually happening now in Europe  where younger generations are really interested of not working anymore in front of a computer  and want to go back to farming, that's still very limited, at least from what I can see  
**0:12:26-0:12:35:**  with the different farm groups that we're working with.  Because even if the conditions improve, it is still a hard life where you need to be  outside, you need to do a lot of things.  
**0:12:35-0:12:51:**  So I think, yeah, that's not, at least we can't, I wouldn't be, couldn't say that now  thanks to us, we have funded so many new farmers, unfortunately, to move back in.  And I think there would be, would need to be much more people working like us in these  
**0:12:51-0:13:06:**  countries to really start making a real shift in that place, unfortunately.  And I think it speaks to the importance of systems approaches too, that so much is interconnected.  It's not just one intervention that's going to change what, you know, a challenge that's  
**0:13:06-0:13:09:**  linked to so many other systems.  Absolutely.  Absolutely.  
**0:13:09-0:13:25:**  We are just one, like one piece of the puzzle, unfortunately, in the whole thing.  Absolutely.  And so how has this work influenced you personally, in terms of how you cook and eat and perhaps  
**0:13:25-0:13:38:**  source your, your food and well, of course your spices, it's changed, but what about  more generally?  Yeah, so for spices, obviously I use our own, but in general, what I do, I've noticed I  
**0:13:38-0:13:51:**  am much more picky than before.  So I always have paid a certain level of attention, but really right now I really pay attention  to buy organic, to buy regional in priority whenever possible.  
**0:13:51-0:13:59:**  So, and even if there is a higher price, right, because I know what the difference it makes  as well on your personal health.  And I look much more at labels.  
**0:13:59-0:14:09:**  So whenever I don't buy fresh, whenever I don't know the origins, I really look at,  okay, what is really in there?  And because I know a little bit where the ingredients come from, I also know, okay,  
**0:14:09-0:14:23:**  what's the likelihood of pesticides having been used?  And I know for instance, I really on many conventional products, if organic is not available,  if the origin is Spain, for instance, I don't buy it because I know Spain uses a lot of  
**0:14:23-0:14:36:**  inputs.  So then, so these, I think I am much more of a conscious consumer and will accept not  to eat certain things or not to cook certain things if I don't get them in the quality  
**0:14:36-0:14:45:**  that I, that I want.  So, and I do cook much more myself.  Now I really take the time to really avoid processed food whenever possible.  
**0:14:45-0:14:53:**  And you have such amazing spice blends that really make anything taste good.  So it makes it easier.  Exactly.  
**0:14:53-0:15:00:**  If you have the right spices, cooking becomes easy.  Yeah, absolutely.  So I'm really interested in your personal journey.  
**0:15:00-0:15:11:**  I know a bit about, about your background and I think it's an interesting story.  How did you sort of become the spice lady?  So what event or series of events brought you where you are today?  
**0:15:11-0:15:23:**  So I think it's really a bit more of a coincidence.  I never really planned to be exactly where I am today, but I've always just looked, been  lucky enough to be presented with cool opportunities.  
**0:15:23-0:15:38:**  And initially, so I studied at the very beginning law and conflict management, then worked in  a corporate for a few years in that space actually.  And then after a while decided I wanted to do more and that the corporate space alone  
**0:15:38-0:15:53:**  was not fulfilling or not fully aligned with my values.  And did an MBA where I specialized in social entrepreneurship and impact investing.  And that's certainly where I first got exposed to value chains and to these more social entrepreneurship  
**0:15:53-0:16:05:**  practices who got super interested in it.  And somehow after that, I wouldn't have known frankly, also at the beginning, I was really  one of the last one in my MBA knowing what I wanted to do, despite having actually taken  
**0:16:05-0:16:13:**  the decision at the very beginning.  I will know immediately, but actually it took me a long time to find out which direction  I wanted to go.  
**0:16:13-0:16:20:**  And then I worked for three years for Unilever.  So I joined after my MBA, I joined Unilever, which I felt was a corporate, which was very  aligned with my values.  
**0:16:20-0:16:34:**  And I must say it was quite a revelation to sides, positive and negative.  Like the positive side is really, I realized the real power, the sheer power of procurement  and particularly of procurement of private entities.  
**0:16:34-0:16:47:**  And Unilever at the time had bought for 35 billion a year of raw materials.  When you see the size of recovery packages at the moment for COVID, which is also, and  you're like, oh, it's so much.  
**0:16:47-0:17:03:**  But when you think that such an economic player every year spent that amount on raw materials,  you're like, well, if they bought differently, imagine the change they can make and the sheer  economic power that they can have to influence value chains.  
**0:17:03-0:17:12:**  And so, and for me, that was really fascinating.  I didn't quite realize it before that.  On the other hand, what I did see is in these large organization and Unilever is really  
**0:17:12-0:17:26:**  a progressive organization who has a lot of limitations, who wants to do a lot, and they  are really trying to be serious about it.  However, you still see that the sustainability they promote on the ground is largely incremental.  
**0:17:26-0:17:38:**  So it's not, you know, because they need such big volumes and they don't have flexibility  on price.  So fundamentally the sustainability doesn't really question the agricultural policies  
**0:17:38-0:17:52:**  which work, which are conventional, which push for inputs, which push for productivity.  There is also this constant pressure on price, so they don't really have any leverage to  say, well, we pay more, or if you pay more, it's so small.  
**0:17:52-0:18:03:**  And often, I mean, the case that they had in Kenya, they increased productivity by 30%,  but then the price dropped because of that equally.  And so the farmer was left with exactly the same.  
**0:18:03-0:18:15:**  And these things they're so inherent in a way, because if you can't give more to the  farmer, at the end, if he has still, you know, just so little to live by, then you don't  really change the system.  
**0:18:15-0:18:29:**  If you don't, can't kind of push for more diversified agriculture on the ground, then  you will continue depleting the soil, even if you do it in a slightly better way, it's  not enough, so to say.  
**0:18:29-0:18:43:**  And I think the level of ambition that's needed can only be shown by much smaller organizations  ultimately, because these big players, they follow once they see others doing it, if there  is enough small organization that demonstrates that you can create a lot of value through  
**0:18:43-0:18:55:**  procurement to higher quality, they're not stupid, they will go for it, because they  will see that the consumers will start moving over to a different quality.  But that first needs to be proven.  
**0:18:55-0:19:07:**  And that's a little bit why then, when after I mean, there was a number of management changes  in India, right, they started to leave and then have the opportunity to create the spice  company.  
**0:19:07-0:19:19:**  And because we have just happened to have friends who were working on spice projects  who wanted as well to create the brand, and that's all led them to us creating that spice  brand, which is more of a coincidence, but then we said, let's do it.  
**0:19:19-0:19:27:**  And at the time, it's kind of like a very small risk, let's try.  And in the meantime, we've invested much more initially planned and it became a much bigger  project.  
**0:19:27-0:19:39:**  But at the time when we launched, we went in there like every entrepreneur quite naively,  and just then stuck with the idea and got determined to push it through.  So I think that's what led us to where we are today.  
**0:19:39-0:19:48:**  I think that's the best way to start, I think a lot of things wouldn't start if one realised  what was actually involved in the process in the beginning.  Yeah, you can never do it.  
**0:19:48-0:20:00:**  If we knew half of the things that we have to face, we would never have done it.  So it's good to go in there as naive as possible, because then you actually have the strength  to overcome different obstacles that you face.  
**0:20:00-0:20:13:**  Absolutely.  And as you mentioned, you sometimes feel like a small piece of the puzzle.  And that means that, you know, there's the chance that you can feel frustrated or that  
**0:20:13-0:20:20:**  you may be not having the impact that you want.  Or you just, you know, face a lot of challenges and don't have the same resources as big organisations  to tackle them.  
**0:20:20-0:20:32:**  So in those moments, what helps you to stay energised and inspired and focus and keep  going?  Yes, I think the one thing that always keeps us very energised is positive feedback from  
**0:20:32-0:20:42:**  customers.  And when we see customers being really enthusiastic about our product and really thanking us for  doing the work, then you feel actually that you're serving someone so that you're not  
**0:20:42-0:20:52:**  doing it for nothing.  So that is very energising always.  And the other thing I would say is when we visit the farmers and see the farmers and  
**0:20:52-0:21:03:**  they're like, well, how lucky are we that this is our job, you know, to help these people  to walk around in these beautiful gardens and to see how we can create value out of  that.  
**0:21:03-0:21:14:**  So I think it's very energising to see the beneficiaries and to have to really be on  that ground so that it's not very abstract.  We know we're working with and we have this direct connection.  
**0:21:14-0:21:26:**  And that for me is always very rewarding.  The last thing is when I see big companies and the big restructuring and how slow things  are and the frustration of colleagues like, oh, how lucky am I that I have a company that  
**0:21:26-0:21:38:**  I you know, that is fully aligned with what I want, with who I am, with my values and  where, you know, I don't have to go through this management frustrations because we are  the ones managing it.  
**0:21:38-0:21:48:**  So that's that's also the three things that I try to think about when I do feel frustrated  or feel down, which, as you say, does happen.  Yeah.  
**0:21:48-0:21:59:**  I think it's important to talk about it.  We tend to I don't know, I know particularly founder stories are always shown, you know,  in the spotlight with a lot of sparkles, but not always a lot of space to talk about what  
**0:21:59-0:22:07:**  is challenging.  And that's something I find interesting about you, too.  So you describe yourself as a climate activist and entrepreneur because you actually split  
**0:22:07-0:22:22:**  your time, as I understand it, between, you know, a role in a bigger existing organization,  climate kick funded through the EU and then your own organization.  So I do something similar and I know a lot of people kind of sometimes find it interesting.  
**0:22:22-0:22:31:**  So I'd love to hear from you.  How does that splitting your time like that help support your overall mission and help  you cross fertilize ideas?  
**0:22:31-0:22:40:**  Yes, I personally love portfolio, what I call portfolio career.  So that's just one thing that having multiple things, those are a way to create resilience  and catch your bets.  
**0:22:40-0:22:44:**  I like that.  I'm going to start using that term.  Thank you.  
**0:22:44-0:22:57:**  Portfolio career.  So I think climate kick is very different because it's really I mean, it's a EU agency  focused on climate innovation and really it aims to create distance change.  
**0:22:57-0:23:10:**  So it's really working with policymakers and we aim to transform entire places value chain  by working across all levers of change.  So really working and having these very systems approach and systems innovation to see how  
**0:23:10-0:23:23:**  can we really transform entire systems and going a step further.  And source bias in that context is a much more like very focused intervention, concrete  in one place, very much on the ground.  
**0:23:23-0:23:35:**  And I think that they do actually complement themselves very much.  So I didn't actually know it when I started at the beginning, but in climate kick, I often  miss the completeness where I feel like we are so high up and it's so complex and you  
**0:23:35-0:23:47:**  feel that the change happens so slow and okay, how can we, you know, you don't always be  actually the direct impact that you're having because you're just part of a constellation  that makes the impact happen.  
**0:23:47-0:23:58:**  And on the other hand, and source bias sometimes misses like, oh, we're just such a small piece  of the puzzle.  How can we really make the difference or create the impact that we want to have in the food  
**0:23:58-0:24:06:**  system?  And I think this compliments actually each other very well, because when I get frustrated  with one thing, I can have the other, which balance each other out.  
**0:24:06-0:24:15:**  There must be as well in Switzerland, I noticed that these two worlds are actually not very  separated.  So there is constant when I go to climate kick events with constant people that I know  
**0:24:15-0:24:24:**  as well through source bias and vice versa.  So it's not like these are two different worlds.  It's almost like source bias is a niche pioneering approach to demonstrate what can be done.  
**0:24:24-0:24:35:**  While climate kick is much more focused on, okay, how do you take a multitude of these  pioneering approaches to then transform them into a systems change and work with policymakers  to make them happen?  
**0:24:35-0:24:49:**  And so in that place, it is quite complimentary and I really enjoy the combination.  Yeah, I have a similar experience.  I like to be able to comment things from both sides.  
**0:24:49-0:24:59:**  So we're coming up to this insanely busy time of the year, or we're already in the middle  of it.  So in these really busy periods, what are some of the most important things that you  
**0:24:59-0:25:07:**  do to try and align your time and your energy with your values and your priorities?  It's a good question.  It's always difficult.  
**0:25:07-0:25:21:**  I think what I've really tried to do is to reflect a lot on as well what gives me energy  and what doesn't and adjust my work accordingly.  So what I do do much more deliberately is I know when I'm productive in the day and  
**0:25:21-0:25:32:**  I try to adjust as well what I'm doing in terms of work around that.  So when I need to do more reflection work or more really inspiring work, I know I do  even more in the morning.  
**0:25:32-0:25:41:**  In the afternoon, I tend to put more emails or things that I need slightly less concentration  on.  And also I do prioritize much more radically what I do and also what I don't.  
**0:25:41-0:25:53:**  So learning to say no.  And I'm lucky that I have in both organizations just enough margin of maneuver to actually  be able to say no when I see like, is that really critical?  
**0:25:53-0:26:02:**  And I think that is quite important to be really quite radical on what you do and also  what you don't do, even if people outside are content, but you should also do this and  this and this.  
**0:26:02-0:26:17:**  And yeah, I could do a thousand times more things if I had more time.  And I think it is also important in the whole thing to find a few moments where you actually  think about neither of both works so that you really are completely outside in the nature,  
**0:26:17-0:26:30:**  having a walk or just take a warm, do a cooking, a great meal where we actually really focus  then on that thing and where you try to push all the issues or all the things that cloud  your mind on both sides.  
**0:26:30-0:26:44:**  So I really try to take enough time to meditate and to reflect and to take these moments.  So because I have been overwhelmed in the past and I really think preserving your mental  health is super important if you want to continue.  
**0:26:44-0:26:57:**  Otherwise, if you break down, then really don't help anyone.  So that's a few things that I try to do to keep sane in the busy organization.  Yeah, I think you hit on two really important ones.  
**0:26:57-0:27:11:**  I'm running a leadership training program at the moment.  We spent quite some time in the last weeks talking about saying no and dealing with overwhelm,  because particularly in this day and age, it's this feeling of, yeah, this fear of missing  
**0:27:11-0:27:21:**  out of never doing enough of being enough.  It drives so much that there's such a high risk of burnout if we don't learn to manage  it and live in a way that's sustainable.  
**0:27:21-0:27:29:**  So our impact can be sustainable.  Yeah, absolutely.  And it sometimes requires a bit of a step back on, you know, taking a step back on how  
**0:27:29-0:27:37:**  emotionally you're involved in certain things.  So if you have the impression that you on your own need to save the world, the pressure  is so crazy.  
**0:27:37-0:27:48:**  And women, I find have that more like where we really feel, I need to do something and  then you feel so big, what can I do to take a step back and actually, you can't do it  on your own.  
**0:27:48-0:27:56:**  And also to take it and accept that.  I look, I'm just one, I'm doing the very best, but also accepting that the very best is good  enough.  
**0:27:56-0:28:05:**  And yeah, to sometimes I know that I really learned over the years to take a step back  on emotional things.  So if things don't go my way, I can live with that.  
**0:28:05-0:28:16:**  And I just accept it and continue without necessarily that then bringing me down.  That's the key on my personal side.  That is tricky, I think.  
**0:28:16-0:28:26:**  And I think that's the challenge in this space when you are very intrinsically motivated.  It's very easy to link your identity with the work and with the impact and all of these  things.  
**0:28:26-0:28:41:**  And if it doesn't go how you expect, it can have a much bigger impact than necessary.  So it's a lovely tip to step back.  And so what would you tell someone starting their career wanting to change the food system?  
**0:28:41-0:28:55:**  I think there is so many ways where you can start.  So I think what is important is that you try to first understand and decide what are the  different ways that you can have an impact in the food system.  
**0:28:55-0:29:10:**  Because based on your profile or skills, you could work in the policy space, which is a  very slow space, but very powerful if you actually manage to change something.  Or being an entrepreneur, but actually trying within companies such as Unilever is going  
**0:29:10-0:29:25:**  to push boundaries further and be more innovative and to push, try to change the systems from  inside, which is again a very powerful way to do it.  Or being an entrepreneur, which is the most risky way where you probably have the biggest  
**0:29:25-0:29:41:**  freedom, but also there is a big risk of failure and you start from a much smaller place.  So I think it's important to know what type of personality you are, because I think you  can really have an impact across and there is not just one way to do it.  
**0:29:41-0:29:56:**  And it's important to know which personality, what level of risk are you able and willing  to take at that particular time and basically make a decision on that.  The other thing I think that is interesting or important to ask yourself is at which step  
**0:29:56-0:30:09:**  of the value chain do you want to be?  Are you working at the Unilever, which is very consumer facing and where you then work  more on changing consumer behavior and mindset and where you change by being the last one?  
**0:30:09-0:30:20:**  Or are you much closer?  Do you work with someone that is actually buying or are you really on the ground working  with the people who produce and try to change their practices on the ground?  
**0:30:20-0:30:30:**  I think again, it depends on personality and where you're able to be located.  So there's so many different ways.  And I think just you're gathering an understanding of saying, okay, that's actually the best  
**0:30:30-0:30:38:**  place.  That's where I can personally create the biggest impact by being there.  That is certainly the most useful or that's how I would start with.  
**0:30:38-0:30:50:**  I had to pick and say, where do I want to be positioned and where can I have the biggest  impact?  And like you say, so much of it is also sort of chance and serendipity and what opportunities  
**0:30:50-0:30:56:**  arise.  Absolutely.  And also realizing indeed there is, you can change or you can have an impact in so many  
**0:30:56-0:31:05:**  different ways.  So not to necessarily judge there is one better place than another because they're all almost  equal and they need to all come together.  
**0:31:05-0:31:17:**  So there is not, so you can really have an equal impact by being very high up or being  very close to the people on the ground.  So there is, and if everyone, the more people move in general and try to have an impact  
**0:31:17-0:31:31:**  in any space they are, the bigger the impact overall will have.  And so regardless of where people want to work, is there one skill that you would suggest  people who want to work in food systems build?  
**0:31:31-0:31:46:**  So as I mentioned for us, partnerships were very important and I still think particularly  as an entrepreneur that partnerships are very important because you are so small.  It's important to see with whom can you align and with whom can you work together and where  
**0:31:46-0:31:59:**  can you find win-win situations.  And we work, as I mentioned, we work a lot with development agencies who actually are  looking for companies who are able to pioneer and who are able to go the extra mile on the  
**0:31:59-0:32:10:**  ground to have these flagship examples.  And our project in Sri Lanka gets visited, I think every two months by some kind of high  level people just to show what can you do?  
**0:32:10-0:32:23:**  How far can you go and what the organisations on the ground do?  And so we really must say we're very thankful that these development agencies are there  because steering such big projects on the ground, for a start-up, is extremely difficult.  
**0:32:23-0:32:39:**  We have partnerships with chefs who try out our spices and then give us recipes that we  can use because actually we're very good at procurement, we're very solid skills there.  And I think in our case that is a critical skill, but in general I think just knowing  
**0:32:39-0:32:51:**  how can you create creative partnerships and with whom can you work and constantly looking  for who else can you align with.  Building your capacity to work in partnership, which I think for me links to a core skill  
**0:32:51-0:33:00:**  of communication and collaboration.  Collaboration, negotiation, understanding, really understanding empathy as well, like  understanding the others where they're coming from.  
**0:33:00-0:33:10:**  So it is a combination, but yes, I think being able to build these partnerships is quite  important.  Yeah, absolutely.  
**0:33:10-0:33:26:**  So the podcast is called The Great Full and I like to ask all of my guests this question,  what does living a great and full life mean for you?  I think it is importantly having work that is fully aligned with my values because I  
**0:33:26-0:33:39:**  at least spend so much time at work between both organisations that it is really important  that I work on something that I feel where I have an impact and where my time is well  used.  
**0:33:39-0:33:54:**  I do feel it's still quite important, at least for me, it's very important to have good personal  life at size, so very good communication and a relationship with my partner, with my friends,  with my family and very good cooking time as well.  
**0:33:54-0:34:07:**  So we do spend quite a bit of time cooking at home and that is really a very relaxing  time and so we can really think that it is part of having good ingredients and being  able to cook a great meal.  
**0:34:07-0:34:18:**  And what I always try to have is always having small things on the side that I love to do  with that from work.  So sometimes for a few months I feel like I have a succulent collection, I like to paint  
**0:34:18-0:34:34:**  a little bit, I like something completely unrelated, but which is just pure enjoyment  for even a few hours a week, but where I can totally disconnect and really have other passions  and not being only focused on work.  
**0:34:34-0:34:41:**  So that's kind of the combination that I see for a great and full life.  Wonderful.  Joy for the sake of joy.  
**0:34:41-0:34:56:**  It's important we make space for that.  Thanks so much for listening to this episode of the Great Full Podcast.  If you liked it, then please go ahead and subscribe and share it with a friend.  
**0:34:56-0:35:10:**  And I would love to get your questions answered here.  So if there's something that you would like answered or explored on this podcast, just  send me an email to podcast at thegreatfull.com and I'll do my very best to get your questions  
**0:35:10-0:35:23:**  answered here on the show.  The last topic in this episode came from Blue Dot Sessions.  