---
title: Sustainable Sourcing And Building Personal Resilience With Irena Loloci Founder Rena Roots Ep 3
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### The Great Full  (2020-11-06)  
### Author(s): Michelle Grant  

**0:00:00-0:00:22:**  Hi, I'm Michelle, and welcome to The Great Full Podcast, a place where we contemplate  how we can eat, live, and lead each day to build a more sustainable world.  My guest on the show today is Irina Laloki, who is the founder of IrinaRoots.  
**0:00:22-0:00:36:**  If you're someone who reads Vogue magazine, then you might have seen her and her products  featured as one of the up-and-coming ethical beauty brands.  So with IrinaRoots, they source pure botanicals and oils from countries that are impacted  
**0:00:36-0:00:48:**  by war and poverty.  And Irina was really motivated and inspired to start this work because for over 10 years  she was working with the World Food Programme, mostly in emergency and humanitarian crisis  
**0:00:48-0:00:56:**  situations.  She was stationed, for example, in Afghanistan, in Colombia at the border with Venezuela,  and in Liberia.  
**0:00:56-0:01:14:**  So today I chatted with Irina about how her difficult work in food security and crisis  situations inspired her to start an organisation that produces meaningful products to support  vulnerable people to build a business based on ethical and sustainable principles.  
**0:01:14-0:01:31:**  I know you grew up in Albania, and I was wondering if you could tell me a bit about how that  sort of influenced the path that you've taken in life, especially professionally.  I have to say there was a series of events that I experienced in Albania during my early  
**0:01:31-0:01:48:**  life that definitely crafted the path I took, or in some ways I was able much later in life  to kind of connect the dots and realise that those experiences really made me a more rooted  person and more resilient.  
**0:01:48-0:02:05:**  In 1990 there was the fall of the communist regime in Albania.  I was quite young, but it's crazy how vividly I remember those moments.  And I saw how it really transformed the entire society, the entire nation.  
**0:02:05-0:02:20:**  I saw how it truly disrupted from supply chains to every aspect of the economy, and also the  burden it had on people's lives and communities.  I remember having to eat on the floor for many days because of fear of bullets coming  
**0:02:20-0:02:34:**  through the windows.  So after that it was followed by the refugee crisis in Kosovo.  And even though Albania, we really experienced that influx of refugees, and in my own hometown  
**0:02:34-0:02:49:**  we had to host the Kosovo refugees.  So it was this one shock after the other that at the time it didn't – I mean, I was still  a child in many ways, so for me I was trying to still make the most out of it.  
**0:02:49-0:02:59:**  I still joke with one of my childhood friends how in 1997 in the middle of the war we're  still outside playing.  And we always remind ourselves of that.  
**0:02:59-0:03:17:**  We really tried to find a sense of normalcy in all of it.  So it was much later that I was able to really reflect on those experiences and connect the  dots in a way how all those experiences really crafted the way I am and the way that – how  
**0:03:17-0:03:30:**  my character developed.  But I definitely have to give also a lot of credit to my family.  They really pushed me to see education is really the only way out of that cycle of poverty  
**0:03:30-0:03:44:**  or financial insecurity for a better life.  So I have to say that that was – that really had a big impact of my life because being  able to get an education, a higher education that they were not able to get, it really  
**0:03:44-0:04:00:**  transformed my life and my opportunities later in life.  At the age of 17 I moved to the United States.  Yeah, it doesn't surprise me at all when I hear how resilient you had to be to crisis  
**0:04:00-0:04:12:**  that you eventually did find yourself working in so many different crisis situations with  your work with the World Food Programme, the UN.  So maybe you could just tell us a little bit about that.  
**0:04:12-0:04:26:**  So I started working with the United Nations World Food Programme in Rome at their headquarters  right after my master's degree.  And I was initially stationed in Rome for about two years.  
**0:04:26-0:04:38:**  But if anyone is in this field, they – after a while with headquarters work you really  get a bit – you really want to experience the field.  You really want to get hands-on.  
**0:04:38-0:04:57:**  So I was – I jumped the opportunity to go to work to the field in the Philippines.  My role was in disaster preparedness and response, so kind of supporting the government, the  local partners, different stakeholders in the Philippines, how to prepare in times of  
**0:04:57-0:05:08:**  a disaster and how to better respond.  So it was – I was involved in two major emergencies when I was working in the Philippines.  The last one was Typhoon Haiyan.  
**0:05:08-0:05:21:**  So the Philippines really taught me a lot.  I have to say it was, again, how it was about natural disasters.  So it was – and I moved a lot from typhoon to typhoon emergency.  
**0:05:21-0:05:30:**  Like within the Philippines I moved at least four or five times.  I lived out of a suitcase.  Because the Philippines, I mean, in a nation island it has 7,000-plus islands.  
**0:05:30-0:05:43:**  So logistically as well when it comes to responding to a disaster, it's quite – it can be quite  a challenge.  So I started in the Philippines and then after that I moved to Egypt, which is our regional  
**0:05:43-0:05:54:**  bureau with WFP for the region.  I was very shortly stationed there and then later went to Ukraine.  After Ukraine I moved to Liberia, West Africa.  
**0:05:54-0:06:12:**  It was after Ebola and then Afghanistan, Armenia.  And the last mission was in Colombia with the Venezuelan crisis.  I was working there as the head of the operations in Arrauca, which is a small sub-office bordering  
**0:06:12-0:06:25:**  Colombia and Venezuela.  It was just incredible experience.  It was incredible at the same time, you know, jumping from one emergency to another.  
**0:06:25-0:06:40:**  You really see a lot of similar themes at the same time.  Even though every crisis is different, there are certain aspects of it in terms of, you  know, humanity and resilience that really go – that you see in people that really  
**0:06:40-0:06:51:**  go beyond borders and beyond crisis.  You have to write a book once because what you saw in a 10-year career is what people  don't even see in a lifetime.  
**0:06:51-0:07:05:**  And could you just tell me a little bit more about what similarities you did see and particularly  in terms of like what can we learn about getting people the food and nutrition they need in  a crisis situation?  
**0:07:05-0:07:23:**  So the lessons are many, that's for sure.  But I have to say that one of the main things that I did see or it always came up is, first  of all, there is so much beauty and humanity and resilience in the times of crisis.  
**0:07:23-0:07:32:**  Once I had someone ask me like, you know, how can you do it?  It's so emotionally draining and, you know, how can you see poor people in crisis all  the time?  
**0:07:32-0:07:45:**  First of all, it's not like, you know, those poor people out there, you know, these are  human beings who also are, you know, empowered and resilient and strong and have beautiful  stories to share.  
**0:07:45-0:08:00:**  So you are the one who is constantly learning from them as well.  So that always was something like a central theme for me that, wow, there is really much,  much beauty in humanity and stories.  
**0:08:00-0:08:11:**  But I learned as well, you know, in times of crisis as well, this whole theme of being  content, but not complacent.  You somehow feel like you're not doing enough.  
**0:08:11-0:08:30:**  So it's really important to always focus on, you know, things that you control.  I remember when I was in Afghanistan, one of my Afghan colleagues, she would always  tell me, Daria Daria Mesha Mesha, which means, drop by drop, a notion is made.  
**0:08:30-0:08:43:**  And I really loved that.  It just, you know, it was, you know, I always would write it in emails and remind myself  because it's so important sometimes to focus on, especially in crisis and when you see  
**0:08:43-0:08:58:**  how perhaps there are many elephants in the room that you cannot do much about, you know,  in conflict, for example, which is heavily politicized.  There's so many actors involved, so many, it's things that you just can't control.  
**0:08:58-0:09:18:**  And I think it's important to remind yourself and focus in things you can control.  So for example, working with WFP, of course, like in terms of, you know, once you have  the initial phase of disaster response, whether it's conflict or natural disaster, you know,  
**0:09:18-0:09:35:**  giving food or cash for food or any type of response, you know it's short term.  It's just providing a cushion for them for the next step.  It's just kind of putting a bit of a band-aid, but it's needed, right?  
**0:09:35-0:09:50:**  It's needed because there is that immediate response for people to just be able to survive.  You know, I saw that with the Venezuelan crisis when you have so many people crossing the  border on foot and literally having not eaten for the past three days.  
**0:09:50-0:10:02:**  I mean, the first thing you need to do is make sure that they have the right food and  nutrition.  There are a lot of questions from the beneficiaries of what's next and any job opportunities and  
**0:10:02-0:10:20:**  this kind of chance to really have something more sustainable and something that can lift  they can use to live themselves out of poverty.  So I think that the sense of economic empowerment and sustainability is really key.  
**0:10:20-0:10:36:**  And I think, I don't know, Michelle, I'm sure you have seen it as well with your work, you  know, the role of sustainable agriculture and how that can really be capitalized to  lift people out of poverty.  
**0:10:36-0:10:52:**  I think we vote constantly with the choices we make.  You know, we vote for leaders who choose, we vote with our own money, we vote on what  we choose to buy, we vote with the way we eat.  
**0:10:52-0:11:03:**  I feel like we can still do things that can have an impact and they don't have to be so,  you know, glamorous or exotic of, you know, being all over the world.  Does that make sense?  
**0:11:03-0:11:19:**  I think that's something that I always remind people because it always feels like, oh, you  have been into all these countries and I want to remind people that everyone can have an  impact and make a difference you want even by simple things and the way you live and  
**0:11:19-0:11:26:**  eat, right, Michelle?  Yes, absolutely.  Change the world through what's on your plate.  
**0:11:26-0:11:32:**  Exactly.  I love the great food.  So it's beautifully made.  
**0:11:32-0:11:40:**  Thank you.  I think that's a perfect time to ask you to tell us a bit more about Reina Roots, what  it is that you're doing.  
**0:11:40-0:11:56:**  When I was working in Afghanistan, I was working as an emergency operations coordinator supporting  the emergency response of over a million Afghan returnees and Pakistani refugees that were  crossing the border from Pakistan to Afghanistan.  
**0:11:56-0:12:12:**  Of course, I was faced with, you know, the usual face of a crisis and desperation.  You know, you have people crossing the border and a lot of times not knowing what comes  next or where do they go next or, you know, what type of job opportunities are there in  
**0:12:12-0:12:28:**  a place like Afghanistan.  But the same day that I had this kind of heavy field day at the border areas, the same day  I had one of my Afghan colleagues who invited me to visit a rose oil factory.  
**0:12:28-0:12:42:**  They had managed to get some funds from one NGO and they had planted roses, which had  replaced a lot of opium plantations.  And it had really, they managed to distill the oil and it's a very expensive oil because  
**0:12:42-0:12:51:**  it takes so many roses to distill the oil.  It sells for almost $10,000 a kilo.  It's super expensive.  
**0:12:51-0:13:04:**  So it's a cash crop.  It was able to give the farmers like a fair wage and they were able to kind of shift their  livelihoods from opium plantations to planting roses.  
**0:13:04-0:13:20:**  And it was just, I just find it, I found it so beautiful.  I was like, wow, a couple of hours ago I was, I thought that there's no hope like going,  you know, seeing people with, with crossing the borders, just this really desperate and  
**0:13:20-0:13:36:**  not too far from that you're smelling roses and you see how something simple as planting  roses in a place like Nangarhar province had really transformed the community.  So I just, I just couldn't let go of that.  
**0:13:36-0:13:53:**  I just felt it was so beautiful and I loved how they had initially gotten support from  a development partner to get the initial funds and then they were running it themselves and  they were able to export the oil that had some, you know, partners and we're looking  
**0:13:53-0:14:12:**  for more.  So it kind of gave me that push to start Renna Roots, which is a holistic wellness beauty  brand with the focus on, on sourcing and sourcing, you know, unique botanicals and oils and create  
**0:14:12-0:14:31:**  premium, vegan skincare while at the same time somehow contribute to creating job opportunities.  I wanted to focus on, you know, Afghanistan showing a face of something beautiful in the  midst of a foreign crisis.  
**0:14:31-0:14:47:**  And I wanted to, to bring that closer to people, if that makes sense.  And I wanted Renna Roots and I still want Renna Roots to kind of provide that platform  to show beauty and humanity and awareness about, you know, important things somewhere  
**0:14:47-0:14:57:**  quote unquote far.  And at the end of the day is also about, you know, my long-term vision about Renna Roots  is, you know, maximizing, you know, resources and efforts.  
**0:14:57-0:15:14:**  So connecting these two worlds with development partners in the aid sector and the private  sector and to see how we can kind of connect the supply chain to something more sustainable.  How was that jump for you from moving from an international organization to effectively  
**0:15:14-0:15:21:**  running a business?  Well, it was a process.  It was an epiphany.  
**0:15:21-0:15:33:**  I didn't have this moment.  I mean, the Afghan story, of course, with the Rose Oil visit definitely gave me that,  that push to start, but it was something that it was brewing for a long time, for years.  
**0:15:33-0:15:46:**  And even from the time of Afghanistan to the time I launched four months ago, it took me  two years.  So I have to say it was kind of collection of field lessons and all these kind of stories  
**0:15:46-0:16:00:**  and experiences.  And I wanted always to kind of somehow connect these two worlds and passions of mine.  And you know, Afghanistan kind of gave me that push to kind of, okay.  
**0:16:00-0:16:10:**  And the timing was right also at a personal level, you know, after being, you know, 10  years in the field, I really wanted to focus on spending time with family and having a  family.  
**0:16:10-0:16:22:**  So the timing as well felt right.  So it was a combination of, you know, many things together, connect these passions of  mine, you know, still try to have an impact and still connect it to a job I truly, truly  
**0:16:22-0:16:33:**  loved working with WFP, but still I could at a personal level also live a fulfilling  life.  I think as a humanitarian worker, that's something that I think with a lot of my friends, especially  
**0:16:33-0:16:46:**  women that are in this field, we're always have to kind of remind ourselves to take care  of each other as well.  You can also have so much focus on others and it's also important to take care as well  
**0:16:46-0:17:01:**  and find that own balance for your own life as well.  I think that's, it was definitely a process and I have to say it's still evolving.  I mean, the whole concept of Renee Roots, I'm looking forward to see where it takes  
**0:17:01-0:17:15:**  us this year.  It's empowering to create jobs and opportunities for people who are geographically in a way  historically less advantaged.  
**0:17:15-0:17:28:**  I think being able to do that requires a certain amount of confidence too.  And you mentioned that if you look at yourself in the beginning of your time with the World  Food Programme and the end, you had built so much more confidence and found your voice.  
**0:17:28-0:17:45:**  What do you think were the most important things to help you do that?  Time and experience and taking risks and really not being so comfortable, always being comfortable.  And I think it took me many years to learn that, that rejections or failures are not  
**0:17:45-0:17:56:**  failures.  They're just opportunities.  Take those and transform those into an opportunity to do better.  
**0:17:56-0:18:11:**  Especially when you're working in situations like humanitarian crisis, how can you make  teams, really work in teams and feeling empowered and feeling like they can take ownership of  what they're doing and find meaning in what they're doing.  
**0:18:11-0:18:26:**  That's so empowering.  And it really makes everyone more productive.  It makes everyone in the team feeling like they have power to do something that is good.  
**0:18:26-0:18:44:**  And that's so important, I remember with my last mission in Venezuela, in Colombia, I  had a small team of eight, nine people.  And it was really a process of really talking to everyone and just from the driver to the  
**0:18:44-0:18:53:**  cleaning lady, to the programme officer, to the monitoring and evaluation, to everyone  and just trying to understand a bit, what's the long-term vision?  What's the goal?  
**0:18:53-0:19:15:**  Can we really have something work together?  I'm so excited to follow your journey.  I mean, you've launched four months ago, you've already been featured in Vogue.  
**0:19:15-0:19:23:**  You have been selected as a Sephora entrepreneur.  It sounds like it's been a wild journey.  It has been.  
**0:19:23-0:19:38:**  I have to say one of the challenges, because sometimes it can look really rosy from the  outside and I have a lot of people, especially women, who, I don't know, how can you manage  having sort of a family and a business?  
**0:19:38-0:19:52:**  I don't know if that's a question that is asked to men as often, but that's a different  discussion.  But I think one of the challenges that I'm having is also, I need to shift a bit my mentality  
**0:19:52-0:20:06:**  from humanitarian emergency mode, because I want things done quickly, but I forget that  the private sector works differently.  So one of my personal frustrations right now is, okay, what's happening?  
**0:20:06-0:20:19:**  This harvest isn't like, will I be able to source more from Afghanistan?  Will I be able to source more from Albania?  I have some other countries and partners at different countries that are interested to  
**0:20:19-0:20:29:**  export.  How do you select the suppliers that you work with?  Do you have criteria or is it a value based, relation based collaboration?  
**0:20:29-0:20:41:**  Yeah, so for the moment is places that I personally know.  So it's communities and countries that I've been there and I've established a relationship  with.  
**0:20:41-0:20:56:**  So for example, the place of Afghanistan.  I think moving forward, it might change how the brand develops, but for now it's really  been like a relationship based on trust and personal.  
**0:20:56-0:21:11:**  But this is why I think it's so important to, again, the long term of Renee Roots is  if we can connect to projects that somehow are already vetted by development partners  who are already doing the work in the field, like they're involved in so many agriculture  
**0:21:11-0:21:24:**  projects.  And that's what they do best, making sure that the project is done the right way.  People are getting paid a fair wage.  
**0:21:24-0:21:32:**  Gender is mainstream.  There's so many aspects that development partners are focused already.  It's so many different field projects.  
**0:21:32-0:21:45:**  So how can we capitalize on that and make sure that it's actually linked to a private  sector who does work with projects that are supported by field partners?  Does that make sense?  
**0:21:45-0:22:08:**  So it's about creating a sustainable cycle because if I take the role of the private  sector, let's say, as Renee Roots, I know that if I work with certain local partners,  certain local NGO, that they already are doing that process of selection and making sure  
**0:22:08-0:22:22:**  that things are done well at field level, then it creates a bit like a symbiotic win-win  relationship between the different partners and as well for the communities.  That's amazing.  
**0:22:22-0:22:48:**  So on this Renee Roots journey so far, what has brought you the most joy?  I think it's funny you ask that question because a lot of times you have to remind yourself  that in the midst of all the frustrations, I'm so happy that I just did it.  
**0:22:48-0:23:10:**  I'm just so happy that at least I started and I developed something.  Of course, it will take time and effort to see it where I want it to go, but I think  to be able to give shape to all of my ideas in a very tangible way, to be able to translate  
**0:23:10-0:23:30:**  all those passions of mine, to make sure that at the end of the day, you can pick up a skincare  and tea and essential oil and then it has a story, it has value.  So for me, this has been something that to give value to certain products and then to  
**0:23:30-0:23:50:**  be able to create this, to be able to put all the dots together, all my passions together  and see where it is right now, I have to remind myself to just again be content but not complacent  and really rejoice in what I've achieved so far.  
**0:23:50-0:24:03:**  And then it's beautiful to see when people love the products and the idea and they're  always encouraging.  I think this has been so wonderful for me just getting a lot of encouragement from different  
**0:24:03-0:24:19:**  mentors and friends and family just saying, keep going, it's a beautiful project and idea  and a social enterprise.  So I think that kind of gives you power and joy to keep going even when you feel like,  
**0:24:19-0:24:32:**  oh, there's so much to it.  So what's one of the things, particularly over the last four months that you've sort  of focused on learning so that you can grow you and your organization in the direction  
**0:24:32-0:24:47:**  that you want to?  It's been learning from biochemistry all the way to how I can successfully grow this business  and at the same time keep the trust that I've developed with field partners.  
**0:24:47-0:25:03:**  So I do spend a lot of my time just reading books on biochemistry, believe it or not,  and ingredients and trying to understand that aspect more because working with field partners,  it's my bread and butter.  
**0:25:03-0:25:09:**  It's what I do best.  I love it.  It just gives me so much joy to field work.  
**0:25:09-0:25:25:**  So I need to push and challenge myself.  And that's what I've been doing these past months to learn other aspects of Renee Root's  formulation and packaging and testing that have to do with developing the products.  
**0:25:25-0:25:41:**  Because it's also important that for me, it's so important that people, when they buy, it's  not just because they're doing something good in the world.  I really want to get away from that mentality and see how it's a good product that you're  
**0:25:41-0:25:51:**  buying anyways, or most women will buy anyway.  So how can we make this kind of model a bit more mainstream?  Does that make sense?  
**0:25:51-0:26:06:**  Like how can we, when people buy something that it's a good product, it's a high quality  product, but it's also, it's transparent and it's making an impact.  And I hope that it pushes more and more business models to do that.  
**0:26:06-0:26:20:**  And at the same time, more development partners to work directly with the private sector.  There are a lot of skincare companies that they're already sourcing.  How wonderful it would be if they're actually sourcing from farms and agriculture projects  
**0:26:20-0:26:33:**  that are already supported by development partners.  Or how can these two worlds kind of talk a bit more and say, at this moment we're supporting  farmers and planting this type of vegetables.  
**0:26:33-0:26:49:**  But can we shift maybe to a cash crop?  How can that be more beneficial for farmers and can give them more income?  And then they can really lift their own selves out of poverty.  
**0:26:49-0:27:08:**  So it's a constant learning and a constant process.  But I do hope that Renarut is able to also provide an example to other social enterprise  models.  
**0:27:08-0:27:19:**  It's a bit of a wild idea.  I know, even when I did the Sephora pitch, it was so surreal to go to Paris and I felt  like I was from a different planet in a lot of ways.  
**0:27:19-0:27:34:**  I was talking to some of my friends, I'm like, I just don't fit in.  I'm really talking about issues such as humanitarian crisis and hunger and all these things to  people who are working at Sephora.  
**0:27:34-0:27:45:**  It's a bit wild, but I think it's so important.  That's why I wanted to do it.  I think it's so important to kind of think a bit outside of the traditional models and  
**0:27:45-0:28:02:**  see how can we provide a platform as well for awareness and for actors to tangibly work  together.  And how it can be a win-win for both of these worlds in a way because a lot of skin care  
**0:28:02-0:28:18:**  companies are already having their own farms, they're already sourcing.  And a lot of agriculture projects at field level, a lot of them are either not sustainable  in the long term or sometimes they don't have access to market or from your work as well,  
**0:28:18-0:28:35:**  like how there can be a lot of levels why they cannot provide enough food and nutrition  for their own families.  So how can we work more together and kind of give them that chance to have a more sustainable  
**0:28:35-0:28:53:**  project along the supply chain and have a symbiotic win-win situation for everyone.  From the conscious consumer to the field partner, to the business person, along the supply chain  having that win-win situation and creating that model.  
**0:28:53-0:29:08:**  Yeah, that's what I really love about what you're doing.  You're bringing different worlds together and that's always where, well, it's the most  challenging place to stand, but it's a place where your message just becomes so important.  
**0:29:08-0:29:21:**  And so yeah, by having your products in vogue, that's nice on a business side, but deeper  than that, it's bringing a message to an completely different industry and what sort of impact  we could actually have.  
**0:29:21-0:29:31:**  Yeah, exactly.  I think that's why I was so excited to get into the CIFOR Accelerator program because  I realised they definitely saw something in the idea and I was so happy that they were  
**0:29:31-0:29:49:**  able to see that because when you come from a field development background, for you it's  clear and then you realise when you're back to...  I realised that every time I was flying back between missions, either in Switzerland or  
**0:29:49-0:30:06:**  the US, I felt like, I mean, even my own family sometimes are like, what are you doing exactly?  I'm like, after 10 years.  So they know that I'm doing something, they know the general things, but it's hard for  
**0:30:06-0:30:15:**  people to digest.  It's kind of surreal a lot of times.  And when you come back, and I heard this from other friends of mine who are humanitarian  
**0:30:15-0:30:26:**  workers, when you come back from certain, especially crisis response, you really need  that time.  Like sometimes even when you landed in the airport, you realise it's kind of a shock.  
**0:30:26-0:30:43:**  You really need to give yourself time to adjust and then kind of find a bit of balance because  it can also be frustrating because you feel like you're not understood.  I think that I dealt a lot of times, I felt like, can I talk to people about these issues  
**0:30:43-0:30:56:**  and how I felt like I couldn't talk to everyone, like I couldn't connect.  And I think that that was a personal struggle.  How can I connect and how can I make you feel like you can also have an impact, you can  
**0:30:56-0:31:02:**  be a part of it.  And that's why I loved Renard Woods because I feel like it can be something small in a  way.  
**0:31:02-0:31:15:**  It can be a tea and it can start with small things that then people feel like they are  also part of that story and part of that creating value in the world.  So yeah, it's exciting.  
**0:31:15-0:31:21:**  Back to the Daria Daria again, right?  The drop by drop.  Exactly.  
**0:31:21-0:31:30:**  I love that.  And then the Renard Woods logo, I have a little drop because it's something that it reminds  me that drop by drop.  
**0:31:30-0:31:46:**  And it's somehow, I have to say, a good friend of mine said this the other day because I  was sharing a bit, some certain frustrations, it's simple things, logistics and packaging.  And she was saying, people expect, I understand because people expect more from a social enterprise  
**0:31:46-0:32:01:**  or a small brand.  They expect sustainable packaging, they expect things to be good and done well.  And when you're a small company, it really, it takes way more resources than when you  
**0:32:01-0:32:11:**  are a big company, right?  So it's something that I'm learning and because I tried really hard from the beginning to  be, okay, how can we eliminate boxes?  
**0:32:11-0:32:17:**  Because it's a waste.  Let's work with artisans in the Philippines.  I'm doing the skincare pouches with them.  
**0:32:17-0:32:24:**  So with upcycled material, like really do sustainable every aspect of the brand and  the products.  And it's beautiful.  
**0:32:24-0:32:35:**  Like I'm happy how everything turned out, but it's also a challenge.  And I wish like these big brands would actually put even more and more because they do have  the resources.  
**0:32:35-0:32:46:**  So how can we, as well push them to make those changes?  I think it's happening and maybe even with sourcing, it will eventually happen.  I think it's like a wave.  
**0:32:46-0:33:05:**  I think more and more with, for example, environmental impact, I think that shift is slowly happening.  And maybe it will just take time for the bigger companies to slowly transition to a more sustainable  and impact oriented way of doing business.  
**0:33:05-0:33:12:**  Absolutely.  And I think we often forget that our own energy and motivation is one of our most valuable  resources.  
**0:33:12-0:33:25:**  So on that note, you do juggle a lot.  You have any business and you have a little one, what are some of the most important practices  for you to try and balance or align doing well and being well?  
**0:33:25-0:33:42:**  Yeah, so it, I have to say it has changed throughout the years, but one thing that has  always been constant for me, and that has led to me being a very rooted person, because  I've always had sometimes people like, you know, having lived in so many different countries,  
**0:33:42-0:33:55:**  you know, but I still have some of my best friends who are childhood friends.  And when I got married a couple of years ago, I had people flying from Afghanistan to Tanzania  from all over the world.  
**0:33:55-0:34:12:**  But it brings back to the fact that I really nourish the relationships I have and spending  time, like quality time with family.  I feel like I really need that time to, you know, when with Renee Roots, it kind of gets,  
**0:34:12-0:34:24:**  you know, frustrating.  I know when to stop and kind of shift and divert that energy to spending time with,  you know, my family and my relationships.  
**0:34:24-0:34:32:**  And sometimes it's small things and small rituals.  I mean, food is central to my life.  It's always been in my family.  
**0:34:32-0:34:42:**  It's my husband's jokes that I'm never lazy when it comes to cooking.  It's just the therapy for me.  I'm just, I love food and how central it is to my life.  
**0:34:42-0:34:54:**  So I'm always cooking, that's for sure.  And it's simple acts.  Like I met my husband dancing, so I still spend time to, even if it's just a couple  
**0:34:54-0:35:08:**  of minutes a day, to really, you know, dance.  And there is like a small ritual that I always do in the evening, which is a prayer, but  it's more of, I say it's a prayer, but it's more this kind of gratitude.  
**0:35:08-0:35:24:**  It's just a silent prayer, but it's just this always reminding myself to be content  and joyful and just thankful for life.  I think it's just a small ritual that I've incorporated in my life, but it's important  
**0:35:24-0:35:41:**  for me that at the end of the day, I can just go to sleep and just be thankful for where  I am and who I am and the family and the relationships that are around me.  But I have to say that's another, I think you asked this earlier, how important it is  
**0:35:41-0:35:56:**  to, when you run a social enterprise or business, it's so important to have that healthy balance  with business and personal life.  I think it makes you a more grounded person and more, you're able to see more joy and  
**0:35:56-0:36:03:**  contentment and it's so important.  Like it's just not worth it if you don't have that.  It's just, and for me it was so important as well.  
**0:36:03-0:36:20:**  Like I was able to find those pieces of, you know, calm working in the field, you know,  find my own way of what makes me calm and what gives me joy.  And these days it's just, yeah, this little small things that, you know, learning how  
**0:36:20-0:36:34:**  to simply be sometimes, and that's enough.  It puts so much focus on always doing, like we're measured by what we do.  And so it's so important to remind yourself, at least I do, that sometimes it's just important  
**0:36:34-0:36:48:**  to just breathe in and just be and be grateful for life really.  You just such a surprisingly powerful practice.  Yes.  
**0:36:48-0:37:11:**  So what does living a great and full life mean for you?  I think for me to live a great and a full life, it's also about, it's a process.  I don't think it's one of those things that, you know, you have a lot of ups and downs.  
**0:37:11-0:37:20:**  You have a lot of challenges in your life.  So it's a process of growth.  How do you look at, you know, these challenges and these failures?  
**0:37:20-0:37:30:**  You know, are you able to transform them into opportunities?  Are you able to take that and kind of transform it something that it's good for you and nourishes  you?  
**0:37:30-0:37:44:**  I think that's important, you know, and finding those balances is so important and not letting,  you know, other things, you know, direct that, you know, how you feel and how you are to  some degree.  
**0:37:44-0:38:05:**  So I think for me to live that life, it's a process of learning, constantly learning  and feeding yourself like the, whether it's for food, nutrition to information, really  feeding things that can help you grow and help you as an individual really be content  
**0:38:05-0:38:20:**  of where you are in the world and where you'd like your place to be in the future.  I don't know if that makes sense, but yeah, for me, it's also about finding a balance  in all of it.  
**0:38:20-0:38:40:**  It makes perfect sense.  Thanks so much for listening to this episode of the Great Full podcast.  If you liked it, then please go ahead and subscribe and share it with a friend.  
**0:38:40-0:38:55:**  And I would love to get your questions answered here.  So if there's something that you would like answered or explored on this podcast, just  send me an email to podcast at the great full.com and I'll do my very best to get your questions  
**0:38:55-0:39:24:**  answered here on the show.  Like in this episode came from blue dot sessions.  