---
title: Sustainable Leading Learning With Curiosity And Joy With Dr Jess Schulschenk Sustainability Institute South Africa Ep 11
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### The Great Full  (2021-04-23)  
### Author(s): Michelle Grant  

**0:00:00-0:00:09:**  Hi, I'm Michelle, and welcome to the Great Full Podcast, a place where we contemplate  how we can eat, live, and lead each day to build a more sustainable world.  Today on the podcast, I'm taking you to South Africa, more specifically to Linedoc, which  
**0:00:22-0:00:27:**  is an ecovillage and learning institute just on the outskirts of Stellenbosch.  And this is a pretty special place.  As you go through the gates, you wander through a mixed living community of eco-houses.  
**0:00:35-0:00:39:**  You might see kids from the Montessori Kindergarten playing next to the kids from the primary  school.  And as you keep walking down the path, you come across a research and learning center  
**0:00:44-0:00:48:**  that covers all things sustainability in Sub-Saharan Africa.  And you look across the garden and see agro-ecology apprenticeship trainees tending to the food  gardens.  
**0:00:56-0:00:58:**  People chatting over lunch in the green cafe.  And just generally an incredible melting pot of people from different backgrounds who are  all passionate about leading more sustainable lives.  
**0:01:07-0:01:11:**  And I've had the joy of running a few learning programs here at the Sustainability Institute  over the last 10 years.  And today I had the pleasure to chat with Jess Schulschenk, who is the director of this  
**0:01:17-0:01:20:**  incredibly vibrant and diverse Sustainability Institute.  I've had the chance to visit the Sustainability Institute a few times, which has been such  a privilege because I think it's such a special location in the world and I've never actually  
**0:01:34-0:01:35:**  seen anything else like it.  So, Minh, could you just tell our listeners a little bit more about what the SIE is, what  you do there, and what sort of makes it unique in the world?  
**0:01:43-0:01:47:**  Yeah, so I mean, maybe I can start off by saying I really don't like the name.  It's one that I inherited a couple of years ago.  We went through this kind of conundrum of do we keep it or not.  
**0:01:53-0:01:55:**  We've been called the Instability Institute.  I kind of like the Instability Institute the most.  But last year we celebrated our 20th anniversary as a nonprofit trust.  
**0:02:01-0:02:08:**  And I think 20 years ago the word sustainability invited a kind of a curiosity around what  all of this work between environmental and social justice coming together could mean.  And I think over the years it's been co-opted and shifted.  
**0:02:15-0:02:21:**  But ultimately I think it asks of us kind of what is it that we want to sustain and  what is it that we want to change.  So the Sustainability Institute as we are known by, we're based within Lindoch Ecovillage,  
**0:02:29-0:02:35:**  which is as far as I know in South Africa and possibly in the world the first and probably  one of very few today ecologically designed communities that is deeply intentional about  having kind of mixed income built into its structure.  
**0:02:45-0:02:49:**  And so in South Africa that means a mix of cultures and races and languages and belief  systems as well.  So it's a deeply diverse community and our work at the center of that is running a number  
**0:02:56-0:02:58:**  of education programs.  But we also have food gardens and woodlands.  We started in the last year really interesting community scale food security learning farm.  
**0:03:06-0:03:10:**  We have our graduates and we work in partnership with Stellenbosch University.  So we have an undergrad and post-grad programs in sustainable development.  And many of those students or graduates and alumni have gone on to run really incredible  
**0:03:19-0:03:24:**  micro social enterprises and solar energy and a number of different things.  So as a space that's a very vibrant community of children and kind of activists and students  all coming together.  
**0:03:31-0:03:36:**  It's a community kind of deeply rooted in nature and wild spaces and trying to figure  out how we could be.  I think increasingly kind of what does it mean to be human and how do we choose to respond.  
**0:03:44-0:03:49:**  So transformative learning and sustainability kind of sitting at the core.  I think that's what I love so much about it is that you really you know you obviously  have this connection with the university and with the education.  
**0:03:56-0:04:01:**  There's a lot of theory and thinking around sustainability but it's inherently connected  to action by you actually living it in place which I think is really unique.  And I was just wondering what are some of the things that you've learned about you know  
**0:04:09-0:04:14:**  connecting the global and the local in this way or the abstract and the concrete as you  do in place there.  Sure that's a great question.  
**0:04:18-0:04:23:**  I think it's one of the things I was looking for as I had spent a couple of years in corporate  and felt quite disconnected I think from the impact of one's actions.  And so I found myself really looking for in a way coming back.  
**0:04:32-0:04:37:**  So I had studied at their time many years before and worked there and then coming back  into a place where it matters not just what you think but also the actions that you take  and it's incredibly humbling.  
**0:04:45-0:04:49:**  For example our work in food systems we teach a number of modules short courses we do a  lot of research on you know organic hubs across Africa setting up training and facilitation  for young farmers.  
**0:04:57-0:05:02:**  But when it comes down to actually sourcing locally ethically agroecologically or through  regenerative agriculture practices for our own little coffee shop it's sometimes the  hardest work.  
**0:05:08-0:05:12:**  So I think it's in the doing that we both humbled and inspired that other ways could  be possible.  And I think that's kind of balancing the global perspectives with the local experience is  
**0:05:17-0:05:18:**  really important.  When I had just come out of my undergrad I was overwhelmed and maybe optimistic that  there was a solution out there and if we just applied it then everything would be fine.  
**0:05:28-0:05:33:**  And so my work over the last couple years I think has taught me that this work takes  much deeper and longer time scales.  I used to think that three years was a long time and I'll start to think in 10-20 year  
**0:05:39-0:05:41:**  cycles and that place really matters.  And so we talk about context or place based work but until you have your feet in the soil  and your kind of eyes locked in with another person and you're trying to figure it out  
**0:05:52-0:05:57:**  I think a lot of our work can remain theoretical and abstract and maybe we remain subscribed  to this idea that there is a solution out there if we just learned how to apply it.  And I think this work has brought me a lot closer to a deep belief that the way forward  
**0:06:08-0:06:13:**  lies within us already and it's about unfolding a process together in which we'll learn a  lot and we'll make a lot of mistakes and kind of you forget your perfect offering very quickly.  Yeah, absolutely.  
**0:06:20-0:06:25:**  It's where the rubber hits the road that we learn the reality of it all.  Maybe related to that, like the work at the SI that I find really interesting is how you  educate from, as you said, like four months old I think as your youngest student through  
**0:06:36-0:06:41:**  to postgraduate training programs affiliated with the university.  And are there any common things that you find people have to keep relearning across this  entire age span?  
**0:06:49-0:06:56:**  So what's fascinating is we draw on a Montessori pedagogy and philosophy within our early childhood  development and so I'm not a Montessorian by my own experiences or training or that,  but I am a grounded theorist.  
**0:07:03-0:07:09:**  So my work and my research is we ground ourselves in kind of the reality of the world and then  we try and make sense of it and evolve our theories from that.  And so as a grounded kind of theory researcher and spending time with our early childhood  
**0:07:18-0:07:23:**  development programs where the underlying philosophy is really the child has this innate  potential and innate love for learning and it's our responsibility to create the conditions  in which that can unfold.  
**0:07:30-0:07:36:**  What I've seen in our youngest kind of learners on site is that they have this incredible  joy and curiosity and what tends to happen in traditional education systems is we terrify  and at worst and at best probably ball that out of ourselves.  
**0:07:47-0:07:48:**  And so I think we've always had it.  I think young children know it intuitively, which is that kind of learning can be curious  and it can be joyful.  
**0:07:55-0:08:00:**  And so as adults, I think that's what we need to relearn or find our way back to is that  if learning, as Schumacher said it about work, to make work boring, terrifying or stultifying  would be nothing less of a great human injustice.  
**0:08:10-0:08:15:**  And so I think the relearning sits for me in how do we bring back curiosity and joy  into our own learning processes.  And we do that through experience.  
**0:08:19-0:08:21:**  So yeah, it's a part of the work that I love.  It's really beautiful.  I think bringing both curiosity and joy, not only back into our learning, but into our  
**0:08:28-0:08:33:**  lives and our work as adults is kind of the central question for many of us.  It's what we tend to lose along the way, sadly.  Exactly.  
**0:08:37-0:08:38:**  And it's right in front of us.  I think you just need to take half a moment to observe how a child in their natural way  of being, how that just is, it's just so natural to them.  
**0:08:47-0:08:51:**  So it's always accessible, it's always available, but we've put a lot on top of ourselves, a  lot of really intense expectations.  And yeah, so it's almost like that great social unlearning to return to a more natural way  
**0:08:58-0:08:59:**  of being.  Now you mentioned that, you know, you've done some research that's based in grounded theory,  and that was your PhD research.  
**0:09:06-0:09:09:**  And I don't remember the number, but I remember something crazy like that you interviewed  150 sustainability leaders across Africa.  Correct me if I'm wrong there.  
**0:09:14-0:09:20:**  And I don't want to bring back any nightmares by taking it back to your PhD, but I'd just  be really interested to know what came out of that process for you.  What were some really inspiring stories or people or concepts that came out of that incredibly  
**0:09:30-0:09:32:**  large process?  I think it's been long enough that the scars have healed a bit.  It would certainly appear in most PhDs, right?  
**0:09:37-0:09:40:**  I don't want to, no one say that word.  But I think it's like that for many of us that have been through these intense experiences,  academic included.  
**0:09:46-0:09:51:**  So my research, like you said, I had this incredible privilege of interviewing what  ended up being a data set of about 200 global CEOs, board chairs, directors of companies  as part of a broader research program where we were trying to understand how do large  
**0:10:03-0:10:09:**  multinationals fundamentally shift to incorporate planetary boundaries and social foundations  into core strategy.  So within that work specifically, I think I was really inspired by the more invisible  
**0:10:20-0:10:22:**  actors in the system.  I had gone in with this expectation that there's cockpits of pilots and they've got a plan  and they're flying this plane very strategically.  
**0:10:29-0:10:35:**  And if you just put the right information in their system, they'll calculate a new course.  And what I realized was that it's an incredibly high pressure position to be the CEO or kind  of board chair of these big organizations.  
**0:10:44-0:10:49:**  The people are trying to make sense as best they can, but there is too much information  in the system.  And so what I ended up finding was this incredibly interesting group of people who were supporting  
**0:10:54-0:10:59:**  leadership to shift the strategy of their organizations, but that they weren't doing  this through hard facts.  And it was much more, and to me a bit unexpected, around narrative work.  
**0:11:04-0:11:09:**  So what are the stories we tell and the stories that we believe, and how do those kind of  shift and shape the actions that we take over time?  So my work ended up kind of contributing into a space around this notion of narrative infrastructure  
**0:11:17-0:11:23:**  and how do we construct new narratives and how do we deconstruct those that are no longer  serving us?  And I think what was interesting to me is that this is long work and it's deep work.  
**0:11:27-0:11:31:**  And it was very humbling that these kinds of big systems level changes won't happen  overnight.  But I have been bowled over.  
**0:11:35-0:11:37:**  It was entirely unexpected for me.  I'm not an epidemiologist, so I didn't see Corona coming in this way.  Just the extent to which many things we for a long time believed were not possible have  
**0:11:47-0:11:48:**  happened overnight.  And so in the corporate sector, we've seen executive leadership take 30 to 40 percent  pay cuts.  
**0:11:54-0:11:58:**  And that's actually in fact in South Africa been led by the presidency and leaders in  government.  So things that we never believed we'd have to kind of really struggle on this narrative  
**0:12:04-0:12:11:**  around excessive remuneration and deep inequality between highest and lowest earners.  It's when necessary action is called on us and maybe it's about appropriate social peer  pressure and you don't want to be left not taking appropriate action.  
**0:12:20-0:12:27:**  So I've been very curious and inspired to see the corporate responses to the current  crisis that we're facing.  Yeah.  
**0:12:30-0:12:32:**  So I guess those are some of the stories within the more corporate space.  But I think many inspiring stories in different places.  Kind of two that I'm really thinking on at the moment is this new initiative we've been  
**0:12:40-0:12:46:**  partnering with Woolworths and SPEAR in South Africa to set up a five hectare community  scale food security farm, learning farm.  And so we were very ambitious to think and we're still kind of building the plane while  
**0:12:53-0:12:59:**  flying it that we could bring together not just land reform, so questions of access to  land, but also to address major challenges we face in the country around food security,  youth skills development and regenerative agriculture.  
**0:13:08-0:13:13:**  And kind of at the heart of that, I was really interested around what would be new narratives  that we could kind of construct around inclusive agriculture and also around food security  that wasn't left to this kind of mindset of a handout.  
**0:13:24-0:13:29:**  And I've been blown away by the group of young farmers, all black, mostly female, who've  really come through and taken a leadership role to show that this new narrative is not  just possible, but it's something that's deeply desirable.  
**0:13:37-0:13:41:**  So I think those not necessarily sitting in mainstream spaces, if anything, those are  probably very fringe projects or programs at the moment, but I think they have something  really inspiring to offer.  
**0:13:48-0:13:53:**  I really love what you said about it all comes down to shifting narratives if we want systems  change, because I actually think there's a parallel to that in our own lives as well.  If we want to create change in our own lives, we have to observe the narratives that are  
**0:14:02-0:14:07:**  playing out in our own minds and adjust them and build the new narratives that we want  to step into.  So I think that that's a really interesting thing to think about.  
**0:14:11-0:14:16:**  For me, that's always a central question is, how do we parallel creating change in the  world with creating change in our lives so that we can both live a life of purpose, but  also live a life that's fulfilling and as we said before, filled with joy.  
**0:14:25-0:14:30:**  So maybe that's a nice point to talk a little bit more about your personal journey and your  personal narratives.  I've known you for quite a long time.  
**0:14:34-0:14:40:**  I guess it's well over, or maybe nearly 15 years, which as I say that is quite frightening  to think about.  Yeah, it is.  
**0:14:42-0:14:47:**  I was just wondering, obviously in all of that time I've known you, you've been involved  in sustainability, but when did that start?  So was there any particular turning point in your life or story or incident or person  
**0:14:57-0:15:02:**  that really influenced you to step into this sustainability oriented career?  I think it's always hard to kind of pinpoint those moments, but there's certainly a few  that stand out for me.  
**0:15:07-0:15:10:**  I remember being about 11.  And so if anyone's been to South Africa and visited Cape Town, it's this beautiful city.  And so we grew up in the Stellenbosch Winelands.  
**0:15:18-0:15:20:**  We had a kind of a small farm.  And one Saturday morning we were going into the city.  And if you've been to Cape Town, you'll also know that as you land at the airport, you  
**0:15:27-0:15:31:**  kind of land amidst a massive township, Gugulea to the Kailicha.  And so for us to drive in from the farms to the city, you drive, you know, townships on  either side of the highway.  
**0:15:36-0:15:41:**  And I remember coming back with my dad and saying like, it just doesn't seem right that  I get pocket money.  And yet there's a lot of people, you know, we, I'm extremely privileged.  
**0:15:45-0:15:48:**  So I grew up in a stable, middle income house.  You know, we didn't have periods where we didn't have things, you know, I got access  to a really good quality of education.  
**0:15:55-0:15:58:**  So in my mind at that time, it didn't seem right.  And I was like, you know, I'm going to give up my pocket money.  And my dad said, you know, you can do that.  
**0:16:02-0:16:03:**  That's an option.  He said, but what you've really been afforded is a quality of education that very few people  will access.  
**0:16:09-0:16:12:**  And so that provides you with a platform.  And you can give away your 50 rand.  So what's that probably like two euros that I was getting every month.  
**0:16:17-0:16:22:**  That'll make a difference, probably not much, but if you use this platform of education,  you can actually really change something.  And I think that stuck with me on a lot of levels.  
**0:16:26-0:16:32:**  It was, I think privilege, you have to recognize your privilege and to deny it is to insult  many, many people who were not born with them.  But I think it comes with huge responsibility.  
**0:16:38-0:16:43:**  And I think when people deny that there's a responsibility or an opportunity to learn  to be more connected, to be humbled, you miss out on something.  So that was deeply informative in my own kind of choices around what I learned and what  
**0:16:51-0:16:54:**  I wanted to do as I grew up.  And then the other being in a position of privilege and going to this really great school,  we ended up going on a 28 day hike.  
**0:17:01-0:17:06:**  And so we were hiking through this absolutely beautiful, but quite intense mountain range  in the greater McGregor Pass, probably at 15.  And because our parents were terrified of us going for a month without school, for some  
**0:17:15-0:17:19:**  reason the school not only made us do a 20 day hike, but we also had to do homework every  day.  One of the things we had to do that day after hiking for 14 hours through like, you know,  
**0:17:25-0:17:30:**  Twin Peaks and multiple gorges was write an essay on whether or not they should turn that  mountain pass into a road, because it would shorten the travel time between the two towns.  And I think it was one of the first times that as a young adult, I was really asked  
**0:17:41-0:17:43:**  to consider something.  And it wasn't about having a right or a wrong answer.  But I think the moment that you participate actively in considering something, your mind  
**0:17:53-0:17:55:**  opens up to the complexity of it.  And I became very curious about kind of the experiences between this beautiful natural  world and kind of deep social injustice and economic theories and all of those kinds of  
**0:18:06-0:18:07:**  things.  So I went on to study that.  I tried to put a degree together that at the time didn't exist.  
**0:18:11-0:18:14:**  So my undergrad was in oceanography.  And I tried to study in all the philosophy classes that they would let me and I tried  some economics was horrible.  
**0:18:19-0:18:21:**  I hated supply and demand curves.  So I often smile when I think of that because today our institute offers a really cool undergrad  program and kind of intersection between entrepreneurship, sustainability and the creative arts.  
**0:18:31-0:18:33:**  And it's totally the degree I would have taken if I could.  When I was in my second year, I was, you know, climate activism, I was the University of  Cape Town, which was one of the largest concentration of climate scientists on the continent.  
**0:18:43-0:18:46:**  And so this kind of climate change question was coming up so much.  And I found and applied for, I think they'd been somebody the year before, this youth  encounter on sustainability or YES program, which is actually where I met you, Michelle.  
**0:18:55-0:19:01:**  And it was the first time in my life, I think that I was surrounded by 30, 40 young people,  some older, some younger than myself, who were deeply passionate and active in this  world of sustainability.  
**0:19:07-0:19:09:**  And I was like, I found my tribe.  So I think when this journey became a little bit more social, a little bit less lonely  was when I started to find my own fuel and fire to be more active in my work.  
**0:19:19-0:19:20:**  Yeah.  And it's been a super fun roller coaster since then.  That's so interesting.  
**0:19:23-0:19:28:**  It's so often that point when you find that tribe and you find that language around what,  you know, you were having trouble articulating yourself that you kind of get the confidence  to step into it, right?  
**0:19:35-0:19:36:**  Absolutely.  And I think it's, we're such social beings.  Margaret Wheatley writes so beautifully about kind of finding your islands of sanity and  
**0:19:43-0:19:44:**  joy in community.  It's not that the work we do is easy or that it doesn't come with real trauma and real  grief, but it's in participating alongside others that we can find forms of joy.  
**0:19:56-0:19:57:**  Absolutely.  Fully agree with that.  And I think that's just an interesting question as well.  
**0:20:02-0:20:06:**  Like when you look back on your career, do you feel like you were sort of actively plotting  it out and then taking one step after the other, or was it more, you know, a series  of kind of serendipitous moments that led you somewhere and it's only looking back that  
**0:20:16-0:20:18:**  it all makes sense?  I don't think it always makes sense.  I mean, I can make up a story that makes it make sense.  
**0:20:26-0:20:31:**  Kind of oceanography, climate change, food security, corporate education.  I mean, there's like a way you could kind of read that if you tried really hard.  Yeah.  
**0:20:37-0:20:43:**  I think that something I'm leaning into at the moment is this idea of paying attention  to your own intuition.  And so there's moments when I've followed what seemed like my, or felt like my conviction.  
**0:20:51-0:20:57:**  And it's, it's almost always led me to a place that I'm incredibly grateful to be in.  And so I think, you know, there's a lot of voices telling you what to do, especially  when you're leaving secondary education, when you're in your undergrad, there's a lot of  
**0:21:07-0:21:09:**  people telling you what you should do.  And especially for me, it was like, no, you need to become a doctor or you need to become  an actual real scientist.  
**0:21:14-0:21:19:**  And so I had those two voices, the ones saying what you should do and the other saying, well,  so that was my mom and my dad was always the one who said, well, as long as you enjoy that,  if you wake up on a Sunday and not looking forward to a Monday, something's wrong and  
**0:21:26-0:21:28:**  you need to change.  And so I think that balance of voices were very helpful.  But at a point, you have to start listening to your own voice.  
**0:21:35-0:21:41:**  And we were doing some fascinating work last year around deep ecology, feminism, and African  perspectives.  And I came across this quote by Audre Lorde, which has just really struck me.  
**0:21:46-0:21:50:**  I think it goes along the lines of kind of a woman's place of power is within each of  us.  It's dark, it's ancient, and it's deep.  
**0:21:56-0:21:59:**  And I think that applies not just to women, but to men, to all of us.  I think it's our feminine seat of power is this deep, dark, ancient place.  And I feel not yet confident that I'm working from that place.  
**0:22:09-0:22:17:**  But I think following your intuition, your convictions, we need to pay attention to them  as well as the other voices.  But all too often, we don't listen to our own enough.  
**0:22:23-0:22:27:**  Yeah, I think that's so true, and particularly when we're younger.  And as you said, there are just so many voices in so many different directions that you can  go and it can feel really overwhelming.  
**0:22:33-0:22:39:**  And it takes us time to develop that calm confidence in our own voice and our own intuition  and to be able to follow that.  So nice that you highlighted that.  
**0:22:44-0:22:46:**  Oh, even just to know that it's there.  And it doesn't mean that you're going to be confident and brave about it.  I'm often not sure.  
**0:22:51-0:22:55:**  But it's just like, I think that's why a lot of the practices that you often speak about  and share with others are so important.  It's like the question's always there.  
**0:23:00-0:23:03:**  It's just sometimes the system's too noisy for us to hear our own question.  And so we have to find ways to kind of calm things down just long enough to allow those  voices or questions to come up and be a part of the conversation.  
**0:23:14-0:23:16:**  Yeah, absolutely.  It's a process of self-empowerment, I think, which is a long and sometimes arduous journey.  But if you can approach it with curiosity, you'll find a lot of joy along the way as  
**0:23:27-0:23:28:**  well.  Yeah, I mean, maybe just a small reflection.  Sometimes people associate that kind of work with us at the SIS.  
**0:23:34-0:23:37:**  Like, go exactly as you know, people journal when they go there.  And you know, you talk to clients and such things.  But I often am given a day where I'm expected to go into an MBA class or a business school  
**0:23:45-0:23:48:**  kind of executive leadership program.  And in a day, I'm supposed to explain kind of climate change, inequality, strategic shift,  culture shift, change agency, and, you know, I've got all these academic outcomes and credits  
**0:23:58-0:24:02:**  and points and all this stuff I don't really pay too much attention to.  And it can be overwhelming because, you know, you get to be that person that comes in and  the, you know, kind of shares the state of the world.  
**0:24:09-0:24:11:**  That's not always that great.  And I've learned over the years that in many ways, the most generous thing that I can offer  in the time that we have together is the ability or the facilitated experience to self reflect.  
**0:24:24-0:24:26:**  Because actually, we all know this stuff already.  You know, you'd have to be very disconnected from public discourse to not be aware that  these issues you just, you know, for South Africans, you need to simply drive to work  
**0:24:35-0:24:36:**  to be aware of inequality.  And so it's often about actually the sacredness of that space that you can just be able to  connect to things that are already in your own mind and your own heart.  
**0:24:46-0:24:51:**  And obviously, I don't come out of the blocks using words like heart.  But we usually get there by the end of the day.  Yeah, I find that a lot as well in my teaching, which has often been in the setting of a very  
**0:24:59-0:25:05:**  technically oriented university that, you know, these days people can Google just about  any challenge and find out about it.  What they can't do is hear other people's perspective on that challenge to value that  
**0:25:11-0:25:13:**  perspective and engage with it.  And like you say, to actually understand their own perspective and where it comes from.  And I think to link always these big challenges they learn about with their own capability  
**0:25:23-0:25:28:**  to act in that space and what are their unique set of strengths and gifts that they could  sort of bring to the table and combine with others.  And sadly, I just find that those things aren't really at the forefront in our educational  
**0:25:35-0:25:39:**  institutions, but it's what each of us as humans crave.  And the deeper we go with the questions, the more we all find that we're quite similar  in the things that we're trying to juggle.  
**0:25:47-0:25:48:**  Absolutely.  And that's the exciting space, I think, when you start to connect in the work.  You just kind of not just despite our differences, but kind of even celebrating them.  
**0:25:57-0:25:59:**  Yeah, absolutely.  So in that space then of these big global challenges and our own personal action, what  are some of the challenges that you personally face in doing the work that you do?  
**0:26:09-0:26:12:**  I imagine to some extent it's the same we all do.  Kind of balance.  Balance between kind of what I'm passionate about and my own health and sanity in the  
**0:26:18-0:26:19:**  mix.  Taking time for myself has been one of the biggest challenges I experienced.  I have been reflecting on what it is about our upbringing that lead us to believe that  
**0:26:27-0:26:32:**  that's selfish or that even if I'm being very honest, leads me to perhaps condone it in  others.  So yeah, learning to be able to take time for myself and not to even, I think sometimes  
**0:26:39-0:26:43:**  I try and frame it as, oh, then I'll be able to better serve others.  And I think even that is a trap, which is denying you that space to say, well, actually  this time is just for me and that's okay.  
**0:26:50-0:26:51:**  And actually that's a good thing.  So I've been reflecting on what is Protestant, is it Calvin?  I'm sure we get very fancy and give it a lot of words, but I do think that we have been  
**0:27:00-0:27:05:**  brought up within a narrative that values kind of hard work, but at the cost of our  own wellbeing.  And there's not always, we might be very smart, but I'm not sure we're very wise.  
**0:27:11-0:27:16:**  I find myself getting caught up in these never ending projects around the external world  and not always paying equal amount of care and intention to the internal world.  So yeah, I guess I struggle with balance and with affording myself with time.  
**0:27:27-0:27:28:**  Yeah.  Yeah.  And I think there's so many narratives that we all have there around, you know, our value  
**0:27:34-0:27:40:**  and our worth being linked to productivity and that's some deep work that as a society,  we need to reflect on.  I think if we're really going to chart a more sustainable way forward, not only for the  
**0:27:45-0:27:48:**  world, but for ourselves as well.  And there's a Simpsons episode from like the early 2000s and Homer, it's a terrible episode  for many reasons, but Homer washes up on a desert island.  
**0:27:56-0:28:00:**  He manages to convince all the islanders to build a casino and work in this windowless  casino for their whole life so that one day they can earn enough money so that they can  go on holiday to this desert island where they all happen to actually live right now  
**0:28:10-0:28:11:**  already.  And I think that just struck me so much as one of the narratives that we, those of us  in a position of privilege can afford to reflect on is that, you know, we're going to work  
**0:28:19-0:28:23:**  so hard so one day we can have a holiday and what would it be like to live a life that  you don't need to take a holiday from?  And this chance to, like you say, those of us that are privileged enough to be able to  
**0:28:28-0:28:33:**  work from home and to have the slowing down that is aligned with that, you know, can start  to look around and see how much beauty is in your immediate surroundings.  And there's no longer that need to escape somewhere else to relax or calm down.  
**0:28:41-0:28:46:**  You sort of realize that it's all accessible to you right now if you would just slow down.  Yeah, absolutely.  So then on this note, if you could go back and talk to Jess as she was graduating from  
**0:28:56-0:28:58:**  university, what would you tell her?  What would you tell your younger self?  I think maybe what we spoke about a bit earlier is kind of to listen to the voice within,  
**0:29:06-0:29:09:**  a little bit more than to the voices outside.  I think that it's not to say to not care so much of, I think it's to care less of what  other people think, but that's very hard I think when you're in your early 20s and you're  
**0:29:18-0:29:20:**  trying to make sense of the world and trying to fit in and belong.  I finished reading this amazing book recently by Thomas Armstrong called The Human Odyssey.  So I came across his work, a really brilliant book, The Power of Neurodiversity, which I'm  
**0:29:30-0:29:34:**  trying to find ways of creating much more accommodating and diverse learning environments  for people with not just dyslexia, dyspraxia, but kind of seeing these not as disorders,  but rather as gifts.  
**0:29:41-0:29:46:**  And so I'm a huge fan of his work in general, but his work around The Human Odyssey looks  at these 12 stages of life.  And I think that there's an incredible gift to be coming out of university.  
**0:29:53-0:29:57:**  You have this energy that I sometimes wish I could go back and like, you know, I didn't  need to drink coffee.  I didn't even drink coffee back then.  
**0:30:00-0:30:04:**  But it came with, for me, a lot of kind of caring what other people thought.  And I don't know how, maybe that's a great question, because I think some days I still  do, but I would love to have told kind of graduating self to care a little bit less  
**0:30:12-0:30:15:**  about what other people think and to care a little bit more about what I do.  The lifelong challenger.  So I mean, on a similar note, is there any sort of practice that you've developed now  
**0:30:23-0:30:28:**  that you wish you'd already started back then or something you do every day that helps,  helps maybe ground you, give you a little bit of balance or perspective?  I know it's a bit cliche, I get ridiculed at work every time we try and do some kind  
**0:30:37-0:30:41:**  of stuff wellness thing, I offer yoga and everyone suggests soccer instead.  But for me, yoga has been this exceptional place where I connect to myself, my breath,  my body in the least judgmental way.  
**0:30:49-0:30:51:**  I think it's an incredible practice.  This quieted time has offered me a space to bring it into my daily practice.  And I can just see the benefits, kind of clarity of mind, but also just a calmness.  
**0:30:59-0:31:05:**  So for some people, whether that's yoga or meditation or breath work, I think they're  such important pieces of our life.  And if we look at almost any of the ancient traditions and kind of religious systems,  
**0:31:12-0:31:18:**  prayer kind of is a form of meditation and mindfulness that's integrated into daily experience  as well as gratitude.  I think that's so, so critical.  
**0:31:21-0:31:25:**  And we know that it has tremendous impacts on our brain and the way in which we think  can act from a research perspective.  So yeah, I think that's a practice I'm so grateful for.  
**0:31:30-0:31:35:**  And it never seems to judge me when I get onto the mat and I can't quite touch my toes.  I appreciate that.  And I think especially having come from much more disciplined sports, much more competitive  
**0:31:42-0:31:47:**  sports, there's a gentleness and an invitation that yoga offers to find your edge, which  is really lovely.  And then the other thing, it's not a daily practice of mine, but it's become a daily  
**0:31:52-0:31:56:**  experience that I have, which is living in a village.  So I moved into the eco village where work is.  And in this village, it's one of the few places in South Africa that's so culturally diverse  
**0:32:06-0:32:08:**  and also safe for children.  One of the things many South Africans' neighborhoods struggle with is that it's not safe for kids  to be on the streets.  
**0:32:14-0:32:16:**  Gangsters and crime, a number of things.  But thankfully, luckily our village is.  And so many afternoons, the kids come past a little kind of gang of bicycles and they  
**0:32:24-0:32:27:**  kind of produce or to play a game or something.  And it's this never planned, but always welcome interruption.  So spending time with young people who seem to have their priorities better sorted than  
**0:32:35-0:32:38:**  I do is a wonderful daily practice as well.  Yeah, they invite you back into playtime, which we have forgotten how to do.  Yeah.  
**0:32:44-0:32:47:**  And I'm very lucky that I get to kick them out when it gets a bit rowdy and noisy.  I can imagine for many parents who are trying to navigate this world of homeschooling and  yeah, they may not be feeling the equal amount of gratitude.  
**0:32:57-0:32:58:**  Yeah.  I just, I can't imagine what it would be like to be caring for young people constantly in  this time as well.  
**0:33:04-0:33:05:**  Yeah.  Yeah.  They're the ones sending the kids to you at a certain point during the day, probably.  
**0:33:09-0:33:14:**  You mentioned a book before that has really influenced you.  What are some of the key things that you've read in the last year or so that have influenced  how you eat or live or lead?  
**0:33:20-0:33:25:**  What was the kind of big thing you took away from them?  I mentioned kind of the Human Odyssey by Thomas Armstrong.  I think besides offering so many reflections into my life as I've lived it up until now,  
**0:33:34-0:33:40:**  because it kind of covers all these stages, it was such an incredible piece of work, I  think that considers aging a gift.  And I think we live in a society, especially as women where we are denying the aging process  
**0:33:49-0:33:51:**  or fighting terribly against it.  And it was the first time I read a piece of work that offered a gift of each of all these  different life stages, including as we age.  
**0:33:58-0:34:02:**  And so I thought that was really something tremendous and I would highly recommend it.  It also balances perspectives of kind of remembering our spirit world and our kind of spiritual  origins with the challenge of adapting to this physical world that we live in and what  
**0:34:13-0:34:17:**  that plays out as kind of as we move through life.  And then a book that I'm currently busy with, and I may be for some time because it's about  the size of a doorstop, it's absolutely huge, is Woman's Bodies, Woman's Wisdom by Dr. Christine  
**0:34:26-0:34:27:**  Northrup.  And it's, I don't know if you've come across it Michelle, but it's, she's a medical doctor  who has put together a really consolidated review of what we know and understand from  
**0:34:38-0:34:44:**  the medical profession around women's bodies, but has woven into it the most exceptional  combination of kind of intuition, wisdom, and just a celebration of being a woman and  being in our bodies.  
**0:34:51-0:34:56:**  And it's kind of like the Bible, I think I was never given as a young child.  What probably would have had no ability to make sense of.  And so I'm just thoroughly enjoying it and yeah, it's, but taking it slow.  
**0:35:03-0:35:04:**  Because that's huge.  It sounds like one I'll have to add to the tower that's about to fall over next to my  bedside table.  
**0:35:11-0:35:17:**  So just as a final question that I like to ask all my guests, what does living a great  and full life mean for you?  I had a reflection a while ago.  
**0:35:21-0:35:26:**  I had actually gone through, I think what you'd probably term as a burnout and always  thought of burnout would be something like, you know, you wake up one day and you can't  handle it anymore and you physically like finish.  
**0:35:32-0:35:35:**  But I realized it was a long, slow burn for me.  I mean, I came with a combination of kind of a high professional load and kind of a  family member who wasn't well and taking care of them and just having nothing left in the  
**0:35:44-0:35:45:**  tank.  And I started to ask kind of questions around like, you know, at the end of my life, what  do I want to achieve?  
**0:35:50-0:35:51:**  And is this it?  And is it worth it?  And the one thing that came up for me so clearly is that I don't want to get to the end of  
**0:35:56-0:36:01:**  my life and be like, well, you know what, I answered all my emails.  So it left me not with an answer, but with a bigger question.  And I think there's something that comes from a lot of the African wisdom systems and traditions  
**0:36:09-0:36:15:**  – a lot of people know the word Ubuntu, which is this kind of I am because we are  so my identity is helped to be shaped by the collective.  But there's a lesser well-known word, Ukama, which kind of comes from the Shauna traditions.  
**0:36:25-0:36:30:**  And the way that I interpret it, and I would so welcome if others could help me to interpret  it better, it is this idea of kinship or relatedness.  And it's almost a sense of you seeing me helps me see myself too.  
**0:36:37-0:36:44:**  And so perhaps for me, I'm starting to live into a way of being in which a great and full  life – I love that – is maybe one in which I'm in good relation with myself, with others,  and this absolutely crazy beautiful living world.  
**0:36:55-0:37:00:**  With all of its complexity and tragedy and trauma, there's a whole bunch of beauty  in between too.  So a great and full life is one rich in kinship, rich in relation.  
**0:37:06-0:37:12:**  Yeah, it's not a destination, but it's a beautiful dance.  Thanks so much for listening to this episode of The Great Full Podcast.  If you liked it, then please go ahead and subscribe and share it with a friend.  
**0:37:21-0:37:24:**  And I would love to get your questions answered here.  So if there's something that you would like answered or explored on this podcast, just  send me an email to podcast at thegreatfull.com and I'll do my very best to get your questions  
**0:37:36-0:37:38:**  answered here on the show.  Thanks again.  