---
title: Systemic Regeneration And Feminine Leadership With Jehane Akiki Co Founder Farms Not Arms Lebanon Ep 15
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### The Great Full  (2021-12-17)  
### Author(s): Michelle Grant  

**0:00:00-0:00:07:**  I really do think it comes from being at peace with yourself, working on that inner conflict,  inner issues, inner connection, to be able to from that create a better connection with  the world around you.  
**0:00:16-0:00:26:**  Hi everyone, I'm Michelle Grant and this is The Grateful Podcast, a place where we explore  how to lead sustainable change, gathering insights for how each of us can eat, live  and lead for greater personal and planetary wellbeing.  
**0:00:37-0:00:43:**  My guest on the show today is Johanna Kiki, a social entrepreneur and human-centred systems  designer, originally from Lebanon and now based in the US.  I got in contact with Johanna because she runs a really interesting project, or should  
**0:00:54-0:00:59:**  I say collective, that's called Farms Not Arms.  And I came across this work because they were actually listed as one of the semi-finalists  in the Food Systems Vision Prize, something that was created by the Rockefeller Foundation  
**0:01:07-0:01:09:**  last year.  I saw their project and became really fascinated by the vision that they had to create a space  for refugees and host communities in Lebanon that revolved around food as a tool for not  
**0:01:21-0:01:28:**  only nutritional security, but for building social cohesion and for offering unique education  opportunities and pathways to regenerative futures.  So today Johanna and I have a chat about the vision of Farms Not Arms, the social and environmental  
**0:01:39-0:01:44:**  challenges the project's tackling, and we also explore what leadership looks like when  you centre co-creation and collaboration across very different cultures and backgrounds, and  why it's so important to create space for feminine values and approaches in leading  
**0:01:55-0:01:58:**  sustainable change.  Aside from being the Managing Director of Farms Not Arms, Johanna is also the co-founder  of IOI Strategic Design and of Learning Blocks, and all of these efforts have seen her acknowledged  
**0:02:11-0:02:15:**  as one of the World Economic Forum global shapers.  Now in trying to set up the conversation with Johanna, it took us some time because she  was moving through so many different time zones.  
**0:02:22-0:02:26:**  So at the start of our conversation I was really interested to learn more about her  story and how it came to be that she has connections to so many different parts of the world.  I was born and raised in Lebanon and then when I was 17 I moved to the US for university.  
**0:02:43-0:02:50:**  So I spent four years in Boston, after which I moved to New York, and in New York I worked  for a year, then I started doing my Masters, and my Masters I was linking international  development with design, strategic design, systems design and design thinking, and so  
**0:03:00-0:03:06:**  that really, you know, that fusion of international affairs and systems design is what is the  essence of what I do now.  But being from Lebanon I also have family in Europe and throughout my university time.  
**0:03:14-0:03:20:**  I've built this network of people around the world, especially US-based and Lebanon-based,  that have formed also what is the bulk of the Farms on Arms Collective because it's  really about those connections, those global and local connections.  
**0:03:28-0:03:35:**  So that led me to be in so many different places and then I was focused a lot on refugee  issues, and so because of that I worked around the Middle East as well, not just in Lebanon  but also in Jordan.  
**0:03:41-0:03:47:**  I had policy work in Turkey so that made me also be in a few different places between  the US, Europe and the Middle East.  And so I know agriculture and food is at the centre of your work with Farms on Arms but  
**0:03:55-0:03:59:**  you actually don't have a background in food and agriculture so I'm super interested  to learn what was that moment that got you really interested in food as a catalyst for  social and environmental change?  
**0:04:06-0:04:10:**  Yeah, it was actually the refugee work that got me into food.  So prior to beginning to work on food and agriculture I had been working on the issues  of integration and that has always been a very big issue that's been close to my heart  
**0:04:22-0:04:27:**  is people who are marginalised from society and it's something we need to solve which  is how to eliminate othering people, you know, and this happens on a lot of different levels.  And so a lot of my work and my masters was about understanding how to work on structural  
**0:04:39-0:04:45:**  problems regarding to, you know, slum dwellers, refugees, marginalised communities and so  I really started focusing on the refugee crisis, what now it's like seven years ago maybe,  when I really started working on it and that was what really triggered me to focus on refugees  
**0:04:57-0:05:01:**  specifically because Lebanon became the country with the highest percentage of refugees in  the world so I was seeing the refugee crisis play out in my country at an unprecedented  scale and so I really felt like I needed to do something about this.  
**0:05:12-0:05:16:**  And when I was working on the refugee crisis it was from a systems and design thinking  glance so I created this framework of what are the different things you need to tackle  in order to really help someone integrate into a new society.  
**0:05:25-0:05:30:**  And so a lot of that focus was on education to employment and I worked a lot in that space  of education and how do you provide education, how do you create education programs and even  more strategic, you know, conceptual work around education.  
**0:05:38-0:05:45:**  And then from that I had worked with refugees in Lebanon and in Jordan and then done some  policy work in Turkey and then I met a group of people in New York who were interested  in doing a refugee project around food in Lebanon and because of my work in Lebanon  
**0:05:56-0:05:58:**  and with refugees I felt really drawn to it.  I'm like I don't know anything about food but I really feel drawn to this project which  is now Farms Not Arms and drawn on using a design process in order to come up with a  
**0:06:08-0:06:15:**  food security solution to refugee food insecurity which was the initial focus of Farms Not Arms.  But then as we dove into the design process because usually with design thinking you start  with the problem and not the solution.  
**0:06:22-0:06:28:**  So as we started diving into this and as we started building that collective that became  Farms Not Arms I was working with a lot of different agricultural experts and food experts,  architects and engineers and just people who have worked around food from different perspectives  
**0:06:39-0:06:45:**  and so I was getting like an education in food and in regeneration and in food security  through my work and so now I'm such a preacher of food systems, of regeneration and I feel  like as much as we've been working on this project for three years and as much as I've  
**0:06:58-0:07:02:**  helped guide it I've also been the biggest student of it because I've learned so much  about the necessity and the problems like the really deep systemic problems of food  systems.  
**0:07:09-0:07:14:**  There are so many things that come together in a food system that for me it's one of the  most important systems that we need to create some changes in in order to also create bigger  changes in economic, social, political systems around the world.  
**0:07:25-0:07:27:**  Yeah, couldn't agree more.  I'd love to learn more then about what the idea is behind Farms Not Arms and the philosophy  and the principles that you're trying to bring to life through this project.  
**0:07:37-0:07:38:**  Yeah, of course.  So basically Farms Not Arms started as a design led inquiry into creating a solution for refugee  food insecurity and the way we started the project is by really going to refugee camps  
**0:07:52-0:07:57:**  in Lebanon in the Baka region which is both the agricultural area of Lebanon and also  the area with the highest percentage of refugees in Lebanon.  We went there and we were doing a lot of visits and just immersive research of spending a  
**0:08:07-0:08:12:**  lot of time trying to understand where food is coming from, how refugees working in agriculture,  trying to really understand the context and then we had a design sprint in Lebanon with  refugees to really map out the problems that they're facing and then the opportunity areas  
**0:08:23-0:08:30:**  and then from that we also had another parallel one afterwards in New York with a lot of different  multidisciplinary experts from the whole range of agriculture from biodynamic to vertical  farms and to hydroponics and then we also had architects, educators, engineers, just  
**0:08:42-0:08:46:**  a lot of different people coming together and by doing those two design sprints we really  defined the core pillars of what we're trying to do which one is nutrition and how can we  build a solution that really creates nutritious food.  
**0:08:56-0:09:04:**  The second was about how we actually create an agricultural solution that helps the planet  positively and doesn't create externalities that would exacerbate climate change because  agriculture is one of the biggest pollutants of the planet and we didn't want to have a  
**0:09:15-0:09:19:**  solution on one side for food but then create a bigger systemic problem and contribute to  climate change.  So regeneration was a second core focus and the third one was social cohesion because  
**0:09:26-0:09:30:**  in Lebanon when you have immigrants and refugees coming into a community there's usually a  lot of social tension and so we wanted to have our farm and our solution really bring  together the local community and refugees and have it be a place of social healing and  
**0:09:43-0:09:48:**  social cohesion through agriculture, through learning new skills, through growing food  together.  When we first started it was focused on refugees.  
**0:09:51-0:09:57:**  The refugees in the design sprint they told us that we actually fear for our security  if it's just for us because of clashes that had happened before and so we really felt  that social cohesion has to be one of those three pillars but then we didn't know that  
**0:10:08-0:10:17:**  Lebanon is going to face its biggest economic crisis ever in starting 2020 and so in 2020  national food security in Lebanon became a very big problem because more than half of  the country is food insecure in one way or another.  
**0:10:25-0:10:30:**  So this social cohesion factor also became about how can we create an inclusive food  system because the whole country right now needs food security and needs agricultural  solutions and so it really shifted a lot over the years and in a more general scale because  
**0:10:41-0:10:47:**  we really do want to create a scalable model community is really at the heart of building  farms anywhere because we don't want to just have a farm that is just selling food but  really want to create this community of this farm that's a farm school and a hub where  
**0:10:56-0:11:02:**  people come together, learn different agricultural skills and then also grow food at the same  time and the system and the farm that we designed ended up being this multi-agricultural farm  that combines regenerative agriculture with very low tech adapted agricultural technologies.  
**0:11:15-0:11:21:**  In the case of Lebanon we chose hydroponics where together they can grow 3.5 times more  food than any given space so it really maximizes production in a very efficient way and it  really produces a very wide range of food because it uses regenerative principles where  
**0:11:32-0:11:37:**  you're planting very densely, planting really diverse crops, rotating the crops so you can  really satisfy a person's yearly diet through that farm.  Yeah, amazing.  
**0:11:44-0:11:51:**  So imagine that we were in Beqar in Lebanon together and we were arriving to the farm.  Walk me through what we would see, what we would hear, who we would meet, what we would  experience.  
**0:11:56-0:12:05:**  Yeah, so when you first get to the farm you would see this vast like land and on our farm  we have a refugee family that lives on the land.  This is quite common in the Beqar where you have like a sort of a land caretaker family  
**0:12:15-0:12:20:**  that is usually refugees who live on the land, who help us out, who get food, who are kind  of like caretakers.  You would also meet our farm manager Erika and our other team members Fadi, Bahat, Faten,  
**0:12:29-0:12:36:**  and Noor, they're a group of young farmers, permaculturists who have been helping us build  this farm and who are actually our first community members.  You would on your left see two greenhouses.  
**0:12:43-0:12:48:**  One is our hydroponics greenhouse where we have two adapted systems.  One is the kind of NFT system which we're growing vertically in pipes.  We have pipes and water and lettuce right now, leafy greens growing in it.  
**0:12:58-0:13:03:**  Another is kind of like a basin, a deep water culture system where we have styrofoam and  plants that are just growing in what looks like a swimming pool.  Behind it we have a nursery for all of our crops.  
**0:13:13-0:13:19:**  Then next to it there's a common area which is this common space that we gather in and  then you would see different plots and each of those plots has a lot of different crops.  We have flowers everywhere because we have marigolds and zinnias in between them.  
**0:13:29-0:13:34:**  You'd smell a lot of herbs because we also have a lot of herbs that are in between crops.  We still haven't put our trees yet because it's a bit too hot in Lebanon right now, but  starting the fall you'd also have like stone fruits, apples, cherries, a lot of different  
**0:13:44-0:13:45:**  trees.  You would see a lot of different levels of growth and that all together create what looks  like a very bushy food forest if you go towards the end of the summer because our crops would  
**0:13:56-0:13:57:**  have grown.  And then you'd see compost piles on the side, you'd see a dog running around, our farm manager's  dog who's basically our guard dog right now.  
**0:14:09-0:14:12:**  For now that's what you would see visiting.  Sounds amazing and it was lovely to see your face light up as you were talking about it.  It must be such a beautiful space.  
**0:14:18-0:14:25:**  Yeah, it's been really nice seeing it build up from what was, so when we first got the  land it was just a field of green wheat that we used as a cover crop.  We put it back into the soil but it was just this one field of green and like seeing it  
**0:14:36-0:14:42:**  change has been very exciting because it really makes you realize that this is coming to life  and it's becoming its own character and its own area.  So I'm really excited to see it grow and I really have to give credit to our team of  
**0:14:52-0:14:56:**  farmers on the ground because they've really turned this vision into reality and it's such  a quick time that I'm really impressed with the progression of the project.  I think that's what's so interesting about it because you had this really international  
**0:15:07-0:15:13:**  co-creation and co-design process and it seems to be very embedded still in the local ecosystem.  So how did you manage that process and how did you ensure this local embeddedness?  Yeah, so it's been a lot of back and forth really.  
**0:15:21-0:15:26:**  So as I mentioned before, it started in the local and it started in really understanding  the local ecosystem and then really having, like when we were in New York and we were  doing the design sprints, we really had a lot of the local voices with us, not physically  
**0:15:36-0:15:37:**  but virtually.  So during the first design sprints we had a lot of the refugees that we initially had  in the first design sprints also be part of the second one, talk to people, they were  
**0:15:47-0:15:52:**  being interviewed and people in New York were actually understanding the local context from  them.  Then as we started defining our collective and our team, we had a few different team  
**0:15:57-0:16:02:**  members in Lebanon that were really the local voices and they were what we were testing  with when it comes to what would work, what wouldn't, getting insights from the ground,  really embedding them into the process.  
**0:16:09-0:16:11:**  So it's really been this back and forth.  And I think through this process we've met the right people.  So I really do feel like the right people have come into this project that have made  
**0:16:19-0:16:23:**  it very easy to work across time zones, across countries.  We really used a lot of tools and sketches and sending things over WhatsApp, having Zoom  meetings.  
**0:16:29-0:16:33:**  We've really created this flow of working between both.  And I can imagine it wasn't always easy.  What's been your biggest challenge in going from this beautiful concept that you co-designed  
**0:16:40-0:16:43:**  together to actually implementing it on the ground?  Yeah, I mean, so a lot of the challenges, I would say when it comes to adaptation, one  had to do with the local context.  
**0:16:54-0:17:00:**  So as we were going through the design process, the local systemic context of Lebanon was  changing and is still changing drastically day after day.  Like the economic situation keeps on getting worse.  
**0:17:07-0:17:09:**  The food security situation keeps on getting worse.  So there's a lot of things that we have to adapt and prioritize over other things.  So that was one big challenge.  
**0:17:16-0:17:20:**  Like, for example, procurement of certain materials, it has become more and more difficult.  Prices have been fluctuating.  So that has caused some adaptations of what we include, what we don't.  
**0:17:27-0:17:36:**  Then the other part is that we, in going from design model to adaptation, it's also what  are the core, really important elements that we have to include in the first phase and  what do we add next?  
**0:17:43-0:17:48:**  So for example, in our design, we had this really nice community center that's made out  of earth bricks that is really where everyone meets together.  And we realized that the space that we originally envisioned is massive and it will take a lot  
**0:17:57-0:17:59:**  of resources to build.  And we don't have that huge community yet that would use it.  So we said, why don't we just, instead of investing all that money right now in a community  
**0:18:07-0:18:12:**  center, why don't we invest in the core basics, which are building the farm and the education  program?  And then from that, build that community that would then be able to build the community  
**0:18:17-0:18:20:**  center and would be able to make use of it.  And so we have to scale a bit, scale down our land that we wanted from what was originally  15,000 square meters to 8,000 or 9,000 square meters.  
**0:18:31-0:18:33:**  So we made things a bit smaller.  We removed a few of the key elements, not remove them, but just worked on their core  rather than the whole thing and are slowly working towards that.  
**0:18:42-0:18:46:**  And another challenge was actually the first challenge that we faced because of the economic  situation in Lebanon was finding land.  So because of everything fluctuating in Lebanon, a lot of people were unsure whether they wanted  
**0:18:55-0:18:59:**  to sell their land, hold onto it, rent it, you know?  So that availability of land took us a very long time to find the right land.  And so that also in a way delayed us a little bit, but we still ended up finding land by  
**0:19:09-0:19:13:**  the time of the growing season, but it was a big challenge as well at the beginning.  Yeah, I think this land tenure question is always a big one whenever it comes to food  related solutions.  
**0:19:20-0:19:25:**  And if I understand it correctly, you're interested to train people who can then go off and set  up their own farms.  And you already have a lot of women involved in that process as well.  
**0:19:29-0:19:35:**  So what challenges do you see in terms of them acquiring the land they need and in particular  any gender issues that come into play in that process?  Our vision that we submitted to the food system vision prize, it was really about how we could  
**0:19:45-0:19:52:**  utilise 3% of Lebanon's land to feed every single Lebanese and refugee using our farm  design because of how dense it is and because Lebanon has actually like almost 70% arable  land, but it's not properly utilised so it imports 85% of its food when it could actually  
**0:20:04-0:20:10:**  export so much more and at least only use 3% of its land to feed everyone when it comes  to most of their at least vegetables and fruits and everything.  So our vision became about building those hubs that our farm and our model farm in and  
**0:20:20-0:20:24:**  of themselves, but also train people and then link them to unused land, because there's  a lot of that land, that 70% land that's unused, that could be used and could be cultivated.  What we were thinking about is actually linking them, either if they're the landowners themselves,  
**0:20:37-0:20:43:**  giving them the tools in order to build the land and the training and everything, so basically  cost sharing, and if they're not, linking them to farm owners or to landowners who are  willing to have a farm on their land and then go from there.  
**0:20:52-0:20:58:**  So basically have skilled labour that is turning their land into a farm, working on how to  split the costs based on the landowner, what they want to do with the land.  So as you can tell from what I've described about us being a collective of people working  
**0:21:07-0:21:12:**  together is that we don't really want to work alone, we really want to establish partnerships  with different organisations and initiatives in the country in order to really create a  much bigger impact.  
**0:21:18-0:21:25:**  So we had identified a few local organisations that have been working on similar issues,  and one of them for example has a database of people with land who are willing to work  on that.  
**0:21:31-0:21:35:**  So we were envisioning sort of partnership, where we're in the training space, then we  work with other organisations to find the land, to equip them, so it's really more of  just like a we do everything, but about finding the right partners.  
**0:21:44-0:21:48:**  And in terms of the gender issue, this was actually one challenge that I forgot to mention  when we went from design to implementation, is that our farm is women-led, and it wasn't  really on purpose, it just happened that we were attracting a lot of women, and our farm  
**0:22:00-0:22:05:**  manager is a woman, and we have more women farmers than male farmers at this point.  And so having women in charge has been at some points met with certain comments, certain  resistance, certain not taking something seriously because women are seeing them, so that was  
**0:22:19-0:22:20:**  a challenge.  So in our education outreach, which we're running our first education programme towards  the end of the summer, but in our education outreach we've been really focused on this  
**0:22:28-0:22:33:**  equal representation of women and men, and equal representation of Lebanese and refugees,  so that we ensure that it really is inclusive.  So we hope that by at this first step ensuring that there's inclusivity that would ripple  
**0:22:42-0:22:46:**  through the other stages of spreading regenerative agriculture.  Yeah, that's super interesting.  And I love how you're tackling this through a collective and through co-creation and collaborative  
**0:22:54-0:23:00:**  design processes, because I think that is what we need in complex systems and with complex  challenges, and I also think it means that it shapes new definitions of leadership and  what leadership means.  
**0:23:06-0:23:10:**  So I'm really interested to know through the work you're doing, what does leadership mean  to you?  How do you define the leadership we need to tackle these big challenges that we're facing?  
**0:23:17-0:23:23:**  Yeah, I definitely agree with what you said, and I do think that for me, complex problems,  no one can solve them alone, you know, so it really requires interrelated multi-organisational  approaches and solutions to really get them done, whether you're working at a small scale  
**0:23:33-0:23:34:**  or at a big scale.  So for me, I would say leadership is less hierarchical and less about, you know, this  is my strategy, what I want to do, and I'm telling you what to do, go and do it.  
**0:23:45-0:23:50:**  Like I don't think this is kind of a healthy way of leadership, especially when you're  tackling these problems or even, you know, in this day and age.  But I really think it's more about one, finding the right people to work together, but at  
**0:23:59-0:24:03:**  the same time creating the right container and the right environment for every person  to really give it their all.  Because I think that one of the things that I love about how we've come up with the design  
**0:24:11-0:24:15:**  for Farms and Arms is that it really brought a lot of different perspectives together and  a lot of people with a lot of different expertise, and each one of them had the space to really  share what they're best at.  
**0:24:21-0:24:27:**  And by bringing all of these people together and creating that space to have those conversations,  to have those brainstorming sessions, to really let each person bring something to the table,  then we could create something that none of us alone would have been able to create.  
**0:24:36-0:24:42:**  And so I really do think that part of leadership in a systemic environment or when you're working  with a complex problem is really about creating that container, about making sure that you're  helping each person feel heard and contribute to the table, and then about synthesizing  
**0:24:52-0:24:57:**  what each person has, creating that common vision, bringing what everyone is saying,  translating what one person's perspective is into how it fits into the bigger picture,  really building that bigger picture and keeping that kind of north node or that compass of  
**0:25:06-0:25:11:**  like this is the vision that we're working towards and where everyone fits in.  But for me, I guess leadership is really about doing all of that, but really helping people  give it their all and be part of something bigger.  
**0:25:21-0:25:24:**  Yeah, I think that's a beautiful way to define it.  And as always, the topics of leadership, it's much easier to talk about it than to do it.  So when it comes to putting this into practice, to stepping into this type of leadership,  
**0:25:34-0:25:37:**  what challenges do you find yourself facing personally?  I would say one of my biggest challenges was actually when you're dealing with something  that's like really big as a food system, you're like, is this actually going to lead towards  
**0:25:46-0:25:47:**  something?  Am I actually doing a change?  Are people still motivated?  
**0:25:50-0:25:54:**  Are we actually going to like, where's the light at the end of the tunnel?  And so I think that there's always like this fluctuation of like, yes, we're all going  to do this.  
**0:26:00-0:26:05:**  Like, I know we can achieve it or moments of self doubt moments of unclarity with what  you're working towards, especially because if you don't have a solution at the end, that  this is where we're working towards, but you're working on solving the problem, you don't  
**0:26:14-0:26:15:**  know what the end goal is.  So I would say that working without that end goal in the first more unclear parts of the  process is where you really need to trust yourself that everything is coming together  
**0:26:27-0:26:31:**  and will be coming together neatly at the end.  I think that's so true.  It's so normal when tackling any sort of big challenge that you do have those moments of  
**0:26:37-0:26:43:**  kind of disillusionment or doubt or questioning, and that can sometimes feel deeply uncomfortable.  So do you have any tips or things you've learned to help yourself navigate those times?  I would say one of the challenges that I've had as a person is that I always think big  
**0:26:56-0:27:00:**  and dream big, and I always think about big systems and how can we solve them.  And I remember even when I was wanting to write my thesis and my masters, I was thinking,  okay, how can I narrow this down?  
**0:27:08-0:27:12:**  Because I have so many things I want to do, and I only have like 60 pages to write about  it.  So I think that one of the things that has helped me is really creating those parameters  
**0:27:17-0:27:21:**  and really thinking, okay, this is the end goal, but how do we start now?  What are the resources that we have now and how can we work with those resources?  Like what's most feasible right now and what can we do the most with the least amount of  
**0:27:30-0:27:36:**  resources and then delegating and making a smaller plan while still having the bigger  plan in mind.  So I really feel that this really narrowing down and zooming down really helps me think  
**0:27:43-0:27:50:**  of, okay, let's think of the right now because the big picture is always in the background.  It's super important because otherwise one can get paralysed by their own dreams and  visions sometimes if they're so big.  
**0:27:58-0:27:59:**  Or overwhelmed by problems.  I think that especially being from a place like Lebanon where there's a lot of systemic  problems happening all at once, it's like you don't know where to start.  
**0:28:09-0:28:15:**  So in a way, just focusing will help you take the first step.  So in your process of creating this project and implementing it, what are some of the  stories that have really touched you or some of the moments where you've really felt like,  
**0:28:23-0:28:26:**  oh, this is why I do this work?  Yeah, so the beginning of the project, one of the things that really touched me is how  open people were to really letting me into their lives.  
**0:28:34-0:28:39:**  When I was doing a lot of immersive research, going to farms, going to camps, talking to  people, whether it's Lebanese or refugees who are working in agriculture.  And it was very natural and very easy to just see how people were opening up to me and telling  
**0:28:49-0:28:53:**  me a lot of different stories and how nice and generous people were, especially people  who don't have that much but were giving me presents, giving me a head of lettuce, giving  me some fruits.  
**0:29:00-0:29:05:**  So I really like that generosity and especially taking me to different places, letting me  see different things.  So I think that truly touched me and really made me think, okay, no matter how much we  
**0:29:11-0:29:16:**  dream big, really the things that happen on the ground that matter the most.  And then when we started building the farm, another thing that really touched me is I  realized how the right people came together, like the right team on the ground came together  
**0:29:26-0:29:32:**  and actually is the starting point of the community that we've been dreaming of building  with this project.  I mean, we always thought that we'd start building the farm with the community, but  
**0:29:37-0:29:41:**  we always thought that the community was going to be only the education participants and  never really thought that we're going to attract young Lebanese farmers who really have a  huge passion about permaculture, about regeneration, and who would actually be so happy to be working  
**0:29:51-0:29:54:**  on the ground and who would really bring this whole project together.  For me, it was a very beautiful thing to witness and to see them giving a part of them and  being so excited to be working on the farm and to really see this shift and the start  
**0:30:04-0:30:10:**  of this community coming together and even seeing interactions between our refugee caretaker,  family on the land, our team, how everyone sort of actually became a family.  It was really nice to watch.  
**0:30:16-0:30:18:**  Yeah, that sounds really beautiful.  If it's okay for you, I'm going to read out something that you tweeted that resonated  with me.  
**0:30:22-0:30:23:**  Oh, yeah.  You said, the transition to a regenerative system comes hand in hand with the rise of  feminine values and with giving women equitable access and rights to land.  
**0:30:34-0:30:40:**  I'm interested to know what your process has been to create space for feminine leadership  values in your own work and life when we are often in systems that don't necessarily nurture  them.  
**0:30:46-0:30:51:**  Yeah, so that's exactly what this tweet was about.  It's because people sometimes just think of regeneration in terms of soil or in terms  of restoring soil health or restoring climate.  
**0:30:59-0:31:02:**  But I see it as a bigger picture.  I mean, I obviously see it as that as well because we're doing that on the ground, but  I see it as a bigger picture of systemic regeneration.  
**0:31:10-0:31:15:**  And I really do think that as a world system, our world is very masculine and encompasses  and places importance on masculine values.  And masculine values don't necessarily have to be something that is only related to being  
**0:31:23-0:31:24:**  a male.  I think there's a lot of females in leadership position who are very masculine, who encompass  those masculine values.  
**0:31:29-0:31:34:**  And it's really about this taking action, harshness, competitiveness, this rise to the  top, putting yourself first, like very individualistic.  And I feel that a lot of the feminine values are more about care, nurturing, empathy, working  
**0:31:43-0:31:45:**  as a collective, communal.  So I really do think that this regenerative shift in agriculture also encompasses those  more feminine values where you're really not thinking, how can I just maximize profit at  
**0:31:55-0:31:59:**  the expense of everything else, whether it's the environment, whether it's the community,  how can I really diversify, how can I bring people together, how can I really nurture  and take care of the land.  
**0:32:06-0:32:10:**  So I really do think that in our work, we're really putting those values into practice  because we're really thinking about the community.  Yes, we are putting women first, but we're also attracting males who want to do that.  
**0:32:17-0:32:20:**  But we're also taking care of the land, restoring it.  We have a seed saving garden to really like nurture and preserve some of those organic  non-GMO seeds that are very hard to find nowadays.  
**0:32:29-0:32:32:**  It's really putting that nurture and care of the community at the heart of it, which  I think is part of the feminine.  And so that's how I think we're working on, on, on encompassing that.  
**0:32:40-0:32:41:**  That's nice.  So I like to ask all my guests this question because the podcast is called The Grateful.  What does living a great and full life mean for you?  
**0:32:52-0:32:55:**  That's a nice question.  For me, I would say living a great and full life means living a life where you're in touch  with yourself and what you really care about the most.  
**0:33:07-0:33:12:**  And it's really about harnessing that inner connection that acts as like your inner compass  and guidance to really work on the things that you care the most about and where you  can do the least amount of harm and do the most amount of impact.  
**0:33:21-0:33:24:**  And for different people, that means different things and different people have different  skills and can apply this in a different way.  But I really do think it comes from being at peace with yourself, working on that inner  
**0:33:33-0:33:39:**  conflicts, inner issues, inner connection to be able to, from that, create a better  connection with the world around you.  Yeah, I think that's so beautiful.  
**0:33:44-0:33:47:**  That question of where are we creating change from and starting there.  Yeah, exactly.  And I really do think that, you know, everyone can create change in a lot of different ways  
**0:33:53-0:33:56:**  and you need everyone in order to create change.  So I really do think by being the most true to yourself, you'll be doing what you are  meant to do the most.  
**0:34:02-0:34:06:**  And then from that, you could create a better society.  Thanks so much for listening to this episode of the Great Full Podcast.  If you liked it, then please go ahead and subscribe and share it with a friend.  
**0:34:19-0:34:22:**  And I would love to get your questions answered here.  So if there's something that you would like answered or explored on this podcast, just  send me an email to podcast at the great full dot com and I'll do my very best to get your  
**0:34:33-0:34:36:**  questions answered here on the show.  And that's it for this episode of the Great Full Podcast.  