---
title: Youth Leading Change With Yumna And Nabeeha Bite Back 2030 Youth Board Ep 23
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### The Great Full  (2022-06-06)  
### Author(s): Michelle Grant  

**0:00:00-0:00:07:**  I always say, but I'm going to say again, young people's voices are always being taken  as tokenistic and not directly embedded within policy making or decision making or governance.  And I think it's a real shame. But being a young person, I think is one of my greatest  
**0:00:16-0:00:20:**  strengths because it makes people wake up and listen. And I think that's that's what  we need more of.  Hi there, and welcome to the Great Full Podcast. This is a place where we chat with inspiring  
**0:00:30-0:00:35:**  people who are driving sustainable change in their communities, in their food systems,  and also in their own lives. And in this episode, I have a special treat for you because I have  not just one, but two amazing guests on the show for us today. Yumna Hussain and Nabin  
**0:00:50-0:00:57:**  Khan may both only be 17 years old, but they're showing up in a way that will give you hope.  They are both part of an organization that's called Bite Back 2030. It's based in the UK  and it's a youth led movement for change. They're really committed to making it a reality  
**0:01:09-0:01:15:**  for young people that they can access healthy, nutritious food. Bite Back was actually launched  by Jamie Oliver and it's chaired by the amazing Corinna Hawkes, who was on an earlier episode  of the podcast if you want to learn more about her work. But what's really cool about Bite  
**0:01:25-0:01:30:**  Back is that it is entirely youth led. So these two amazing ladies that are on the show  today are actually part of the Youth Board in Birmingham. So Yumna grew up in the UK  and she's the chair of the Birmingham Youth Board of Bite Back. And she's also serving  
**0:01:40-0:01:46:**  as a youth member of parliament in Birmingham. Nabiha, our second guest, came to the UK from  Pakistan and she's also a member of the Birmingham Youth Board and shares with Yumna this really  deep conviction that young people have the power to change the world. And all I can say  
**0:01:57-0:02:02:**  is that from talking with them and watching what they do, they really prove that's absolutely  the case. So Bite Back's a fascinating organization. They run creative campaigns to really drive  government action on getting healthy food to kids. So for example, they run a campaign  
**0:02:15-0:02:19:**  called Spill the Beans, trying to get youth to share more about the food that they're  really being offered as a part of their school meals. They have a campaign called Don't Hide  What's Inside, which is highlighting the fact that many food businesses are misleading consumers  
**0:02:31-0:02:36:**  to label food as healthy. That's actually far from the truth. And a campaign called  Ad Enough, which is all about ending junk food advertising in the UK on their way to  school. Kids are just bombarded with ads for fast food, for hyper palatable food before  
**0:02:48-0:02:54:**  they've even sat down for their first lesson. What I think makes this work so powerful is  that it is by youth and for youth. And I really loved learning about the commitment and the  efforts of Yumna and Nabiha, but also just seeing how they respectfully collaborate with  
**0:03:08-0:03:13:**  each other and hold space for each other was really a highlight of this conversation for  me. I left it feeling super inspired. I'm sure you're going to as well. And to help  get you ready for this conversation, I'm sharing a poem with you from Christina Adane, the  
**0:03:24-0:03:29:**  youth co-chair of Bite Back, called Feed Britain Better, which will help you get a feeling  for the topics that are close to the heart of everyone involved in Bite Back.  So what, we go maccis or chicken chop? The ultimate question amongst a group of friends  
**0:03:51-0:03:59:**  going out. Ironic because the two are variations of the same, both deep fried junk just under  a different name. In a world full of choices, it seems we don't have many. Can't have nice  food without spending a pretty penny. And that's the pretty price that many can't afford.  
**0:04:11-0:04:17:**  We'd rather that 99p option on the billboard. Speaking of advertising, I really wonder why  they use cartoons to catch my little sister's eye. Using kids to sell products, how can  you justify sacrificing our health for your wealth? This has to be rectified. This isn't  
**0:04:29-0:04:34:**  just one instance, it happens all over the scene. Young people's health is on the line  from London to Aberdeen. Whether it be supermarket shelves or school canteens, we deserve better.  We cannot live by these means. It's about time the food industry put our well-being  
**0:04:48-0:04:53:**  first. I don't want diabetes, obesity or anything worse. It's frightening that junk food is  our automatic reaction. When we're feeling hungry, this needs direct action. We're already  worrying about racial justice and the Earth's condition, yet we still have to fight for  
**0:05:04-0:05:17:**  a fairer food system.  You're both still in school, but you seem to dedicate a lot of time to this really important  topic of campaigning for healthier food, particularly for youth. Perhaps each of you could just  
**0:05:28-0:05:33:**  share how you realised you really care about this topic. When was that moment when you  decided to have to do something about it?  I've moved to different countries and I used to live in Pakistan. I used to see the food  
**0:05:39-0:05:46:**  inequality was massive. When I moved to the UK as an asylum seeker, I had to stay in hospitals,  refugee hospitals. I had to stay in homeless shelters. When I looked at the quality of  my food and how the food was same every day, it was repetitive, it wasn't healthy, not  
**0:05:56-0:06:01:**  fresh enough and how people were struggling compared to the people who were well off.  So I realised that it's actually a problem. At that time, I didn't know what I can do  about it because I was new to the country. I was still really confused, quite puzzled  
**0:06:10-0:06:15:**  about all of the problems going on around me. All I could do is just look at them and  that's it, do nothing and feel sorry about myself and other people around me. But then  in lockdown, I came across this organisation, White Pack, and when I looked at what they  
**0:06:25-0:06:30:**  do and how they're using young people as a voice to change the world, I was like, that's  exactly what I was looking for. That's the solution to my problem, not everyone's problem.  It's our voices and how we can raise our voice and campaign. So I joined White Pack and it  
**0:06:39-0:06:45:**  gave me that confidence and it gave me that knowledge to actually use my ideas and take  an initiative about changing the world and changing the food system.  So amazing. What about you, Yumna?  
**0:06:51-0:06:56:**  Yeah, I would say so I was always passionate about young people's voices because I truly  believe that young people do have the potential and the skills and all the passion to change  the world. So I, in Birmingham, I'm a Youth MP for Birmingham and that means that I speak  
**0:07:06-0:07:11:**  to a lot of decision makers and policymakers and counsellors and MPs to try and find out  what are the specific issues that impact young people and how young people can utilise their  own skills to make a difference and make an impact. And so I always saw food poverty as  
**0:07:22-0:07:27:**  a massive, massive issue. Covid obviously exacerbated a lot of the issues that young  people are facing. And for me, I saw food as being one of the things that separates  people who are well off and people from lower income backgrounds is the food. You can go  
**0:07:37-0:07:40:**  to a school and everything can be the same. You have the same teachers, but it's the food  that separates you on the table from one school to another. You've got young people who have  fresh, local food who understand more about food than other young people. And then you've  
**0:07:49-0:07:52:**  got young people who don't even understand the difference between certain vegetables  and stuff like that because they aren't taught food education in schools and food is such  a massive, massive part of everyone's life. It's culture, it's heritage. It literally,  
**0:08:02-0:08:07:**  it keeps you alive, it keeps you sustained. And so if you don't have fresh food, it puts  you at a disadvantage. You can't focus in school. And I saw it in Birmingham. It's such  a big issue. Like if you just look at poverty levels, it's like more than one in three children  
**0:08:17-0:08:22:**  in Birmingham are impacted by food insecurity. And that it's a massive, massive percentage  of young people who don't have access to healthy food. And Birmingham is supposed to be the  youngest city in Europe where me and the behalf of our family here. So we're both from the  
**0:08:31-0:08:34:**  youngest in Europe. And yet our voices aren't really being heard, especially when it comes  to the food system. So yeah, that's why I got involved with Bite Back 2030 as well.  I think it's just an incredible organisation that does one, impacts the lives of young  
**0:08:45-0:08:49:**  people, isn't giving them a voice and giving them a confidence like Nabiha said, but also  trying to tackle some of those big issues within the food system, like junk food advertising,  like looking at how we can make a more sustainable food system that takes into account the impacts  
**0:08:59-0:09:04:**  that it has on both people and planet. So yeah, I think Bite Back's amazing.  So as I understand it, Jamie Oliver set up Bite Back, and it's primarily run by youth  though. Could you explain a little bit more the purpose behind Bite Back and also how  
**0:09:16-0:09:22:**  it works with this youth led focus? Yeah, Jamie co-founded the organisation, but  it's like you said, primarily led by young people. And he is a big supporter of what  we do in our campaigns, and he tries his best to push it forward. And I think that's incredible.  
**0:09:31-0:09:35:**  Us actually as young people who are leading this movement and leading this change. So  we've got three separate boards. We have a national youth board who sort of work on campaigns  that are more national and that have a wider impact on maybe policies in the government.  
**0:09:48-0:09:51:**  But also we've, so me and Nabiha both sit in the Birmingham local board. You've got  the London youth board and you have a Birmingham youth board. And this Birmingham youth board  is run, it's led by young women actually. So every person on our Birmingham youth board  
**0:10:03-0:10:08:**  are women. So that's just incredible to have a women only team. And then the London board  is slightly bigger than ours and much bigger than ours actually. And it's got more than  20 young people. And I think that that's how it's run and we run campaigns more on the  
**0:10:15-0:10:19:**  grassroots level, more locally. And Nabiha, you can maybe explain a bit more about the  Birmingham board and one of the new campaigns that we're trying to set up.  Yes, we're currently working on this campaign to ban junk food advertisement in Birmingham.  
**0:10:28-0:10:33:**  And we have seen on our way back from school, wherever we are going on our routes, that  there are junk food advertisement like loaves and loaves, which are kind of brainwashing  us indirectly. We don't even know we're impacted by it, which lead us to end up buying junk  
**0:10:44-0:10:50:**  food, right? So we decided to put an end to it and call out our amperes and write a letter  to them and create a petition to finally solve this problem. But we're still working on it.  We sent him a letter, but we haven't heard from him yet. So let's see how it turns out.  
**0:10:59-0:11:04:**  So we're really trying hard on this campaign. We're still collecting signatures, trying  to promote the campaign, sending it out to the young people and lots of people agree  with us that this is a problem.  
**0:11:10-0:11:15:**  Yeah. And just to like expand on that, so like our buyback 2030, it's main aim, main  goal. Some people might be thinking, what's the 2030 behind that? So the 2030 is basically  trying to half childhood obesity rates by 2030. And we have these three main aims. So  
**0:11:25-0:11:30:**  healthy schools, healthy neighbourhoods and healthy streets. And so that's sort of our  three pathways and what sits underneath that, like I said, was the National Youth Board.  You have your Birmingham Local Board and then the London one. But also we're looking to  
**0:11:39-0:11:44:**  set up loads of new local boards around different cities in the UK this year and next year.  So if there are young people listening to this, get in touch with Wipeout because there  are new local boards, not just in Birmingham and London, but we're looking to expand. So  
**0:11:52-0:11:56:**  that would be amazing. And like Nabiha said, one of the campaigns that we're doing in Birmingham  is trying to end junk food advertising on public transport because young people take  buses, trams and trains like nearly every day to school. And so we're seeing all this  
**0:12:04-0:12:08:**  junk food advertising and we did like a few weeks of like going around the city, taking  pictures, taking videos of these junk food ads that we are seeing, McDonald's, KFC, all  these different big fast food companies. And they're like subconsciously impacting and  
**0:12:18-0:12:24:**  influencing what you buy for food. And I think like Nabiha said, it does have a big impact  on whether you buy healthier food or don't. That's one of the new exciting campaigns that  we're running.  
**0:12:30-0:12:35:**  That's amazing. I actually saw the video that you made with people ordering the chicken  in the restaurant and how they were influenced to do that. And that was really striking to  watch just what an incredible impact it has. And I also remember the last time I was in  
**0:12:44-0:12:49:**  the UK just being overwhelmed by the amount of advertising. And not only that, like if  you went to buy a bus ticket, I noticed I was all of a sudden surrounded by all of this  junk food at ridiculous prices. Like you could buy three chocolate bars for 99 pence. And  
**0:13:00-0:13:04:**  it's just it was just shocking to see that. And so many kids hanging around there after  school or before school. Yeah, it's wonderful you're doing something about it.  Yeah, I think a lot of young people hang around junk food shops, fast food shops in general,  
**0:13:14-0:13:19:**  chicken shops. And so that's like why I think for me, food is such a big thing because food  is such a massive thing. And you know, growing up in the community, they're sort of seen  as safe spaces for people, especially when you take in the racial element to it as well.  
**0:13:29-0:13:34:**  So I live in an area where the majority of people are from black African backgrounds  like myself. So I just I feel like those sort of environments are more friendly for black  young boys, because that's you know, where they've grown up. And that's a very comfortable  
**0:13:45-0:13:49:**  and safe environment for us at Bite Back. And just you know, as young people who are  campaigning to make healthier food more accessible is how can we create those safe spaces as  well for young people where they can access healthier food and have free Wi Fi and still  
**0:14:00-0:14:06:**  hang out with their friends. So it doesn't create the cycle of just spending literally  like you said, like 99p can literally be the cheapest amount for junk food. But when it  comes to healthier food, there's a lack of affordable options. So it's also creating  
**0:14:15-0:14:19:**  that element of safe space and belonging for all of these young people.  The thing with junk food is that I've noticed these companies and these shops, restaurant  owners, they're so clever. They've got these places near our schools, on our way back to  
**0:14:29-0:14:34:**  school like this specifically targeting us. And they don't realize what the consequences  of this are impacting the whole nation like whole world, the restaurant, the fast food  spaces, and the advertisements. And as you've just said, by such a powerful organization,  
**0:14:46-0:14:51:**  before before joining by back, I didn't even realize that I've been impacted by those junk  food advertisements. And as you talked about that video of people ordering and looking  at the crispy fried, really nice, juicy chicken, if I look at it, obviously, I would want to  
**0:15:02-0:15:06:**  buy that because that's how they presented us. But when you go and buy it, and when you  keep on eating it, what it leads to the health problem, you don't realize about that. And  that's what buyback is aware of. And the thing about buyback I really like is the name buyback.  
**0:15:15-0:15:19:**  I think the name stands out so much. It's such a unique name. And I told my friends  that I've been part of the organization and the campaign buyback. They find it really  funny as well in a in a nice way. Obviously, you're like, okay, so you're biting back now.  
**0:15:27-0:15:30:**  Like, we all have to buyback now.  My friends say that to me all the time. My friend said that to me just yesterday. But  yeah, it's a great name. I love it too. It's a really good way to rope young people into  
**0:15:39-0:15:43:**  the campaign because they start asking questions like, what is about what's the new campaign  that you're doing? So I feel like it gets young people interested and gets young people  involved. And that's what we want is to try and get more young people involved and included  
**0:15:52-0:15:55:**  in this because it's just it's so much bigger than us.  I think it definitely gives us power as youth. Because we are the future. We are future voters.  We are the people who would help out in everything we we are the future basically. So we have  
**0:16:05-0:16:11:**  to know we have to use our voices from now on. And because adults what they're doing  is literally doing nothing. So we have to take over technically. That's why I think  the organization such as buyback are quite important.  
**0:16:18-0:16:23:**  I wanted to ask you what you thought about that because so many adults that I speak to  when I ask them what inspires them, when everything feels so overwhelming, they always say the  youth of today and the action the youth is taking. I wonder how you feel about that when  
**0:16:32-0:16:37:**  you hear that what what sort of comes up for you when when people say that?  Yeah, there there are two parts to this because I feel like it's really easy for adults to  be like, yes, we created all the issues in the world and where you know, we're so perpetuating  
**0:16:47-0:16:52:**  it now, but we'll hand it over to young people because young people are the future. They've  got the skills and they can change it. That's amazing. But sometimes I feel like our youth  is sort of robbed off us from trying to campaign on issues that we ourselves haven't created.  
**0:17:03-0:17:07:**  And we're being directly impacted by it. And sometimes that burden can be a bit too much  for some young people. And that's definitely not wrong. It's like you feel like you've  got all the world's troubles on you. And especially when things are so personal, like food insecurity  
**0:17:17-0:17:23:**  or not having access to healthy food or, you know, just being brought up in an area where  you don't feel safe. I think that it does have a lot of impact on young people. And  so, yes, whilst I agree with Nabiha saying that, you know, adults, it's great that some  
**0:17:33-0:17:37:**  of them are trying to give young people more of a hand and be like, yes, you are the future  and you've got this. I think young people are leading change now. And that's the difference.  It's like adults need to be there to support young people and not just be like handing  
**0:17:46-0:17:50:**  everything over to us and be like, yep, we created the mess and now it's up to you guys  to fix it because, yeah, you've got you've got it all. And sometimes it just feels really  ironic. The fact that young people were here to sort of fix up a mess that we haven't created.  
**0:18:00-0:18:05:**  So I do think that organisations like BikeBike, you don't do this fake consultancy thing.  You get a lot of organisations who talk about young people without talking to young people.  And that's one of the things that I really dislike. It's like even when it comes to education,  
**0:18:14-0:18:18:**  food or anything, young people are one of the main stakeholders in this. But yeah, we're  not going to include them in the table because their views don't really matter as much. But  I think one of my greatest strengths and I always say this is that young people have  
**0:18:27-0:18:31:**  so much power. People listen up to you more as a young person. And like you said before,  I think that with some adults who are really inspired by young people and what they're  doing, I think it's really important. But young people do need that good support network  
**0:18:40-0:18:45:**  around them so they can carry on and sustain the campaigning work that they're doing or  whatever it is they want to do. So yeah.  Naveeha, what about you? How do you feel when you hear that?  
**0:18:49-0:18:54:**  When I hear that, I think I need to influence other people like me, like people of my age  group to get more involved. But I've noticed one thing when people say, oh, young people  have voice and people have power, they need to use it. But I think some people say just  
**0:19:03-0:19:08:**  for the sake of it, for example, that in politicians, they say, oh, we try to get youth involved,  which we have tried to set up youth spaces and all of that, but they're not actually  giving them the power. They're just pretending to give us the power. They have limited our  
**0:19:16-0:19:21:**  choices and still young people lack voices because lots of adults still are not supporting  young people. We need adult support and we need organisations like Bite Back to give  us the voice and give us the right direction and purpose.  
**0:19:30-0:19:34:**  I think that's what I really liked, at least from what I could see from the outside of  Bite Back, it was like adults came in and said, OK, let's set up a platform, let's offer  resources and then let's get out of the way. And that's probably what you need more of.  
**0:19:43-0:19:48:**  And it seems like they also offer you support in terms of offering professionals who can  support your work but aren't guiding your work, which seemed also like a really nice  setup of the organisation.  
**0:19:54-0:20:01:**  Definitely. It's very much advice, but it's literally giving young people a space like  where you feel very much heard. Everything that we say is taken into account and even  the internal structure. We have difficult conversations, but it's so important. We're  
**0:20:14-0:20:18:**  always being listened to, we're always being heard. Nothing ever feels like a tick box.  The young people staff relationship seems so well cultivated, everything is very well  thought of and it's just such a nice atmosphere to be in. With young people who are around  
**0:20:30-0:20:36:**  the same age as you, you're sort of in this campaigning journey together, but also staff  who are willing to understand you and always, always there to listen to you and just take  on board what you're saying in everything that they're doing.  
**0:20:43-0:20:49:**  Yeah, being in Bite Back is surrounded by all of like minded people. Everyone is there  to work for the cause.  And have fun as well. Campaigning doesn't need to be boring and that's what I like about  
**0:20:55-0:20:59:**  Bite Back. I think there's always a fun twist to things. So yeah, that's what I like.  I really think joy is the fuel for our purpose for work in the world. So that's nice to hear.  And I can see it in how you interact with each other. It's really nice to see how you,  
**0:21:09-0:21:13:**  yeah, you clearly have fun with each other, you make space for each other. So what are  the most important things you've learned from either one another here or from the broader  youth who work with you on the Birmingham Youth Board? What are some of the most important  
**0:21:23-0:21:26:**  things you've learned from each other?  I would say the importance of listening to people's stories and actually combining your  lived experience as well as like the research that we do as well to actually make differences.  
**0:21:35-0:21:40:**  One of the things that I would say I've learned from everyone in Bite Back is just the way  you, like if Nikki's listening to this, Nikki helps with framing and the way we put out  Bite Back messages and she's going to be really happy when she hears this. But I just love  
**0:21:50-0:21:55:**  framing. So it's like framing the message that we want to tell people about Bite Back  and our story and why we do things the way we do. And I think one of the things that  I've learned is the power of storytelling. So I'm a poet so I love writing poetry and  
**0:22:03-0:22:08:**  writing in general. So storytelling and communicating and speaking to different people and hearing  their stories just makes me really, really happy. So I think one of the things that I've  loved about Bite Back is just it's been able to give me more of also just awareness about  
**0:22:17-0:22:22:**  how important storytelling is in terms of campaigning and just putting the message out  there to people. Because the way you tell a message can either make someone go further  away from the cause or bring them much closer. So I would say definitely the way you tell  
**0:22:31-0:22:36:**  the message in storytelling in general is one thing that I've really learned and just  I'm hoping to even take that further and find more ways that we can be more creative in  our campaigning.  
**0:22:44-0:22:48:**  I would say the importance of intersafety and diversity because in our organisation  everyone is coming from all walks of life. It's so diverse, so good. I feel like I'm  living in an actual world with all different kinds of people all coming together. We can  
**0:22:58-0:23:03:**  relate to each other. And as Yumna said, storytelling. So we can definitely relate to each other,  learn from each other, be part of each other's journey, support one another to work for our  cause. So it's quite amazing. And as Yumna also mentioned, framing. I didn't even know  
**0:23:12-0:23:14:**  about framing before Bite Back.  Yeah, I didn't.  I didn't know there's something as framing and how powerful it can be to make your voices  
**0:23:19-0:23:22:**  be heard.  And you see that in the material and the way your campaigns are delivered too. They're  very, very effective in getting attention and in helping one understand a complex topic  
**0:23:31-0:23:32:**  really quickly.  Yeah. And I think it just makes people relate to your message even more. And like you said,  it simplifies it in a way that is still kind of detailed, but brings people closer in as  
**0:23:43-0:23:47:**  well. So you're presenting it in a really concise way that still kind of draws people's  attention in. And I think one of the things that I really liked is just people being like,  oh, I got where you're coming from. Even if someone's not able to understand like your  
**0:23:58-0:24:02:**  particular struggle, they're still able to see, okay, what part can I play in that? And  they can, you know, you can take them on that journey with you. And I think that's something  that's really special.  
**0:24:08-0:24:12:**  Yeah, I think particularly around the topic you mentioned before, you know, one of the  experiences around banning junk food advertising, but other parts of your work are around the  other side of that, which is, well, how do we get people access to healthy food? And  
**0:24:21-0:24:27:**  a lot of people don't necessarily understand what it means to not be able to access healthy  food as a young person. What would you wish they knew about that lived experience to help  them realise how important it is if it's something they haven't experienced themselves?  
**0:24:37-0:24:43:**  Yeah, I would say just food is just a big part of everyone's life. So if you don't have  access to healthy food as a young person, just become a young person's perspective,  how can you expect it to concentrate in school or how you expect it to just, you know, live  
**0:24:55-0:24:59:**  just on a day to day basis without access to healthy food? And there's just so many  different things within the food system that need changing, like just trying to lessen  down on, you know, the food waste. There's so much food waste everywhere, wherever you  
**0:25:10-0:25:15:**  are. I was reading something like a few weeks ago and it was saying how all the food waste  in a year can total up to 11 meals to feed somebody who doesn't have food. And you can  imagine 11 meals a day. Some people don't have three meals a day. I think in England,  
**0:25:27-0:25:33:**  it's such a big issue. Like food insecurity is such a massive issue that there's an overreliance  on food banks now and we saw it in the pandemic. I think when you think about certain things  like overreliance on food banks, you see the food delivery apps, Deliveroo, Uber Eats,  
**0:25:43-0:25:49:**  there's such an overreliance on all this stuff. And I think people nowadays just want things  that are convenient for them and things that are cheap. And junk food hits those boxes  straight off. I think it's such a big issue and I think it definitely needs to be looked  
**0:25:58-0:26:02:**  at within our education system as well. We're not really taught much about food except the  red, orange and yellow labelings that you have. We don't really know about nutritional  labelings. We're not really taught on how to cook food, how to grow food, how food plays  
**0:26:13-0:26:17:**  a bigger part in the ecosystem, how important it is to your health. There's so many, so  many different things. I was speaking to, so I went to a primary school on the outskirts  of Birmingham and so the young people grow their own food, they cook their own food,  
**0:26:28-0:26:31:**  they make their own food. And these are primary school children who aren't older than the  age of 11. And it's directly embedded within their curriculum so they teach their young  people about the process of food from growing to production to packaging to actually having  
**0:26:42-0:26:46:**  it on your plate. I was speaking to teachers and I'm like yeah this is amazing. It's brought  the students and the staff closer together. You know when you're eating together with  other people it's that sense of community, it's that sense of respect that you have for  
**0:26:53-0:26:58:**  each other. There's so many different things and I think that people don't really register  all of that. When they think about food they just think yeah I mean it's just I'm just  eating something and I'm leaving but it's literally such a big part of our lives and  
**0:27:07-0:27:11:**  we don't really think about it. And I think yeah that's just a few of the things that  are wrong with our food system now but I think one of the big things that we need to do is  try and give people from all different parts of the food system a voice and try and build  
**0:27:22-0:27:27:**  stronger you know alliances with people within the food system such as farmers, growers,  young people rather than just big businesses hogging the spotlight. We need a healthier  spotlight on healthier food on young people's voices to create a better impact in our food  
**0:27:38-0:27:39:**  systems.  Can I add on to what you said? I think that it's cheap and it's easy to get. I think people  are so used to eating junk food that they find it always more delicious compared to  
**0:27:51-0:27:55:**  the healthy food so they've got used to that taste because so much of that is available,  so much of that is given to them and there are loads of junk food advertisement. Well  why can't we have healthy food advertisement? Like if you want to invest why can't we invest  
**0:28:04-0:28:09:**  in something which is useful and I think people need to eat together socialize but the thing  is we don't have enough healthy food spaces where people can get together and socialize.  All you can see is high streets of UK flooded with junk foods, flooded with chicken shop,  
**0:28:19-0:28:24:**  chip shop, all of that. That's where good young people go. You're not giving them a  way out so they can't have a way out. They will still be trapped inside of that junk  food and all those unhealthy options and as you said relating to your question, I think  
**0:28:33-0:28:39:**  it all comes down to awareness and education. People who haven't had those lived experiences,  they don't know right? But I think if there's not enough awareness, there's not enough education  for people to know what's happening around them. So I think school plays a big role in  
**0:28:49-0:28:53:**  that but the thing is the school even doesn't have healthy food options so where would young  people go? There's literally no way out and that's what we're trying to do as fight back.  Okay so I am totally buying everything you both say and I would immediately make changes  
**0:29:08-0:29:13:**  if I was in your local government but I'm not unfortunately. So let's imagine that you  have two minutes with your local representative. What would you tell them?  I would definitely tell them that I am a young people living in Birmingham and I'm representing  
**0:29:24-0:29:30:**  the voices of all the young people in Birmingham. How we are impacted by junk food, how we have  no healthy food options, how we are indirectly being brainwashed, tempted to go out and buy  junk food, how our health are impacted and we need your help and support to put an end  
**0:29:42-0:29:46:**  to it but you're not listening to us. You're too busy listening to all other people, all  other issues rather than which is impacting us. Yeah that's all I'll talk to them about  and I might throw some statistics and data to be more convincing.  
**0:29:57-0:30:00:**  With a cherry on the top. What about you, Yonah?  Yeah I mean I would definitely talk about how our government needs to do more to make  sure that young people's voices and their concerns are not being taken as tick boxes  
**0:30:08-0:30:13:**  but our voices are directly embedded within decision making and you know we aren't necessarily  asking for seats at the table any longer. We're building our own tables, we're building  our own chairs and we're making spaces where young people's voices truly matter and so  
**0:30:22-0:30:28:**  that's what I would say and yeah I would definitely be talking about how we really only have two  options. We can either go down this path of further destruction of the planet and exploitation  of people when it comes to the food system or we can actually choose to recognise the  
**0:30:38-0:30:43:**  urgency of this food crisis right now where you have childhood obesity rates on the rise  but also malnutrition in one of the six richest economies in the world. What we love to brag  about is our people who don't have access to healthy food and it's impacting their lives  
**0:30:53-0:30:59:**  on a detrimental level. We can either choose to recognise this and we can build these powerful  alliances and this movement for food justice that goes beyond borders, that goes beyond  ages, that goes beyond race and everything else and that gives people the agency and  
**0:31:09-0:31:15:**  has equity at its heart but yeah I think it's really important for decision makers to listen  to the voices of people in general but particularly young people because young people have some  powerful stories to tell like you know Nabiha her story is just incredible and I think it's  
**0:31:25-0:31:30:**  one thing to actually recognise what you're going through at the time but it's another  thing to be like yeah it's impacting me but now I want to do something different and actually  make a difference in the lives of other young people so yeah I think that's really commendable.  
**0:31:40-0:31:44:**  So you mentioned something before which I think is really important that's how overwhelming  this burden can feel particularly on young people of all these big challenges that you're  trying to tackle in your spare time while you're also at school. That's an enormous  
**0:31:54-0:31:58:**  burden. What have you learnt about how to navigate that and how to look after yourselves  in that process? I think sometimes there can be a breaking point but it all comes down  to your mindset and your motivation and that burning desire to change the world and make  
**0:32:08-0:32:13:**  an impact so if you've got if you really want to do something I believe you know it's going  to sound a bit cliche but where there's a will there's a way. If there's a will to do  something I think you can fit into your day and you can definitely have a balance it all  
**0:32:23-0:32:28:**  comes down to work-life balance as well. Obviously it's hard so you have to have a schedule.  I always have a to-do list even though I'm not the most organised person on the planet  I still procrastinate a lot as well but I end up doing things at the end of the day  
**0:32:36-0:32:41:**  so it all comes down to trying to just trying you don't have to do it like you don't have  to fully accomplish your goal but what is what matters for me is trying at least it's  better to do something than not doing anything at all so I always try to do things have a  
**0:32:50-0:32:56:**  balance deciding what to do when so trying to fit it all in my day and if I feel like  losing motivation if I feel like I'm too tired then I have to remind myself like what  I'm doing this for who am I doing this for think of a bigger picture I would say. Yeah  
**0:33:07-0:33:11:**  and I would definitely agree with that and it's really really difficult a lot of people  like how do you balance it how are you able to and I'm like sometimes I don't balance  it and it's actually okay to admit that yeah sometimes I will spend more on things that  
**0:33:19-0:33:23:**  I do outside of school like campaigning for food justice because for me it's a really  big thing and I understand you know the impact that I can have on this issue so the bottom  line is that every person has the right to access healthy food no matter how old you  
**0:33:35-0:33:40:**  are no matter your background and so for me that is the one thing that drives me and you  don't need to be this sort of perfect activist like Nivea said doing one thing is better  than doing nothing it's important to just understand where you are and not put too much  
**0:33:50-0:33:55:**  pressure on yourself because the world is already you know big and there's so many different  issues and it's easy to sort of feel overwhelmed especially as a young person but I would say  it's really important and this is advice to myself is the importance of rest when it comes  
**0:34:04-0:34:09:**  to activism and I actually wrote a piece on this a couple of weeks ago about the importance  of rest and activism it's really really important because you can't continue fighting for change  if your cup is empty and rest is such a natural reaction to tiredness and lack of energy and  
**0:34:21-0:34:28:**  feeling so overworked and the culture that we live in now in society it's so hyper capitalist  we want to keep pushing for success whatever that means whatever campaign that we're doing  we're like yes yes we want to win it and it's really important that we do but success is  
**0:34:37-0:34:43:**  relative and activists and advocates whatever you want to call it we seem to translate this  sort of this notion into social movements that we're leading where we're a part of and  sometimes you place so much pressure on yourself to keep moving to keep striving even at the  
**0:34:56-0:35:00:**  extent of your mental and physical health and we lose ourselves and we lose our connection  to others and it's difficult to then keep pushing with this feeling of detachment that  you feel and being overworked and being overworked is like seen as a badge of honour pride when  
**0:35:12-0:35:16:**  it really shouldn't be so yeah I would definitely say that we can thrive if we give our give  ourselves the space to to rest and we need to practice it consistently because it is  such a radical tool for community healing and just being able to stay in the work that  
**0:35:25-0:35:30:**  we're doing we need to reframe our bodies sites of rest and I can go on about this for  so long because I've recognised that when I do rest more and I take a step back it's  had such a bigger impact in terms of the energy that I can bring to a campaign and what I'm  
**0:35:40-0:35:45:**  putting into myself what I'm releasing out so yeah I would say it's it's such a big part  and I've this is definitely a message for me as well so yeah we often become very passionate  about the topics we need to learn ourselves so that's what I'm passionate about for the  
**0:35:54-0:35:56:**  same reason yeah.  As Yamuna said about success with relatives I think what sometimes most young people they  end up comparing themselves with other people and I think subject is quite subjective and  
**0:36:06-0:36:12:**  perceptive as well because everyone's living different life based on different circumstances  so everyone has a different timeline and everyone's definition of success is different so if you  compare your success like for what you're doing should be enough for you but it might  
**0:36:23-0:36:26:**  not be enough for some other people so if you keep comparing because everyone has got  different capabilities different goals so if you end up comparing yourself obviously  you're gonna put a pressure on your mental health so sometimes you end up losing yourself  
**0:36:34-0:36:39:**  so I think we should be really careful and be self-aware of our tools that we're not  comparing we're definitely taking rest.  Then I have a last question for you I ask all the guests on the podcast this question  
**0:36:46-0:36:52:**  the podcast is called The Great Full what does living a great and full life mean for  you?  I'm very passionate about life when people ask me what are you passionate about I wouldn't  
**0:36:57-0:37:03:**  say I'm just passionate about one thing all of these things of girls are very cheesy but  I think these lines actually hold the real meaning of life I think everyone should live  life to their fullest giving hundred percent and having no regrets no virtues so I I would  
**0:37:13-0:37:18:**  say I live my life I believe in the thing attitude of gratitude so even if you're not  getting what you want but if you're as long as you're trying you should be grateful and  live your life because if you keep on striving for more and more in terms of for example  
**0:37:29-0:37:34:**  wealth you would never be happy the true happiness comes from mindset from your perception of  life perception of reality and just being grateful for what you have rather than striving  for more just making use of the opportunities already available to you and giving your hundred  
**0:37:44-0:37:46:**  percent and living your life.  Yeah I don't even think I need to add much to that like she just said it all like that  is for me what life is about and just staying true to myself and trying to be confident  
**0:37:56-0:38:02:**  in myself not really compromising on my beliefs and my value system my core values and I am  really strong on my faith so just making sure that I trust in God and trusting in myself  and the people that I'm close to and my family my friends and just prioritizing the message  
**0:38:11-0:38:16:**  and the aim and never feeling like what I'm doing is not enough I think I feel like a  lot of us feel that center for I'm not doing enough you know we're speaking about things  that impact our lives and the lives of so many like communities around us in the communities  
**0:38:24-0:38:28:**  that we're part of so yeah sometimes it does feel really heavy but like Nabiha said I love  learning I love life I love taking in experiences and every day just trying to be a better person  and yeah no one's really made change if they've tried to blend in with other people and I  
**0:38:39-0:38:45:**  think it's just so important that for us we just try and like Nabiha said try always find  the one good thing one positive thing in every day like at least you found that one thing  in that day that you know that's made you positive that's put a smile on your face and  
**0:38:54-0:39:00:**  I would say like in any campaign you work that you're doing in any sort of social movement  or anything joy optimism being content is the thing that makes it keep going it's the  hope that we're living for a better tomorrow and I think that is the one thing that I think  
**0:39:12-0:39:16:**  if there was anything that anyone could take away from this it's just it's just that feeling  of love of agency of optimism of hope and joy because that is the one thing that keeps  us going and it's the one thing that you know that we're striving for for about tomorrow  
**0:39:26-0:39:27:**  so yeah.  Well ladies aren't you two amazing that was such a beautiful conversation thank you and  at the end I feel like I want you to be the mayor of West Midlands now or even better  
**0:39:40-0:39:46:**  the prime minister right now and I think we would be able to tackle a lot of the big issues  that we're seeing so that was just yeah so inspiring to hear your stories and your passion  the energy that you're bringing to this really important work so thank you both so much.  
**0:39:55-0:40:00:**  Thank you so much for having us.  Thanks so much for listening to this episode of the Great Full Podcast.  If you liked it then please go ahead and subscribe and share it with a friend and I would love  
**0:40:10-0:40:15:**  to get your questions answered here so if there's something that you would like answered  or explored on this podcast just send me an email to podcast at the great full dot com  and I'll do my very best to get your questions answered here on the show.  
**0:40:27-0:40:40:**  The first take in this episode came from Blue Dot Sessions.  