---
title: BONUS Episode: Live panel from evokeAG 2020 featuring global agrifood tech experts
---

### Agtech - So What?  (2020-03-11)  

**[0:00:00-0:00:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:00:00):**  We are now going to commence with the opening plenary session.  If we could please ask you to make your way through, take your seats for the commencement of this morning session. Thank you.  Hey guys, Sarah here. As you can already tell, today's bonus episode is going to be a little bit different.  
**[0:00:19-0:00:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:00:19):**  Instead of an interview, this is a live recording of a panel I facilitated at this year's Evoke Ag conference.  But before we get to the panel, I want to give you a little taste of how the event actually feels.  That was Culture Evolves. At Evoke Ag, they performed a traditional dance and music that told a story from the Kulin Nation about Bunjil, the creator.  
**[0:01:16-0:01:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:01:16):**  A really amazing performance, acknowledging the traditional owners of the land and helping to open the conference.  In addition to the old, the traditional, Evoke Ag also featured the new, the young. Here was the first speaker on the main stage.  This is agriculture. It is diverse, rich in knowledge, evolving, and the most exciting place to be.  
**[0:01:51-0:02:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:01:51):**  To grow though, we need to look at where we've come from, where we are going, and how we are going to embrace the future.  Now imagine you're sitting in the beautiful and historic Royal Exhibition building in Melbourne,  surrounded by 1300 people from farmers to startups to investors, waiting for Evoke Ag to kick off.  
**[0:02:14-0:02:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:02:14):**  You might have expected a globally famous speaker to come out, but instead Evoke Ag kicked off with this, a future young leader,  one of eight, all under 30 years old, that would present throughout the two-day event.  The 2020 future young leaders are on the cusp of something really exciting.  
**[0:02:36-0:02:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:02:36):**  They're on the cusp of being catapulted by Evoke Ag into the world of networking, connections, and ideas.  Ideas that will fuel their passion to drive Australia, New Zealand, and Asia-Pacific agriculture forward.  The power of the humans in this room can rival any industry, and we will tackle and face the challenges we have ahead of us.  
**[0:03:14-0:03:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:03:14):**  I'm Callen Daly. This is Evoke Ag, and together we can change the world. Thank you.  So, pretty impressive, right? I've added a link to the Future Young Leaders program and to Culture Evolves in the show notes,  so you can learn more about both. What is Evoke Ag? Well, there's no one better to explain it than Kay Hull.  
**[0:03:38-0:03:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:03:38):**  Kay is the chair of the organisation behind the event, Agri-Futures Australia, and here's what she said on the main stage the first day.  So, ladies and gentlemen, what is Evoke Ag? Our vision for Evoke Ag is to showcase, to inspire, to connect and power growth and opportunity in agriculture.  It is an investment, an investment in collaboration to establish the point of difference for the Asia-Pacific region.  
**[0:04:08-0:04:18](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:04:08):**  It's together we can position ourselves in the global market. It's about enthusiasm. It's about optimism for a prosperous future.  It's to encourage you, each of you, to immerse yourself in this explosion of technology within your business, your research, your organisation and on your farms.  Evoke Ag is different. Evoke Ag is a plan. It's a mission. It is not just an event that you turn up to and maybe have a great time.  
**[0:04:45-0:04:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:04:45):**  Every aspect of Evoke Ag is carefully crafted and is designed to bring the future into focus for you.  It's a pretty exceptional event, but of course not everyone can make it to these conferences in person.  So it's a good thing we have podcasts. The rest of this episode is the live panel discussion that I moderated.  
**[0:05:05-0:05:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:05:05):**  Check out the show notes for more information on the panellists and links to the organisations that they mention so you can learn more.  If you want to achieve genuine innovation and progress in global agriculture, what we need is exceptional collaboration between governments, industry leaders and the community.  Now, we've had a global lens and we're now going to take it into the local.  
**[0:05:24-0:05:41](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:05:24):**  So John, if you can take a seat, I'm going to welcome our first panel, Liza Noonan from the CSIRO, Andrew Coppin from Farmbot Monitoring Systems, David Downs from NZTE and Sarah Nolet from Tenacious Ventures who is going to facilitate this discussion.  It's the local perspective, the Asia Pacific region and how we are rising. Would you please welcome this rock star panel.  Good morning everyone. I imagine you can all check out who these speakers are in the app and on your own time.  
**[0:06:02-0:06:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:06:02):**  So if it's alright with you all, we might just get stuck into some questions.  We've come a really long way in the last 12 months in terms of agri-food tech here in Australia and in APAC.  So we'd love to hear from each of you your kind of perspective on some highlights from the last 12 months. Liza, we might start with you.  
**[0:06:19-0:06:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:06:19):**  Cool. Okay, thanks Sarah. Hi everyone, I'm Liza from CSIRO. My role is as the director. So I've been based in Singapore for the last two years.  Our role in Singapore just really quickly is to promote Australian science and innovation into the region.  So we're bringing investment back into Australia, identifying some partnerships where there's shared national challenges, say for example in food security.  
**[0:06:45-0:06:52](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:06:45):**  And of course working with partners like Austrade to help Australian deep tech start-ups and SMEs scale into the region.  Agri-food innovation has been a huge focus area for us because the scale of the opportunity that presents itself in Asia for the agri-food ecosystem here in Australia to address is massive.  There's a report that was issued at the end of 2019 by Temasek, PwC and Rabobank called the Asia Food Challenge.  
**[0:07:12-0:07:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:07:12):**  And it called out $800 billion US of additional investment needed to basically feed a population of people which is going to grow by 250 million in the next 10 years.  So that's another whole Indonesia. Feed a wealthier population. So food spent annually in Asia right now is US $4 trillion.  In the next 10 years that's expected to get to $8 trillion.  
**[0:07:41-0:07:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:07:41):**  But there's also some really significant challenges. You know Asia is a region of extremes.  We've got that incredible growth but at the same time challenges around sustainable nutrition, waste and of course environmental degradation and yield.  So big news in Singapore was the release of something called the Singapore Food Story.  
**[0:08:02-0:08:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:08:02):**  So Singapore as a country has called out a national ambition to grow 30% of its own nutritional needs by the year 2030.  Right now it imports 90% of its food. And it's really getting out there with some very clear targets, some investments, everything from the research sector right through to bringing in the very best accelerators and venture capitalists to set up in Singapore.  To say we want to innovate in urban food production, we want to innovate in alternative protein development and we want to innovate in food safety systems.  
**[0:08:33-0:08:37](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:08:33):**  So much opportunity for the local ecosystem here to engage.  Love it. And Coppo, how about from the start-up perspective, what's been a highlight for FarmBot in the last 12 months?  Yeah, well I mean as a participant and investor in the sector over the last five or six years, I mean I think I'm just super excited about everything that's happening.  
**[0:08:53-0:09:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:08:53):**  To see everyone in this room, to see the interest in ag tech, you know it's been a huge evolution.  You know we've still got some ways to go engaging with corporates, engaging with the customer base.  I think there's still some challenges around the top down and bottom up.  
**[0:09:16-0:09:20](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:09:16):**  You know farmers don't know where to go and corporates don't know where to go.  And as participants in the ag tech sector, it's our job to make sure that people get clarity around that and they really know who to talk to.  Whether they're looking for a solution at the farm gate or whether they're looking for something to invest in or to solve a problem that they've got.  
**[0:09:38-0:09:44](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:09:38):**  And I guess the corporate one's pretty interesting. I think it's one to maybe dig into a little bit.  There are some corporates in the room so maybe it's an opportunity for us on the panel to give them a bit of a call to action to get involved and help start-ups.  But maybe John from your perspective, how have you seen that working really well? How are corporates avoiding innovation in theatre and actually kind of digging in meaningfully?  
**[0:09:59-0:10:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:09:59):**  Well I think that many corporations today are looking outside their companies more and more because you know if I'm a CEO I wake up at night time thinking about how am I going to get disrupted by another company.  So it's on the forefront of many corporates' minds.  What we found is that it's good having an accelerator and getting these companies started but they're not going to scale if you don't have backing from major venture capital or you don't have investment from major corporations that are in the space.  
**[0:10:29-0:10:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:10:29):**  So what we've managed to do is kind of bring them to be very much part of this.  So I know Yamaha Ventures, Nolan Paul is here today. He's been instrumental in terms of helping grow and scale those companies.  Likewise we're working with bigger corporations that are like the likes of Land O'Lakes or Valley Irrigation. They're looking for solutions.  
**[0:10:49-0:10:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:10:49):**  If they're part of that and they're willing to put the investment in it, things will work.  But if we're in a situation where we're having start-ups getting a small amount of money and then trying to survive, it's a very tough challenge.  I know when I was moving to Australia about four years ago I had folks tell me, you know, why are you coming to Australia? Why not go to New Zealand?  
**[0:11:10-0:11:15](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:11:10):**  And I think actually that question is probably less clear now. Australia's come a really long way in that time.  But it's a challenge for both Australia and New Zealand with these corporates because we don't always have the scale of that investment, the scale of that venture capital.  What is New Zealand doing so well?  
**[0:11:24-0:11:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:11:24):**  I presume that's a question for me because I'm a New Zealand.  I hope so.  Okay, cool.  
**[0:11:29-0:11:38](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:11:29):**  My name is David Downs. I'm from New Zealand as you can tell. I've actually worn the traditional New Zealand footwear, the Allbirds.  And by the way, you'd be welcome anytime to move to New Zealand.  What is New Zealand doing? Well, I suppose we've got the advantage, and I can say this because I'm not Australian, we've got the advantage that we don't have that state system that sort of I think disrupts, that makes it difficult, you know, between the federal level and the local level.  
**[0:11:56-0:12:00](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:11:56):**  New Zealand is small and perfectly formed and it's easy to collaborate.  There was recently a study done that sort of says that anyone in New Zealand is like two degrees of separation from anyone else and in the ag tech space it's almost like one degree of separation actually.  Particularly, there's a couple of people in the audience here who are literally connected to everybody in the agri tech system in New Zealand.  
**[0:12:16-0:12:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:12:16):**  I work for the government, but before you start throwing things, my job is to help government and industry work together and to create a single plan for New Zealand for agri tech.  And we're about to launch in the next few weeks. We're just out for a consultation at the moment.  And that's looking at how all the parts of the ecosystem can work together.  
**[0:12:35-0:12:47](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:12:35):**  So that's, you know, researchers and investors and, you know, entrepreneurs, obviously farmers, it's government agencies like the one I represent and the whole ecosystem has got to work together.  I think picking up on the point that John made, it can't be around just startups and it can't be around just corporates.  It's got to be around the collaboration between all parties.  
**[0:12:56-0:13:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:12:56):**  Yeah, great. So Coppa, what do you think are the, I guess, opportunities, I know we've been working on a few, to get Australia onto the same kind of page and really increase this collaboration and solve some of the silos that we've had in the past?  Yeah, well, I mean, I think there's a great lot of work going on on multiple fronts.  Obviously, this event is a huge accolade and, you know, bringing people together to have like-minded conversations.  
**[0:13:21-0:13:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:13:21):**  I was at a food agility event last week where, again, 30 leaders talking about the issues, tabling the challenges.  And, you know, to the extent that Australia is a far bigger country and we need to get people on the same page, I guess, you know, we've started the Australian AgriTech Association to try and get all people who have interest in agritech,  whether it's at an individual level, corporate level, as a start-up or a corporate, to try and get one voice around the conversation so that we can be more powerful.  
**[0:13:57-0:14:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:13:57):**  But, you know, John, you come down here from San Francisco, you know, you must look at the map of Australia and say, you know, where do I go, where do I start, you know?  And you're obviously planning to go to Sydney before you might come here, but it's my first time in Melbourne and seeing what's actually happening here.  We're obviously working with somebody like Driscoll's who are working with Costa here and did a big footprint here in Victoria.  
**[0:14:20-0:14:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:14:20):**  So I think there's a lot going on. I would just pick up on your point with New Zealand.  Not to be a bad guy here because the Irish people love the New Zealanders after beating us so badly in the World Cup.  Put that aside. We see more New Zealand start-ups and more New Zealand companies and people like Peter Wren, Hilton, gathering a group of people together,  
**[0:14:46-0:14:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:14:46):**  not just bringing them to an event, but actually meeting farmers, engaging with the technology players that are there.  I think it needs to go beyond just kind of this is a great event, but you need to kind of integrate with farmers, with corporates, and build those relationships that are there.  And I think my hat's off to Kiwis. They've done an outstanding job in doing this over the last few years.  
**[0:15:11-0:15:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:15:11):**  Yeah, thank you. I think we've got over 100 New Zealanders. Put up your hand if you're from New Zealand. Who's from New Zealand in the audience?  Oh, you're all shy. Yeah, but they're good. They're here. They're among us. They look just like you too, actually.  Just be careful. You could be sitting next to one right now.  
**[0:15:25-0:15:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:15:25):**  But the thing is here, we've got some of the best and most innovative farmers in the world, and our adversity has created great technology.  And what we have to do as a country is just get together, get one voice, get government, get corporations, everyone in the ecosystem together,  and start having one conversation because the opportunity here is global, is to feed that 50 X billion people.  
**[0:15:56-0:16:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:15:56):**  It's huge, and it's really, really exciting. But we've got an opportunity to do it now, and we need to start to hustle.  So I love the talk about collaboration, and I don't think there's anyone in the room who would disagree with that, but it's pretty easy to say let's collaborate, and it's pretty hard to actually do it.  Do you have any examples, and I don't know, Liza, if you do in CSIRO's perspective or what's happening in Singapore, of a collaboration that's actually moving the needle,  
**[0:16:22-0:16:26](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:16:22):**  actually pulling different people together, maybe across research and start-ups?  Yeah, I mean, it's an experiment. So we're just embarking on a program with Singapore's research system.  It's a new program called Foods for Health, a $2 million program over 12 months funded by Australian government with matching support by the Singaporeans.  
**[0:16:47-0:16:58](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:16:47):**  Six projects are looking at things, new ingredients for plant-based meats, looking at food applications for food waste, a whole bunch of really good stuff.  We decided we'd bring the six projects out to Australia for a boot camp, so they're actually over at Melbourne Museum right now.  We deliberately timed it to coincide with Evoke, because we thought there would be an ecosystem of people here in this room that we want those teams to connect with.  
**[0:17:16-0:17:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:17:16):**  Also, a lot of the applications we really encouraged this was we would seek an industry partner, and a lot of those industry partners that were successful,  in the applications, were start-ups. And a lot of them are Australian start-ups. There's actually some sitting in this room right now, which is fantastic to see.  So what we're trying to do is, from a research side, is say don't wait until the end of your research project to explore the pathways to commercialization.  
**[0:17:42-0:17:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:17:42):**  Get out there at the start to really test and validate what your pathway to impact would look like, and engage partners in that journey.  So they'll be over here after lunch, and we've given them targets to go and speak to, and have industry conversations, and have partner conversations.  So if someone comes up and asks for your feedback, please give them a go.  
**[0:18:01-0:18:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:18:01):**  I love it. And there are quite a few farmers in the room here. Any farmers around? More than Kiwis, I love it.  Oh, cool.  Or they're less shy.  
**[0:18:11-0:18:13](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:18:11):**  It could be a Venn diagram that overlaps.  That's true.  Can I pick up on the collaboration point? Because I think one of the important things about collaboration, not just at the research and product level, but at the go-to-market.  
**[0:18:22-0:18:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:18:22):**  And for a small country like New Zealand, and I'd say a small country like Australia on a global stage, you need collaboration for the go-to-market piece.  I'm going to pick up, you made the comment about Yamaha Ventures, and I see my friend Steve Saunders here in the front row.  Steve's organization, Robotics Plus, has partnered with Yamaha Ventures, yes, around investment and innovation, but actually the go-to-market is probably the big thing.  
**[0:18:45-0:18:52](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:18:45):**  That channel, that building for scale, all those sorts of things that we just don't naturally do because we don't have the domestic conditions.  That's, I think, where collaboration can really benefit countries like ours.  And Kaba, what are you seeing on the startup side? Are the corporates and the potential channel partners here in Australia showing up and providing that go-to-market for startups here?  
**[0:19:05-0:19:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:19:05):**  Yeah, look, I think the momentum is definitely heading in the right direction, and it's certainly accelerating.  But it's still got its challenges. Startups obviously have defined timeframes that are normally a lot shorter than corporates.  And we do find ourselves occasionally getting caught up in long-winded processes where we need to move fast.  
**[0:19:30-0:19:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:19:30):**  I think the startup collaboration, I mean, I'm sure there's not going to be a farmer on the planet that wants to have seven apps to run the farm.  So we are really trying to work together to get solutions that are cross-pollinating, sharing data in the farmer's best interests.  And the farmers will decide what apps they want to use and what technology they want to use.  
**[0:19:55-0:20:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:19:55):**  So, look, we're going in the right direction, but I definitely feel that corporate Australia in the sector could be more mobile and could really get behind initiatives.  And not all of them are going to work, but we have to be pushing hard, pushing the envelope, and thinking global in our outcomes.  I think the corporates here are absolutely critical to really kind of make this a real scalable solution.  
**[0:20:27-0:20:34](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:20:27):**  So I totally agree with that. My only thing I would say is that I would like to see more entrepreneurs moving out of Australia.  Not moving out, keep your operations here, keep your engineering team, I'm not saying that.  But your customers are in other places. They're not always here.  
**[0:20:42-0:20:51](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:20:42):**  And I think that's why countries like Israel and like Ireland and like, you know, I hate saying it again, New Zealand, small countries.  You're a global company from day one. You have to think about customers outside.  The largest market on the planet is the United States. The United States is very, very simple.  
**[0:21:00-0:21:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:21:00):**  There's California. If you want to get venture capital and investment, that's where you go.  If you want to meet farmers, California is a great place to go.  But if you want to go into mainstream row crops, livestock, et cetera, it's the Midwest.  
**[0:21:13-0:21:20](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:21:13):**  So it's going to the places where farmers are engaging with farming organizations, not just corporates.  You know, like the National Pork Board or Land of Lakes or Western Growers.  You have to kind of get in there, not just present at an event.  
**[0:21:29-0:21:31](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:21:29):**  You know, it's really kind of starting to kind of build those relationships.  Yeah, and I guess to, well, challenge that a little bit.  Yes.  
**[0:21:35-0:21:39](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:21:35):**  It's probably, it's easy to say, just go to Silicon Valley and raise money.  There's a couple of challenges with that. One, it's far, it's expensive.  Going up and talking to growers in another country can be, you know, a network that you don't have.  
**[0:21:47-0:21:53](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:21:47):**  And often some of these programs offer maybe a little bit of cash and a kind of boot camp stint in a place or a desk somewhere,  which is a great landing pad or a great opportunity to start,  but not the kind of capital or depth of connection that you might need to really get a hold there.  
**[0:22:02-0:22:03](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:22:02):**  How do you overcome that?  So, look, there's no kind of, you know, silver bullet here.  You know, it's like you can stay here, keep doing what you're doing.  
**[0:22:09-0:22:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:22:09):**  Let me give you an example from Ireland, right?  There's two young brothers called the Collison brothers.  Two young kids, 16, 17 years of age, they couldn't raise any money in Ireland.  
**[0:22:19-0:22:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:22:19):**  They were not taken seriously.  They ended up selling their first company for about five million.  And then they set up their second company and they couldn't raise any money.  
**[0:22:29-0:22:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:22:29):**  They were ignored by banks, VCs, et cetera.  They went to Silicon Valley, met in Starbucks, a big investor, wrote them a check for 250K.  Their company is $35 billion now.  
**[0:22:40-0:22:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:22:40):**  So that may be one example, and there's lots of failures, unfortunately,  but I think you need to kind of get out there.  And the one thing I would say also is, you know, Silicon Valley is one part of California.  
**[0:22:53-0:22:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:22:53):**  Like the Central Valley, Salinas Valley, that's where the farmers are, you know,  and the farmers are going to be your customers.  So I think you need to, you know, maybe not hang out in San Francisco,  
**[0:23:03-0:23:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:23:03):**  but hang out where the farmers are.  Yeah, it's no different here, but really we've got our, you know,  if you're in bananas or sugar cane or beef cattle, you know,  
**[0:23:13-0:23:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:23:13):**  you're in North Queensland or somewhere above the 26th.  You know, if you're in almonds and fruits, you're in the south.  And if you, you know, so we've got these different geographic spreads  
**[0:23:24-0:23:28](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:23:24):**  which allows for different ecosystems to evolve within that.  But I mean, I still think you need this overarching, you know,  a cohesion and, you know, conversation going on.  
**[0:23:37-0:23:38](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:23:37):**  So I'll make a couple of points.  One is in terms of, you know, yeah, know your destination.  So a lot of people will say to me, if I'm in ag and food,  
**[0:23:43-0:23:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:23:43):**  why would I ever consider Singapore?  If you're in food, you really should,  because the number of multinationals, food companies that have now  
**[0:23:50-0:23:53](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:23:50):**  their product development bases for Asia in Singapore,  but also increasing in places like Bangkok is not insignificant.  Second thing I would say is find ecosystem connectors.  
**[0:24:02-0:24:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:24:02):**  So one of the, when I mentioned earlier, Singapore sort of put out a call  to the world's best accelerators and venture capitalists  to come set up here and help leverage, you know,  
**[0:24:12-0:24:15](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:24:12):**  $100 million worth of investment into early-stage agri-food startups.  One of the accelerator partnerships that were successful  had two very prominent Australian companies or Australian connected companies.  
**[0:24:24-0:24:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:24:24):**  So the Grow Accelerator was the first partnership to launch.  It's backed by Agfunder and Rocket Seeder.  You know, you've got people like, you know, Christine Pitt,  
**[0:24:32-0:24:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:24:32):**  who's an incredible connector between these ecosystems  and beyond the program, beyond the three months of accelerating,  then into the Singapore ecosystem, into that regional,  
**[0:24:43-0:24:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:24:43):**  yeah, into the corporate base, into the follow-on investment base.  So, you know, find those people and use those people.  I'm going to be controversial here.  
**[0:24:51-0:24:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:24:51):**  I don't know if I was a startup, would I go straight to Singapore from here?  You know, I think Singapore government have done an incredible job  attracting, you know, various different investors  
**[0:25:03-0:25:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:25:03):**  and they've built up the ecosystem,  and I think Singapore is getting saturated.  And I think it's also a very small country,  
**[0:25:14-0:25:19](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:25:14):**  and I think that you need to go to the biggest markets, you know, there.  I'm not, you know, I love Singapore, you know, but I feel like if I had a choice  and you mentioned I don't have much money, I can't afford a plane ride,  
**[0:25:28-0:25:29](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:25:28):**  you know, where do I go?  I go to the biggest and best place I can get investment and customers.  And if you think about Singapore as a hub to serve the region  
**[0:25:35-0:25:38](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:25:35):**  and not just Singapore, Singapore is a domestic market of five million,  yeah, no, you're not going to prioritize that.  But if you think of Singapore as a hub to actually serve, you know,  
**[0:25:43-0:25:48](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:25:43):**  a population of billions, then I think it's interesting.  And I don't think it's saturated when, you know, in comparison potentially  to everyone gets on a plane and goes, we're going to scale globally  
**[0:25:55-0:25:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:25:55):**  and we get on a plane and we go to Silicon Valley.  I don't think the world is Silicon Valley.  I think there's a big market right above Australia and it's called Asia.  
**[0:26:03-0:26:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:26:03):**  So I would say there's pretty good news here.  How many startups are in the room?  We've got a couple of countries literally fighting over you,  
**[0:26:10-0:26:13](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:26:10):**  so really good prospects here for you at about Gag.  No, but it is really exciting and I actually think the point that both of you made  and might be in agreement with is depending on what kind of company you are,  
**[0:26:21-0:26:23](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:26:21):**  there's strengths in different regions.  And so the other point you made, Liza, was around food  and I think it's really important as we go into two days here at Evoke Ag  
**[0:26:28-0:26:31](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:26:28):**  that it's not just Ag tech and it's not just on farm.  As we've been raising the fund for Tenacious Ventures,  we've had a few potential investors talk about, oh, well, you know,  
**[0:26:37-0:26:39](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:26:37):**  how many farmers are going to buy all these gadgets?  And if Agri-Food tech was just limited to selling things to farmers,  you know, maybe none of us would be here.  
**[0:26:45-0:26:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:26:45):**  It's a lot broader than that.  So I don't know if you want to talk a little bit about maybe, David,  the kind of trends you're seeing or some exciting areas  
**[0:26:51-0:26:53](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:26:51):**  beyond just kind of Ag tech on farm.  Yeah, I mean, in New Zealand at the moment,  we're doing a lot of work to look at our Agri-Tech ecosystem  
**[0:26:58-0:27:00](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:26:58):**  and the on-farm piece is important, sure,  but also the supply chain, you know, the cold chain,  what are we doing about getting products to market, you know,  
**[0:27:05-0:27:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:27:05):**  in terms of fresh, you know, lobster and lamb and all that sort of stuff.  And just to pick up on your point you said earlier that, you know,  the world needs Australian food.  
**[0:27:12-0:27:14](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:27:12):**  Well, it needs New Zealand food a lot more, my friend.  It needs our lamb, it needs our shellfish, it needs everything.  And so you need innovation in that sort of part of the market too,  
**[0:27:21-0:27:24](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:27:21):**  so the sort of post-farm gate part of the market.  And, you know, for us, there's a lot of research going into it.  What we need to be better at in New Zealand is commercialising that research  
**[0:27:32-0:27:34](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:27:32):**  and, again, that go-to-market piece.  But, you know, we're very, very good at coming up with innovations.  I think there's a lot in common between Australia and New Zealand  
**[0:27:39-0:27:42](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:27:39):**  in terms of, you know, the conditions for innovation are really there.  We've got necessity, we've got this sort of we can do it ourselves sort of mentality,  but the bit where we fall down sometimes is commercialising our ideas,  
**[0:27:49-0:27:51](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:27:49):**  taking them to market.  And a lot of what we're trying to do in government is trying to work with  accelerators and incubators and, you know, offshore investment  
**[0:27:57-0:28:01](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:27:57):**  and onshore investment and really just push that, push organisations through.  Not only think about products differently, as I say, beyond the farm gate,  but also think about how they're going to get them to market,  
**[0:28:06-0:28:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:28:06):**  who are their real customers, you know, do they go to Asia  or do they go to this valley or do they go to Europe or UK,  which are two different places now.  
**[0:28:13-0:28:18](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:28:13):**  So you've basically got, I think, part of our challenge coming from a small part of the world  is actually you've got this huge choice.  You know, the world is a very big place with lots of opportunity  
**[0:28:24-0:28:26](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:28:24):**  and a lot of what we have to do is sometimes make strategic choices  about where we're going to focus.  Sarah, I have a question for you.  
**[0:28:30-0:28:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:28:30):**  You know, if you look at successful Australian companies,  the yield, Agriweb, Agworld, what have they done?  I mean, because they obviously have laid a path and they've been very successful.  
**[0:28:43-0:28:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:28:43):**  I think I met with Justin Webb yesterday.  You know, he's spending a lot of time here, the UK, in London,  and he's setting up in Denver.  
**[0:28:53-0:28:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:28:53):**  That's one example I know, but I'm just kind of curious to see  what did the successful companies do to scale?  You've lost control of the panel.  
**[0:29:03-0:29:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:29:03):**  Now he's asking questions instead of you.  I think we're doing it.  Yeah, you're running here.  
**[0:29:08-0:29:14](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:29:08):**  So I would say the real strength of Australia is that we now,  over the last four or five years, have started to learn some of the  Silicon Valley polish and starting to speak the ag tech speak  
**[0:29:21-0:29:26](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:29:21):**  and food tech speak that investors and traditional innovation ecosystems understand.  But we also have here and in New Zealand the kind of bones as well  in terms of startups that really connect deeply with farmers  
**[0:29:34-0:29:37](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:29:34):**  that have started on farm, many of those examples you just gave,  and others that you'll see here today,  Swarm Farm Robotics as a robot out here,  
**[0:29:42-0:29:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:29:42):**  and many of the others are grounded really in the needs of the users  and don't sacrifice the sizzle or the sausage for the sizzle, I guess, so to speak.  And so some of the companies we've seen come out of Australia  
**[0:29:54-0:29:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:29:54):**  be really successful.  We're early in navigating both the real substance, the real bones,  of what makes a successful company, but also having that early polish.  
**[0:30:02-0:30:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:30:02):**  And what's really exciting here that we'll see in the next couple of days  is startups that continue to have both.  And so it's not one or the other, it's how do we bring together both,  
**[0:30:11-0:30:13](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:30:11):**  and that's what we're seeing more and more now.  I don't know, Coppa, do you want to comment?  Yeah, I mean, I agree with you, Sarah,  
**[0:30:17-0:30:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:30:17):**  and we've got 20 or 30 awesome startups out here in Startup Alley,  and they've got someone to follow now.  We need an Atlassian of the ag tech sector.  
**[0:30:32-0:30:34](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:30:32):**  It creates a lot of interest, creates a lot of jobs,  brings capital and knowledge and awareness,  and I feel like we've got a good cohort of startups  
**[0:30:41-0:30:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:30:41):**  that are potentially in that realm that really are going global.  So being able to have companies to follow  and learn from their mistakes and everything  
**[0:30:50-0:30:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:30:50):**  is obviously critical for startups because it just cuts down the time  and gives them a greater runway and a launching pad.  But I think in the Australia-New Zealand camp,  
**[0:31:01-0:31:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:31:01):**  I was in England at the World AgriTech Forum,  and Australia-New Zealand needs to be seen as a regional opportunity  to bring people to this region  
**[0:31:14-0:31:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:31:14):**  because I think ultimately they're deciding  whether they're going to North America or Canada  or South America or wherever,  
**[0:31:23-0:31:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:31:23):**  and once you get on the plane, it's a big trip down here,  and you should spend time in both countries.  So I think there's a real opportunity for us to work together  
**[0:31:33-0:31:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:31:33):**  to promote the region.  New Zealand's got different attributes than Australia.  Your farming community and food companies  
**[0:31:43-0:31:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:31:43):**  are amongst the best in the world at what they're good at,  and Australia's are amongst the best in the world in what we're good at.  So I think we all benefit here if we work together.  
**[0:31:53-0:31:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:31:53):**  Yeah, and Coppi mentioned it earlier because I completely agree.  There's actually a collaboration already started up  between Australia and New Zealand.  
**[0:31:59-0:32:00](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:31:59):**  I know you're part of it.  I think you're part of it too, Sarah,  but basically bringing together because, as you say,  
**[0:32:04-0:32:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:32:04):**  the world sees ANZ as a region,  and collectively we've got maybe 25 million people.  That's still not huge, but it's starting to get there.  
**[0:32:12-0:32:14](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:32:12):**  And we've got the advantages of being counter-seasonal  with the northern hemisphere.  We've got all these sorts of things going on.  
**[0:32:17-0:32:20](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:32:17):**  If we can collaborate across the Tasman, we've got a lot going on.  I think New Zealanders and Australians have got a natural affinity.  We actually do work together well.  
**[0:32:26-0:32:29](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:32:26):**  Much as we sort of argue and fight on the rugby pitch  or the cricket pitch, we actually get on very well.  We said we wanted to mention sports, sorry.  
**[0:32:33-0:32:34](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:32:33):**  Yeah, I know.  I can't get into sports because I don't know anything about Australian sports.  I wanted to jump back to something David actually said.  
**[0:32:40-0:32:43](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:32:40):**  So the kind of role of government in this space,  and one thing that government has been good at  is kind of filling that early-stage gap of helping companies get started  
**[0:32:49-0:32:51](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:32:49):**  and survive for a bit longer.  The other side of that might be the valley of death,  this period where startups don't make it to commercial success,  
**[0:32:57-0:33:00](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:32:57):**  don't attract customers, is there for a reason.  What would you say the role of government is in being part of the ecosystem?  Yeah, I think the key thing to remember always,  
**[0:33:06-0:33:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:33:06):**  even when you work in government,  is that governments don't exist for our own sake.  We exist for the benefit of the companies or the individuals  
**[0:33:12-0:33:14](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:33:12):**  or the people we serve.  We don't create ag tech companies or products,  but we need to create the conditions for success.  
**[0:33:20-0:33:23](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:33:20):**  So we need to make sure that there's a good active capital market,  that there's good innovation ecosystem,  that there's great research and development going on.  
**[0:33:27-0:33:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:33:27):**  So in the role I've been doing over the last year or so in New Zealand,  we've been looking, six government agencies got together and said,  actually, we need to do a better job as government  
**[0:33:35-0:33:37](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:33:35):**  of setting those conditions of success.  And we've come up with one collective plan for all of government,  working with industry and research and all the other parts of the puzzle.  
**[0:33:43-0:33:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:33:43):**  Saying, here's the kind of platform that government can build  and making sure we're plugging some of those gaps, as you mentioned.  Definitely in the capital space in New Zealand,  
**[0:33:52-0:33:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:33:52):**  we're a bit light on investment in the early stages,  and in the commercialisation realm, we need to do a bit more.  And that's where government can go, right, where can we increase?  
**[0:34:01-0:34:03](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:34:01):**  And of course, in the go-to market, I keep coming back to that  because I work for the trade part of government.  How do we support companies when they take that big first step?  
**[0:34:08-0:34:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:34:08):**  I think one of you mentioned that New Zealand companies are global  almost from day one.  So these are not big or sophisticated companies  
**[0:34:15-0:34:18](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:34:15):**  having to work in a very nuanced, difficult market.  So how can government help negotiate or navigate trade,  a policy, an agreement?  
**[0:34:23-0:34:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:34:23):**  So that's where I see the role of government,  is to set that platform and conditions for success,  and then kind of get out of the way, let the investors and the entrepreneurs  
**[0:34:30-0:34:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:34:30):**  and the farmers and those sort of people flourish.  What do you think about someone like Enterprise Ireland?  They've become one of the biggest investors, fund to fund,  
**[0:34:39-0:34:42](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:34:39):**  so they're not picking winners themselves,  but they're attracting major players like Finestere, for example,  to Ireland, and they're going to give them investment,  
**[0:34:51-0:34:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:34:51):**  and they'll let Finestere figure out that.  What do you think about that in terms of…  Yeah, I mean, essentially, because that topic, Enterprise Ireland  
**[0:34:59-0:35:03](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:34:59):**  and their sort of early-stage seed funds and seed investment portfolio  comes out regularly.  We have a similar model in New Zealand than New Zealand Venture Investment,  
**[0:35:07-0:35:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:35:07):**  which is a fund to funds model,  built somewhat on learning from organisations like that.  We're not ashamed to steal like an artist, as they say.  
**[0:35:16-0:35:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:35:16):**  Great ideas.  We're not as active as Enterprise Ireland are.  I think they were quite forward-leaning and have been for a long time.  
**[0:35:22-0:35:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:35:22):**  Certainly, I think there's a role for government to try and attract  and stimulate funds to come to New Zealand.  Finestere is a good example, actually.  
**[0:35:28-0:35:31](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:35:28):**  They're active investing in New Zealand already.  They're looking at how do they scale that out,  and we as government are saying,  
**[0:35:34-0:35:37](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:35:34):**  well, how could we further incent you to do that,  working alongside local investment?  So I think it's always the challenge with government.  
**[0:35:42-0:35:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:35:42):**  You've got to be in, but you don't want to be distorting the market too much.  You've got to just, what are the right levels and conditions for your situation?  I think in Australia, we can be quick to put the boots into government,  
**[0:35:55-0:36:00](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:35:55):**  but if you really think about it, in that framework,  I've been on some exceptional delegations with Austrade,  who are really pushing to try and get Australian agricultural technology  
**[0:36:09-0:36:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:36:09):**  into the rest of the world,  and we've got the RDCs, which we wouldn't be at this event today,  who are looking after their various sectors.  
**[0:36:20-0:36:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:36:20):**  There is a lot of work going on,  but it's incumbent upon the sector to bring the cohesion.  The government's providing the framework through its various bodies.  
**[0:36:31-0:36:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:36:31):**  So again, we should be less inclined to put the boots in  and think about all the good things that are happening  and how we can help continue to drive that conversation.  
**[0:36:41-0:36:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:36:41):**  And again, that to me seems like the biggest single opportunity we've got here  is to think about our region as a provider of food into a world that's got a huge hunger.  There's a phrase we use in New Zealand,  
**[0:36:57-0:36:59](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:36:57):**  I'm not sure if it's always true, but we try to make it true,  which is that things should be industry-led and government-supported.  When the government starts to lead or create strategy,  
**[0:37:06-0:37:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:37:06):**  I think you're backwards.  Industry should be the one saying, this is what we need in an industry.  And part of the reason why we started to get ourselves more organised in New Zealand  
**[0:37:13-0:37:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:37:13):**  is because the industry, the agritech industry in particular in New Zealand,  has really got itself together and started to go in one direction,  and when government sees that, we go, right, well, how do we help?  
**[0:37:22-0:37:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:37:22):**  What's our role in assisting?  And I think if you get that right, and at the ANZ level,  I think we've got that opportunity absolutely picking up on the point.  
**[0:37:31-0:37:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:37:31):**  So we're coming close to the end of time here,  and I'm really excited we covered the role of corporates  and maybe pushing some of the corporates in the room  
**[0:37:37-0:37:39](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:37:37):**  to consider working more with start-ups  and avoiding some of the slow death by maybe that we heard a little bit about before,  government thinking about intentional policy design and incentives  
**[0:37:47-0:37:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:37:47):**  and aligning these incentives to attract other types of capital,  research organisations around commercialisation.  We have an amazing two days up ahead with a whole range of people in the room here.  
**[0:37:58-0:38:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:37:58):**  I would love just quickly to hear from each of you one kind of practical tip  that you would give to the delegates here in the room  to get the most value and maybe increase collaboration over the next two days.  
**[0:38:10-0:38:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:38:10):**  Any volunteers?  John?  You asked me the question, so I've got to put you on the spot now.  
**[0:38:18-0:38:26](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:38:18):**  So I think bringing the start-ups and putting them in front of investors and corporates  I think is really, really important to do  because it's very hard to engage as a young early stage company with big corporations.  
**[0:38:33-0:38:37](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:38:33):**  So to be able to showcase and put the start-ups first  I think is a great practical thing to do.  And I know from last night we had an investor dinner last night  
**[0:38:46-0:38:51](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:38:46):**  which went incredibly well and we saw some of the greatest entrepreneurs.  So I think putting the start-ups in front so that we can see and help and support and invest.  Great. And for anyone in the room, definitely check out StartupBally and go have a chat.  
**[0:39:01-0:39:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:39:01):**  They're all standing there, definitely waiting for you to come up and speak with them.  Yeah, Kaaba?  Yeah, I mean, look, obviously John stole my script  
**[0:39:09-0:39:13](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:39:09):**  because I'm in the start-up and I'm happy to have a conversation with you.  Look, I think it's on all of us to do something.  So whether you're a farmer or a corporate or just an interested person  
**[0:39:25-0:39:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:39:25):**  start a conversation with someone here in your sphere of influence  and don't let it end when you walk out the door.  Continue the conversation, have the follow-up meeting, give them the time, dedicate some energy to it.  
**[0:39:41-0:39:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:39:41):**  We're all busy people but if we don't dedicate time to this opportunity that is once in a lifetime,  a huge game changer for Australia, then nothing's going to come of it.  So make the phone call after with that business card you put in your pocket.  
**[0:40:00-0:40:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:40:00):**  That would be my one takeaway for everyone.  Love it. Liza?  My closing message would just be to really just be open and responsive to opportunities outside of Australia.  
**[0:40:12-0:40:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:40:12):**  So here there's been lots of Kiwis in the room, which is great,  but I understand there's delegates from all over the world.  So really be open to some of those international opportunities.  
**[0:40:23-0:40:29](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:40:23):**  Australia does have and really does punch well above its weight in technology and innovations.  And I would like to see a lot more Australian start-ups, Australian companies.  Like I see Kiwi start-ups and companies in Asia.  
**[0:40:39-0:40:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:40:39):**  And there is significant growth out there and so just be open and responsive to it.  Yeah, I'm going to pile on the top of these guys.  Organisations and events like this is an opportunity to network and networking is a contact sport.  
**[0:40:54-0:40:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:40:54):**  It's not something you can do passively.  You don't sit back and kind of wait for it to happen.  And some of the best collaborations I've ever seen come from events like this one,  
**[0:41:04-0:41:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:41:04):**  where people go out there and meet a few people and ask good questions.  Don't ask what do you do.  Ask what could my company and your company do together.  
**[0:41:12-0:41:14](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:41:12):**  How can I help you be successful with what you're doing?  Now those sorts of open questions are exploratory questions I think really good.  But yeah, as I say, it's not a passive thing.  
**[0:41:20-0:41:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:41:20):**  Add to drinks function tonight.  Don't hang around with people you already know because you'll see them again.  Hang around with people you've never met.  
**[0:41:26-0:41:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:41:26):**  I think in terms of the contact sport, why doesn't every investor or corporate person stand up in the room here?  And bring out your tick book.  Every investor. Who's an investor here?  
**[0:41:36-0:41:37](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:41:36):**  Go on, stand up.  Don't be shy.  Stand up.  
**[0:41:39-0:41:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:41:39):**  Stand up.  Stand up.  There we go.  
**[0:41:42-0:41:43](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:41:42):**  Investors.  Oh, they're hiding.  And any corporates.  
**[0:41:45-0:41:47](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:41:45):**  If I'm an entrepreneur, they're the guys that you want to go after.  That's right.  They're buying drinks at the bar at the afternoon.  
**[0:41:51-0:41:52](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:41:51):**  I love it.  I think it's such a good point actually that really put it into action.  Ask those questions.  
**[0:41:56-0:41:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:41:56):**  There's no silly questions.  Talk to the farmers in the room.  We saw lots of hands up earlier and that is truly a strength of the ecosystem here in Australia and New Zealand.  
**[0:42:04-0:42:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:42:04):**  And just there's no shortage to opportunities over the next couple days.  But it's going to take a lot of collaboration and really that's on you now.  So please join me in thanking the panelists and have a great two days.  
**[0:42:17-0:42:18](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:42:17):**  Great. Thanks, Sarah.  Thanks.  Thank you for joining us on another episode of Ag Tech, So What.  
**[0:42:23-0:42:28](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:42:23):**  You can stay up to date with the latest episodes and news at agtechsowhat.com.  And as always, if you have any feedback or other guests to recommend, we'd love to hear from you.  Just hop on the website and leave us a comment or send us a message.  
**[0:42:36-0:42:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=588506#t=0:42:36):**  Finally, if you like what you're hearing and we hope you do, please share the podcast with a friend or leave us a review on iTunes or wherever you get your podcasts.  Thanks again for listening. Catch you next time.  