### Agtech - So What?  (2019-34-11)
**[0:00:00-0:00:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, and welcome to the Ag Tech So What podcast. Emerging technologies are rapidly  changing the global agricultural industry. We believe that this revolution is only getting  started, but there's still too much hype out there and too big of a disconnect between  ag and ag tech. So on this show, we try to bridge that gap. In each episode, we bring  you the story of a different innovator in agriculture and try to find the place where  
**[0:00:30-0:00:47](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:00:30):**  ag and tech meet. I'm your host, Sarah Nolet. Today's episode is the fourth and final in  our series on getting ag tech ready. This theme is produced in partnership with Decipher,  a precision agriculture solution that helps growers and agronomists make data-driven decisions.  Check out episodes 40, 41, and 43 to hear more about getting ag tech ready. Today's  guest is Andrew Whitlock. Andrew is a farmer and the founder of a company called Precision  
**[0:01:08-0:01:13](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:01:08):**  Agriculture. But before all that, Andrew worked as an agronomist and extension officer where  he learned a lot about the how, why, and when farmers adopt new technology. The farming  system was the heart of what my role was because I focused largely on understanding raised  beds and helping farmers adopt raised bed technology in Southwest Victoria. That required  a whole change in farming systems from just accepting that the country can get wet and  
**[0:01:37-0:01:42](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:01:37):**  therefore limiting yield expectations and even the balance between cropping and pasture  relative to those risks. That all changed when raised beds came along. I came a little  bit later after the initial start of the adoption of raised beds. But raised beds has been an  enormous benefit for farmers in Southwest Victoria. We've got heavy sodic soils and  farmers have taken their yield, pushing or doubling what their yield averages are now  
**[0:02:05-0:02:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:02:05):**  by just managing surface water. Andrew describes the raised bed system as being similar to  horticulture but just on broadacre. Helping farmers shift to this new system taught Andrew  a lot about adoption and what drives farmers to change behavior. He's also helped farmers  to start thinking differently about another system change known as controlled traffic  farming. I was fortunate enough to spend eight months working with some consultants in understanding  
**[0:02:33-0:02:38](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:02:33):**  the system behind controlled traffic and it's more just putting wheels, confining wheel  tracks but just the opportunity of how you can then harvest new water and the importance  of trying to get water into your soil. So then it led to the discussion around stubble  and cover management, crop rotations and the like. So yeah it was really all around controlled  traffic and raised beds and the systems are falling behind that. While these systems are  
**[0:02:59-0:03:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:02:59):**  more widely used today, for example in Australia adoption of controlled traffic is at around  30%. Andrew was working with them in the early days and says that adoption wasn't all that  smooth. Adoption of controlled traffic and raised  beds both had their challenges. You know like anything it's change and people are fearful  of change. I mean it was more extreme in Queensland I think because the concept was the system  
**[0:03:27-0:03:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:03:27):**  integrated this idea of running down slope so instead moving away from from contour banks  which is the way people been farming on slopes in southeast Queensland for a long time. And  so this new system came along with controlled traffic and not to go across the slope and  get rid of contour banks and go straight up and down the slope. And the critical thing  for making that work is that you had to maintain cover to improve the whole idea that we're  
**[0:03:51-0:03:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:03:51):**  improving our soils, improving the ability for soil to infiltrate water and these heavy  storm events and then capture them in the subsoil to grow a crop of stored water and  it worked. You know and we've had examples where I was up in the air after some big storms  you know four or five inches in a day and flying over country where we were just seeing  water everywhere running big erosion events and then we'd fly over these handful of these  
**[0:04:19-0:04:23](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:04:19):**  controlled traffic farming systems that had been going up and down the slope when everyone  was saying you know you're going to destroy the country, you're going to exacerbate the  risk of soil erosion and these farms were you know very very little soil movement, not  a lot of concentration of water and it worked and we could see it from the air on the going  down. That's when it sort of clicked for me to realise that you know sometimes we need  
**[0:04:47-0:04:53](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:04:47):**  to be brave and take on change and push back against the fear because the benefit on the  other side once you've seen it then the end of the challenge is trying to communicate  that and to encourage others to adopt and I think we still have got a long way to go  to improve levels of adoption. For some farmers who haven't seen what's possible, like Andrew  did by flying over all those properties, being brave might mean taking a leap of faith. But  
**[0:05:12-0:05:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:05:12):**  what are these farmers who have taken the leap to adopt new technologies actually like?  I guess they're just naturally that typical adoption curve you know they're those guys  that are probably hungry and always on that edge looking to improve identifying constraints  and system wide warnings, that continual improvement attitude and obviously with a healthy dose  of innovation in them. You know it wasn't necessarily an age thing, we found some of  
**[0:05:39-0:05:43](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:05:39):**  the best adopters I've worked with were farmers towards the very end of their farming career,  others are you know young farmers that have come back, the more traditional sort of story  of the younger farmer coming back wanting to embrace new technology. So it's the full  spectrum you know and I worked with lots of different groups of farmers actually that  was sort of a strategy that we employed in my role was to have a lot of different farmer  
**[0:06:00-0:06:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:06:00):**  discussion groups. So really leveraging the peer-to-peer learning experience which we  know is the best way for farmers to learn and just trying to utilise those innovators  and literally just get on farm, visit you know hear from the words of these farmers  that we're doing and making these changes. And my role was sort of to facilitate those  discussions but to also just do a little bit of applied research with these farmers and  
**[0:06:26-0:06:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:06:26):**  try and capture a little bit more data and some metrics around what's actually happening  on the farm. You know you're saying that you've got better water holding capacity but you  know can we measure those changes and so we did a little bit of work around that, measuring  changes in soil, bulk densities, measuring infiltration rates and all the studies were  quite similar all over the country where we were you know wherever we drove wheels we  
**[0:06:54-0:07:00](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:06:54):**  were limiting porosity in the soil and that had a whole flow on effect to how the plant  grew and a less robust plant, less tillers, lower yield in the order of 10-15% as it sort  of averages out. So that was sort of a story trying to just let the farmers learn from  one another as much as we could.  I think it gets talked a lot about the we need to collect the data and really show that  
**[0:07:19-0:07:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:07:19):**  it's working and you know bring people out and give them the evidence of what's going  on but I imagine like reading 17 research papers on the data around the soil porosity  like that's not very compelling and so what's the like how does it actually work to kind  of show the results and is it a conversation, is it a series of conversations, is it a  demo farm like how does that actually work?  
**[0:07:40-0:07:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:07:40):**  Farmers need to see it from other farms, I'm sure so that's field days but it's also more  than that I think it says that we need to hear it from a range of different sources  and a number of times we need to experience it in different ways so it might be you know  podcasts like this getting people talking about it right through to traveling and visiting  new to state and visiting farmers who are who are adopting these technologies that you're  
**[0:08:02-0:08:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:08:02):**  looking at doing conferences is the other big one you know when I one of the things  that I organized was the Control Company Farming Association we kicked that off and we really  leveraged that idea around farmers presenting at a conference.  We have these conferences every few years the Australian Control Company Farming Association  and the whole aim was getting farmers from all over Australia and from different industries  
**[0:08:27-0:08:31](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:08:27):**  all talking about this concept of confining wheel tracks and that was a really powerful  process of adoption because people could see it working in a range of different environments  and it was the key word I think here is you've just got to get trust that what you're going  to implement stacks up and it's you've heard it and it's reliable and it's been proven  in a range of different environments ideally even in different technologies in different  
**[0:08:50-0:08:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:08:50):**  farming context so you know horticulture, irrigated agriculture, broadacre, the concept  sound you know there's that real fear of not wanting to look silly when you adopt something  new and change and the economic risk of it so that was a really powerful avenue as well  the conferences but all the group activities we did were very small groups so there was  sort of no more than 15 to 20 farmers in a group and a lot of conversation a lot of thinking  
**[0:09:13-0:09:18](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:09:13):**  they drove the research questions that they wanted to see answered and just really the  genuine engagement with the farmers and working them through any barriers that they saw adopted  helping them hold their hand to step over those barriers and it's slow and it's tedious  and it's expensive for governments and organizations to do this but we know if you want to get  practice change you have to it has to be a hands-on slow deliberate approach it's not  
**[0:09:39-0:09:43](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:09:39):**  just going to be read a paper and all these farmers are going to adopt.  And it's not just the government who misunderstands the thought processes of farmers.  Ag tech companies sometimes get this wrong too which causes many problems including great  ideas and products not being adopted.  People are coming up with great ideas developing technology putting it to the market and it's  
**[0:10:00-0:10:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:10:00):**  not getting a lot of traction and people are underestimating how complex and how much work  is required for a farmer the farming community to significantly adopt new technologies and  new processes.  One of the things you said before Andrew was around identifying constraints and you talked  a little bit about that or I don't know if you have an example of kind of what that looks  
**[0:10:20-0:10:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:10:20):**  like because I feel like that might be a practical tip for someone who's thinking about you know  making a change kind of like how should they think about identifying their constraints.  I must say that most of my experience working with farmers in this space, geographical area  is southern New South Wales, Victoria, southeast South Australia and Tasmania so I'm sort of  in that higher to medium rainfall areas land prices are high farmers are focused on most  
**[0:10:51-0:10:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:10:51):**  farmers are focused on maximising yield and trying to identify constraints to yield.  I'm happy to invest in strategies to unlock yield potential which is quite a different  approach to farmers in more marginal areas which may initial the default position will  be to manage cost and risk.  So I just need to phrase that first.  
**[0:11:15-0:11:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:11:15):**  The key is to identify what are the key limiting constraints on your farm and then write that  down to an individual a paddock basis and the topics are consistent from farms from  Dubbo down to Devonport.  There's typically a range of key soil constraints which are limiting your potential and for  me it's you know we have to start with our soils.  
**[0:11:39-0:11:43](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:11:39):**  You've got to want to be informed so you're seeking out information.  I've had the luxury of working with a lot of soil scientists and I understand a lot  of the basics of soil science and I think the good farmers they're going to conferences  and they're building their skill levels up they've got that appreciation that soil health  drives productivity of the farm.  
**[0:11:58-0:12:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:11:58):**  It's about understanding what is limiting yield and farmers kind of know that they know  their paddocks better than anyone.  Often when I go and have worked on farms you know in some ways the farmers can tell you  straight off the bat what the strategies need to be, what the key constraints are.  It's just that we need some extra data then to define the spatial patterns of those constraints  
**[0:12:23-0:12:26](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:12:23):**  and then be able to develop a variable age strategy for it.  But the farmers know, they'll know what country they're sitting in, where they get wet and  where they've got the heavy soils and where their sandy soils lie.  Farmers know all that intuitively anyway.  It's a matter of then just joining the dots and collecting some more data through the  
**[0:12:42-0:12:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:12:42):**  process and then spitting out in the end a solution.  The key with all this is identifying the problem that you're trying to address and being very  clear on what strategies you want to do first and not trying, you can't do everything at  once.  Andrew believes that farmers need to find a balance between using their knowledge of  
**[0:13:00-0:13:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:13:00):**  the land and using tools to interpret data to make better decisions.  But how much data is enough?  We're always taught we want to get as much data as we can and try and understand all  these complex patterns and all the correlations between all these maps we're generating.  But there's been a lot of soil science and farming science that's gone on for a long  
**[0:13:19-0:13:23](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:13:19):**  time here in Australia and people love just to throw that out and start new.  We've got this new tech, this is better than all the science, the proven science.  You have to respect the science and understand what constraint you're dealing with, what  are the critical measurements we need to understand that constraint.  And you don't have to throw as much data as you possibly can to try and get a better outcome.  
**[0:13:43-0:13:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:13:43):**  It's just using the right data for the right solutions.  And when it comes to implementing the tech that provides those solutions, Andrew says  that there is still hesitance among some farmers.  There's a real adoption issue at the moment, I believe.  It's about trust and it's about having a conversation with a farmer and for them to feel comfortable  
**[0:14:02-0:14:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:14:02):**  and that the advice that they're getting from their advisor is sound and that they're happy  to act on that.  The challenge is that there just aren't people out there doing that though.  There are very few experienced precision ag advisors in the country sitting at coffee  tables with farmers discussing these strategies and how to build a precision ag implementation  
**[0:14:22-0:14:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:14:22):**  plan for their farm that makes sense and it won't overwhelm them and will be continually  measured to make sure that the investment is sound and it just moves forward.  When I look at a lot of the technology, a lot of the companies now hitting the marketplace,  they're geared around the technology rather than around a process or a real want to improve  the customer's bottom line.  
**[0:14:48-0:14:52](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:14:48):**  I know from the very start we've always said in precision ag, our precision ag business  is we have to focus on the customer and we want to remain technology agnostic.  We don't want to get caught up in just delivering solutions that are limited by the one or two  bits of technology that our business could afford to invest in.  We've tried to remain quite open minded and with that it's largely meant that we've stayed  
**[0:15:16-0:15:20](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:15:16):**  very close to just proven science.  Rubbish in, rubbish out is the key issue I think.  We're flooded by poor quality data and people are grappling to try and make some sense of  it and that is getting lost in the whole journey.  It almost makes it worse, right?  
**[0:15:31-0:15:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:15:31):**  That it kind of makes you less excited to give it a go next time when you got burned  the first time.  I'm sensing a lot of that kind of fatigue or frustration of like, I don't want to do  this again.  It was so painful last time.  
**[0:15:44-0:15:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:15:44):**  Yeah, exactly.  That's right.  We're all time poor.  We know that and that's not going to change.  We need turnkey solutions delivered for us.  
**[0:15:55-0:16:01](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:15:55):**  So when we're working with a new customer, for example, you have to commit to walking  them through the whole process right from setting the implementation plan to generating  initial maps, drawing the insight data of those maps, but then right into the point  of literally loading the file, the prescription file onto the controller, sitting with the  farmer while they're doing their first few laps to make sure it's working properly and  
**[0:16:19-0:16:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:16:19):**  they're comfortable with the journey.  And it's a big investment.  But once farmers have got through that, they've had that win, they understand, oh, well, I  can unzip a file and I can load that prescription file and it is going to work.  And I do have someone I can call back on if there are issues, then I'm happy to proceed  
**[0:16:36-0:16:39](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:16:36):**  with this and maybe start looking at some other strategies.  My parents were small business owners and I've just had a love of small business and  a real passion for working with farmers.  I've been blessed to have had that passion from a very young age and I've known forever  that I've wanted to work with farmers.  
**[0:16:51-0:16:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:16:51):**  So that's just something I've been lucky to identify.  It was just a leap of faith.  I just left the government after seven years knowing I just wanted to go and start up a  small business.  And I started just working under my own business, my own Whitlock Ag Services and was doing  
**[0:17:07-0:17:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:17:07):**  some research and working with some individual customers.  And then Tim Neil up in Queensland and I decided to come together and we started working collaboratively  and that journey sort of grew into where the business is today.  Tim and I had some investors enter the company about four or five years ago and the company  has sort of taken a step change in the rate of growth as a company and we're now sitting  
**[0:17:32-0:17:37](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:17:32):**  as one of the largest precision ag sort of adoption companies in the country and something  I'm really proud of.  Were you married at the time when you decided to quit your job and take this leap?  We were about to be married so I was engaged and I wasn't farming at that stage.  So a couple of years into starting this small business we also took on the opportunity of  
**[0:17:52-0:17:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:17:52):**  doing some share farming with Sophie's family which was an opportunity that came possibly  a little bit sooner than we were maybe even ready for.  So it was a pretty busy time and then small children entered the frame.  So it was a crazy time looking back and there were quite a few years where you're working  every single day of the year but that's what it takes to start a small business.  
**[0:18:14-0:18:19](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:18:14):**  And as I spoke about earlier, working with farmers and in this practice change industry  it's costly and it's time-consuming and you have to be accessible and it's a lot of weekend  work and after hours work because you're working with farmers and farmers work all the time.  So as a service provider you have to match that to get some credibility and to grow a  business.  
**[0:18:37-0:18:39](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:18:37):**  So yeah it was busy but I loved it, loved every moment of it.  I worked with some tremendous scientists around the country, a lot of different farming systems  groups, all the ag extension groups in these geographies, just tremendous people all having  a great time.  Seeing the change at the farmer level though is the ultimate.  
**[0:18:55-0:19:01](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:18:55):**  Sitting there at the kitchen table with a farming family and them talking about the  economic benefits that they've gained from the strategies that we've developed and implemented  that's where it all hits home and it's really satisfying.  Do you have a favorite story or example of a journey that you've taken a farmer on or  an impact that you've had that really stands out as like, oh yeah this is really why I  
**[0:19:21-0:19:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:19:21):**  do it.  Any kind of key stories stand out in your mind about that journey?  I deliberately try and keep things simple and I always have and I've always felt when  I first was learning about precision ag this just seems too complex.  There's something wrong in the messaging here and I suppose some of the best stories are  
**[0:19:38-0:19:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:19:38):**  those that I recall, those where we have deliberately simplified things had a really good outcome.  Drainage is a good example where people often think that it's expensive and it's complex  and it's going to make a mess in the paddocks.  But I love the times when we've looked at paddocks and we've literally just changed  the direction that the tractors are driving in which the dropping perpendicular to the  
**[0:20:04-0:20:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:20:04):**  flow of water has been holding the water up, allowing it to concentrate and then blowing  it into these big water log patches.  Literally just turning those tracts around and running up and down the slope.  I love when farmers still talk about that every now and then.  There's a farmer over at New Lake Bolac where we did exactly this and he was delivering  
**[0:20:24-0:20:28](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:20:24):**  me the next year and he couldn't believe what the benefit it was because often we'll say  let's just start by changing the direction and we'll see how we go.  We have to put some drains in and we'll do that but I think that's going to make a huge  impact and when it comes through and it does and they don't need to put drains in, they've  really spent no money at all to get a really good outcome.  
**[0:20:40-0:20:44](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:20:40):**  I love that because that's the philosophy that we're trying to implement.  So that's a good story.  How do you reconcile that with running a business?  It's the right thing for the customer but I imagine you can't charge very much for that  advice.  
**[0:20:54-0:20:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:20:54):**  Yeah, yeah.  Yeah, very good question.  Maybe I'm not the best business person.  I don't know what that means but it's not a show when I say I'm focused on the customer.  I'm a farmer now.  
**[0:21:06-0:21:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:21:06):**  My family have always worked for farmers.  I understand how tight the margins are in farming.  I think you've just got to realise that you've got to give something up to earn respect and  to build trust with people and marketing and breaking into new industries and building  a reputation for nothing.  
**[0:21:25-0:21:28](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:21:25):**  You just have in my mind that's just how you have to do it.  What strikes me is the longer term view on it that it's not about making money now but  it's about building that relationship and adding value over time.  That might not mean a transaction now.  It might mean just adding value now and getting an opportunity to add value later again and  
**[0:21:43-0:21:49](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:21:43):**  that that's the sustainability aspect of the business, not just the transactional aspect.  Precision agriculture is about solving problems.  You knock one on the head and then one more will pop up.  It's just a continuum.  It's not a transaction, it's a real journey.  
**[0:22:01-0:22:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:22:01):**  If you've got a strong relationship, I've always respected the relationship as well  working with farmers.  You're entering their home, it's not just a business, it's a family.  It's their home that you're sitting in and it's an honour.  I've always found it an honour to come into a farming business and work with them at a  
**[0:22:15-0:22:18](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:22:15):**  business level but with the whole family.  You get to know their children.  It's a different experience.  It's not just business to business.  There's a farmer down near Inverlie who has just been a fantastic farmer that we've worked  
**[0:22:32-0:22:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:22:32):**  with and full of energy and always wanting to try new things.  This is where I suppose the innovation comes in.  We're always trying to look at what the next solution could be and are there some different  ways of measuring this information.  Farmers like Josh down in Inverlie have supported this leap of faith.  
**[0:22:54-0:22:58](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:22:54):**  A farmer taking a leap of faith, putting some dollars on the line to invest in some new  ideas.  You have to have someone try it.  We would often try things by getting projects up and running but every now and then you  can't do that and you've relied on the farmer dipping that in their pocket.  
**[0:23:11-0:23:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:23:11):**  Josh is one.  Josh down at Murnong, they're one example where they had faith in our process and they  were happy to invest and give us a go of trying new strategies.  We did a whole range of different things of utilising yield data and understanding where  on the farm they might be better.  
**[0:23:27-0:23:31](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:23:27):**  Just put the country back to pasture versus cropping.  We did a lot of work on surface water management on there which has changed the way that farm  performs.  We did a lot of work around understanding soils and where the constraints may lie and  always constantly challenging what the norm would be.  
**[0:23:44-0:23:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:23:44):**  Heavy country needs dips and does it really.  So a lot of work with soil pits.  One of the really powerful things I see with Precision Ag is we're collecting data on our  soil and understanding our soil landscapes a lot better and it's bringing soil testing  back to life because this idea of taking a soil test and a transect across a paddock,  
**[0:24:06-0:24:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:24:06):**  it's just flawed.  We've got too much variability within paddocks for that to offer a meaningful result.  We've done a heap of work and I love it when the farmers like Josh really embrace that  and would be constantly pushing us saying, okay we can go and split that up into two  or three or four zones and do some soil tests.  
**[0:24:29-0:24:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:24:29):**  What if we do some pits?  Let's go and look further down the profile and we'll get the excavator out and we'll  dig them and you'll leave the meeting and you'll ring the next day and say, right the  pits are open when you're coming back.  Those sort of experiences never leave you.  
**[0:24:40-0:24:47](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:24:40):**  Working with those sort of farmers and they're out there, they're everywhere, those farmers.  You've just got to identify who they are and just partner with them, really look after  them and together you'll identify some innovations and new processes and new ways of improving  profitability on farms.  I'd be not doing my job in the kind of ag tech space if I didn't ask you about how you can  
**[0:25:04-0:25:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:25:04):**  see this changing with things like satellite imagery getting so much better and new technologies  that might mean we can do that level of analysis and do that rigor around science but in new  ways.  How do you see that changing the relationship and the process and maybe even the farming  system?  
**[0:25:25-0:25:29](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:25:25):**  As I said before, we have to respect the science and as long as the new processes coming in  can complement and maintain a standard and it's accurate and it's being trialled and  tested then we're all for it.  We know the adoption of what we're working with, variable rate applications.  Adoption levels are so low.  
**[0:25:45-0:25:49](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:25:45):**  We're talking 15, 20% at best on strategies.  It just makes so much sense that we're not getting cut through.  Clearly price is a barrier.  If technology can simplify, if we can see sensors automatically capturing this soil  data as we're sowing our crops and if that means then those strategies are going to be  
**[0:26:08-0:26:15](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:26:08):**  implemented more quickly because it's reduced the cost by 50% then I'm all for that because  we're just playing around the edges at the moment and that's what the technology will  do.  In reducing costs of lab tests that's going to be pretty exciting.  I don't think it's going to be in the near future where we're going to be moving away  
**[0:26:28-0:26:34](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:26:28):**  from using laboratories and more traditional measurement methods but I think there will  be a transition into these new techs and it's going to complement and there might be a ratio  of every 10th sample we send off to a lab that we can use these sensors.  As long as we're testing, calibrating and making sure, I do feel people racing off and  collecting a lot of information of low quality data and delivery strategies for it.  
**[0:26:54-0:26:59](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:26:54):**  It's happening now and I really do worry because I guess I've just seen it and I'm a little  bit of a purist but I love lab quality data and measuring it on grids and that's what  I've based a lot of our strategies off now and I guess it's way more expensive but it's  accurate and like I spoke before it's an honour to work with farmers and I take it very seriously  when we change the rate of fertiliser from 100 to 150 kilos and it switches that line  
**[0:27:19-0:27:20](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:27:19):**  in the peak right there.  How confident are we with that line and yes there's always, you're never 100% confident  but I want to use the best quality data I possibly can to build those prescription maps  and it's to save a few dollars to generate those maps in the short term with poor quality  sensor data.  
**[0:27:36-0:27:41](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:27:36):**  That's an expensive operation because you've got it wrong so I'm torn between this idea  of wanting to do it right and wanting to do it a little bit cheaper through advanced technology  so my comment will always be just trial it, test it, question it, if it holds up and it  works well against traditional science and proven science, happy days and I can't wait  for those days because then we're going to see adoption go well beyond just these early  
**[0:28:01-0:28:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:28:01):**  adopters and we really want to get into that early majority of farmers, the big swag of  farmers, 30 odd percent of farmers through there that they're ready, they're looking,  they're on the step, they're not quite getting there and perhaps technology is going to be  a way of really helping those farmers come on board and start implementing some more  precision ag in their business.  
**[0:28:20-0:28:24](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:28:20):**  Love it Andrew, super helpful, some really really good insights there both for the ag  tech community and for farmers looking to go on the journey to get ag tech ready so  thank you so much for having a chat with me, I really really appreciate your insights and  really appreciate the work you do and how passionate you are about it, it totally comes  through and I just really respect it.  
**[0:28:38-0:28:39](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:28:38):**  Yeah, no worries.  Thank you for joining us on another episode of Ag Tech So What.  You can stay up to date with the latest episodes and news at agtechsowhat.com and as always  if you have any feedback or other guests to recommend, we'd love to hear from you, just  hop on the website and leave us a comment or send us a message.  
**[0:29:01-0:29:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=395368#t=0:29:01):**  Finally if you like what you're hearing and we hope you do, please share the podcast with  a friend or leave us a review on iTunes or wherever you get your podcasts.  Thanks again for listening, catch you next time.  