### Agtech - So What?  (2019-36-24)
**[0:00:00-0:00:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, and welcome to the Ag Tech So What podcast. Emerging technologies are rapidly  changing the global agricultural industry. We believe that this revolution is only getting  started, but there's still too much hype out there and too big of a disconnect between  ag and ag tech. So on this show, we try to bridge that gap. In each episode, we bring  you the story of a different innovator in agriculture and try to find the place where  
**[0:00:30-0:00:43](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:00:30):**  ag and tech meet. I'm your host, Sarah Nolet.  Welcome back to Ag Tech So What. Today's episode is the second in our series on responding  to climate risk produced in partnership with the Australian Farm Institute. If you haven't  heard the previous episode in this series, check out Annika Molesworth in episode 42.  Today we have two guests, another couple, Karin Stark and John Elder. John and Karin  
**[0:01:03-0:01:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:01:03):**  are responding to climate risk through innovation and technology by harnessing the power of  the sun to fuel their irrigation system and at the same time benefit both the environment  and the bottom line. In this episode, I chat with both Karin and John about how they decided  to adopt this technology, what it has meant for them and what they've learned.  Regardless of where you stand on the environmental debate, the business case stacks up and for  
**[0:01:28-0:01:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:01:28):**  me as an environmentalist and running a business, that's a really exciting place to be.  That's John who runs his family cotton farm in the central west of New South Wales. Together  with his partner, Karin Stark, they have installed a solar diesel hybrid irrigation pumping system.  They had a few goals in mind for this system, like reducing input costs, minimizing their  environmental impact and building resilience.  
**[0:01:50-0:01:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:01:50):**  Cutting farmers' business costs is really building their resilience like we're able  to on our farm because of our solar irrigation pump. And when you build resilience on farms,  that really leads to stronger, healthier communities because farmers employ a lot of local people  from town, they spend a lot of money in the local town. So it all equates to really vibrant  communities where you can help farming businesses to be more resilient and face future challenges.  
**[0:02:15-0:02:20](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:02:15):**  I guess my biggest driver is the ambition reductions because I read articles about climate  change, that's my background, environmental management and environmental science. So being  able to address both issues, so increasing energy costs for farmers and the environmental  outcomes we get from more use of renewables rather than fossil fuels is what really motivates  and drives me.  
**[0:02:36-0:02:41](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:02:36):**  With a 500 kilowatt capacity, the largest in Australia, the farm has been accredited  as a power generating facility, able to feed energy back into the grid. On top of cost  savings from using less diesel, the environmental impact is also significant.  Karen and John have reduced their carbon emissions by 500 tons per year, equivalent to about  40 Australian households.  
**[0:02:58-0:03:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:02:58):**  Cotton hasn't always had a pretty good rap and a good run in public discourse around  environmental issues. So I'm really happy to demonstrate that as farmers in general,  you know, very quick to adopt these sorts of technologies and adapt to the challenges  of climate change.  But despite these benefits and how proud John and Karen are of what they've done, uptake  
**[0:03:18-0:03:23](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:03:18):**  of this sort of technology is still in its infancy. Karen has been working to figure  out why and how to overcome this.  There are a lot of farmers interested in solar irrigation because of the cost savings and  emissions savings, but not a lot of information out there from either suppliers, government,  state bodies or the farmers themselves. So because of this, I ran a few seminars which  
**[0:03:39-0:03:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:03:39):**  were really well attended 50 to 60 farmers around Warren and Narrabri. And also I ran  a field day at a neighbour's property who put in a 100 kilowatt solar diesel irrigation  pump and that was the largest at the time about three years ago. So I kind of witnessed  solar irrigation government theory to proof of concept with our neighbour's property and  now to our farm, which is commercially viable.  
**[0:04:06-0:04:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:04:06):**  Karen wasn't willing to take all the credit, but John had a lot to say about just how important  Karen's insights have been.  Karen was instrumental in helping us get to a position where we're on the dotted line,  you know, going to Karen's workshops and so on. Yeah, that's had a big impact. And I think  even the people that bought out the pumping business that we used to work with and who  
**[0:04:26-0:04:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:04:26):**  then bought the solar business in Adelaide, I think they came to one of Karen's workshops  very early on and were really taken aback by the interesting farmers that were there.  And I think that the penny dropped for them to say, well, we need to get on top of this.  Now the company John is talking about is Reakwa, who eventually installed their solar diesel  hybrid system. Karen also now works for Reakwa and points out that one main barrier to entry  
**[0:04:49-0:04:51](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:04:49):**  for farmers taking on this technology is trust.  A lot of solar installers were approaching farmers back when I was in government saying,  yeah, we can put on a hundred kilowatts on your property, no problem to run your pump,  but you really need to have the understanding of the farming operation, the water that's  required, how it might blend with diesel if you're off grid or with the grid. So it's  
**[0:05:09-0:05:14](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:05:09):**  not simply a case of a solar installer putting a massive array on a farmer's property. They  really need that deep understanding on how it all works together and also how the farming  operation might need to change their patterns of watering to make the most of the solar  array.  So communication is critical as farmers need to trust that the businesses really understand  
**[0:05:31-0:05:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:05:31):**  their farming system and the impact of the technology, not just how the tech will work  on its own. Another insight around adoption of this technology is the communication between  farmers and the need for real life examples.  We know that farmers learn very much by looking over the fence through a behavioral economic  term called social norms. So there aren't a lot of systems out there for farmers to  
**[0:05:52-0:05:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:05:52):**  see what their neighbors are doing and therefore understand how it works and that it can work  for them as well. So because of that lack of systems on the ground working, it's constraining  investment.  And that's a big reason behind Karn organizing farmer field days. Karn says that whilst field  days are a great way to get farmers in front of these new technologies, seeing and hearing  
**[0:06:12-0:06:18](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:06:12):**  others' experiences is just as important to get that social proof. And tech can help here  too.  I do believe, and I've been told farmers love to show up, kick the tires, look at a system,  play with the pump, put their hands on things. But I do think things like podcasts and potentially  videos of how systems work can help on that journey because it does show them that other  
**[0:06:33-0:06:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:06:33):**  people are doing it.  For many farmers, the idea of upfront investment is something that holds people back. Karn  and John worked really closely with Riaqua to get confident around the financials.  And they came to the farm several times, looked at our figures, our numbers of diesel costs  and how much water we use and how much that water costs in the solar system. So it was  
**[0:06:53-0:06:58](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:06:53):**  quite a complex and long journey, but it also meant that they were taking the time to really  understand what we are doing. And they helped us to understand that with the amount of money  we're spending on diesel, that we could pay back our system on diesel savings and loan  in five years.  Part of getting confident enough to make the upfront investment was accessing a low interest  
**[0:07:15-0:07:19](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:07:15):**  loan through the New South Wales Government Rural Assistance Authority.  They provide $250,000, I believe that might have even gone up now because of the drought,  but $250,000 low interest loan to farmers. So we were able to take advantage of that.  And it was about a 2% interest rate at the time that we took that up for our, that paid  for about a quarter of our system. And that's because of the savings we were making in diesel,  
**[0:07:40-0:07:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:07:40):**  we were able to come and cover that interest and pay that loan off over the next few years.  Even though the technology to respond to climate risk has improved and the cost of things like  solar has dramatically reduced over the last 10 to 15 years, Carn believes that these government  backed financial incentives are still critical for farmers.  At the moment, because of the state of the environment and climate change and emissions,  
**[0:08:02-0:08:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:08:02):**  I do think government needs to be providing those types of incentives and low interest  loans to help push farmers along that investment journey. And particularly because of things  like the drought, there's not a lot of money that farmers have in their bank waiting to  spend on a massive solar system or renewable energy project. So having that further incentive  or subsidy, I think, will really, really help farmers to invest in renewables, which will  
**[0:08:28-0:08:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:08:28):**  really in the long term help their business resilience as they're paying less on energy,  they are more resilient to things like drought. So I believe that there needs to be more done  at the moment.  So when it comes to actually implementing this technology, what does it look like for  farmers? How does it shift current thinking and practices? And what does it mean for the  
**[0:08:46-0:08:47](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:08:46):**  bottom line?  A few months before we would plant our cotton and start the watering season, we turn on  our bores, fill our reservoirs so that they're ready at the beginning of the season. So for  a couple of months out, you pump flat out. Where we've changed with the solar system  now is we do what we're doing now is just during the daylight hours, we turn the solar  
**[0:09:07-0:09:15](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:09:07):**  system on and we just slowly fill those reservoirs using the sun over, say, nine months rather  than using diesel flat out for two or three months to fill it. So that's the main change.  And during the watering season, when the bores are going 24 hours a day, obviously we're  soaking up as much of the solar energy as possible to drive one of those bores. And  what that's meant to us is we have halved those costs. It's now looking that we're probably  
**[0:09:36-0:09:44](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:09:36):**  going to save in the order of about 170, 180 grand a year each year from pumping this way.  We think on diesel savings alone, the payback period for our investment is probably somewhere  around five to six years.  And they're also seeing financial benefits from being able to send their unused solar  energy back into the grid.  
**[0:09:59-0:10:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:09:59):**  We're now Australia's first cotton farmers' bridge as a power generation facility. So  from the sale of large-scale energy certificates, we get an income stream off that. And over  that payback period, that's probably another 120, 130 grand on top of that. This stuff  is almost getting into the realms of being a no-brainer. We were the first and we had  a few teething problems with the equipment and so on, but all that stuff is going to  
**[0:10:22-0:10:24](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:10:22):**  be worked out.  Even despite these financial incentives, there is still concern amongst farmers when it comes  to arable land being taken over by solar panels. However, Karen is confident that there are  more innovations coming online in this space that will help.  There's been a little bit of resistance by New South Wales farms around highly valued,  
**[0:10:41-0:10:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:10:41):**  irrigated, productive land being used for solar farms. And there's a company called  Accuo that is an international business, but they can grow crops underneath solar panels.  So it means you don't need to fence off your solar array like we've had to and lose that  productive land. So potentially, farms can still farm even while they're generating energy  on their property for their own needs and potentially to put back into the grid as well.  
**[0:11:07-0:11:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:11:07):**  Karen's passion for renewables and the natural environment has been recognized by the 2019  AgriFutures Rural Women's Award, where she is a New South Wales ACT finalist. Karen is  keen to share her passion and keep the conversation growing amongst farmers and businesses in  an upcoming conference that features a bunch of innovations that are helping farmers respond  to climate risk.  
**[0:11:27-0:11:31](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:11:27):**  The Renewal Wasn't Ag conference, which will be happening in Wagga Wagga on the 14th of  November, it's the first time that an event like this has been run where we're bringing  together people interested in agriculture and energy. So that's farmers and peak bodies,  government representatives, ag and energy consultants. And we've got some fantastic  speakers lined up. I'm really excited. We've got a winery called Keith Tulloch that's based  
**[0:11:52-0:11:58](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:11:52):**  in the Hunter, which is the first winery there to be accredited to be carbon neutral. And  they're using solar as well for their operations. So really cutting down on their carbon footprint.  And they're really excited to be sharing their story. We've got another farmer who owns a  piggery. I'm just at the moment just confirming him. So what they do is capture the gas produced  by the pig poo, give it a scrub, put it through a generator. It creates electricity and they're  
**[0:12:19-0:12:24](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:12:19):**  actually able to meet their own energy needs as well as putting it back into the grid.  So that's a really interesting way of using a potential waste product to cut your costs  and also make money by putting it, feeding it back into the grid. We'll also have different  speakers on different solar pumping systems. There's one coming down from Bundaberg. That's  a grid connected solar pumping system, as well as a Victorian beef farmer who has been  
**[0:12:48-0:12:53](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:12:48):**  quite an early adopter in terms of battery storage and his livestock pumps. And he'll  be talking about what he's learned in terms of when battery storage might work and some  of the numbers that he figured out and how to look for a good supply. So there's a few  great speakers that are lined up already, as well as a professor from ANU called Ken  Baldwin. He'll be talking about projected electricity prices and what farmers need to  
**[0:13:15-0:13:18](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:13:15):**  understand in terms of what their costs might be and inputs to the farm so they can work  out the economics of a renewable energy system.  What Karn has found in organizing this conference is that agtech innovation comes from a wide  range of sources.  It's a mix of overseas farmers also being innovative. So talking to a pig farmer, his  
**[0:13:33-0:13:38](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:13:33):**  father actually rigged up two car generators instead of kind of going out and buying one.  They were quite innovative and tried to cut their costs and use things that they already  had to produce this bioenergy from the pig poo. So sometimes it's out of necessity and  farmers are very smart in terms of tinkering with mechanics and understanding how things  work. So they're sort of coming up with things themselves.  
**[0:13:56-0:14:00](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:13:56):**  This kind of on-farm innovation is a great example of farmers responding to climate risk  in their own unique ways. And Karn believes that sharing these stories is integral to  helping the industry develop.  Because soil irrigation is an emerging technology, it's really important for farmers to get out  there and share their stories. And any renewables really are quite emerging in the agricultural  
**[0:14:15-0:14:20](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:14:15):**  space. So that's why I'm hoping this conference that I'm planning is one that people come  to because we've got some fantastic stories and speakers to share as well.  And if people can't wait for Karn's conference, Karn and John have some advice for how and  why you can take action now.  So there's a lot of organizations out there, peak bodies or people like Department of Primary  
**[0:14:34-0:14:41](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:14:34):**  Industries that have done research or do know who to speak to that are credible, trustworthy  consultants or businesses. So just start doing those early numbers to see whether it's going  to work out, but also consider the opportunity cost of not acting now as well. So if we had  waited five years for our system to be a bit cheaper, we would have lost the 200,000 savings  that we're making every year now until that five years. So it's kind of the opportunity  
**[0:15:01-0:15:03](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:15:01):**  cost of not doing something as well.  It is early technology. There's plenty of suppliers around who promise the world, but  not many who can spend all the disciplines needed to pull it off. So yeah, I'd have a  chat to people who've done it. Do you do diligence, do your homework in terms of the supplies  that you're talking to and questions, make sure they can answer your questions and that  
**[0:15:21-0:15:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:15:21):**  sort of stuff. It's not quite yet with a stage where you can just go buy a car, turn the  key and you're good to go. The people that you work with have got to understand your  situation, your flows on the farm, both workflows, economics and so on and make sure that it  works for you.  Fantastic. Well, thank you and thanks to Karin and really good luck with the conference.  
**[0:15:41-0:15:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:15:41):**  I'm excited to see how that all goes. Thanks so much, John. And thanks, Karin.  Thank you, Sarah.  Yeah, no worries. Thanks. Best luck.  Thank you for joining us on another episode of Ag Tech, So What. You can stay up to date  with the latest episodes and news at agtechsowhat.com. And as always, if you have any feedback or  
**[0:16:02-0:16:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=388219#t=0:16:02):**  other guests to recommend, we'd love to hear from you. Just hop on the website and leave  us a comment or send us a message. Finally, if you like what you're hearing and we hope  you do, please share the podcast with a friend or leave us a review on iTunes or wherever  you get your podcasts. Thanks again for listening. Catch you next time.  