### Agtech - So What?  (2020-18-05)
**[0:00:00-0:00:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, and welcome to the Ag Tech So What podcast. Emerging technologies are rapidly  changing the global agricultural industry. We believe that this revolution is only getting  started, but there's still too much hype out there and too big of a disconnect between  ag and ag tech. So on this show, we try to bridge that gap. In each episode, we bring  you the story of a different innovator in agriculture and try to find the place where  
**[0:00:31-0:00:42](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:00:31):**  ag and tech meet. I'm your host, Sarah Nolette. Today's guest is Mick Fels. Mick is someone  I've wanted to speak to ever since I read an article he wrote called How I Make Money  Out of Ipadic, It's Not What You Think. Mick has built and commercialized a range of products  with Ipadic from apps to machinery. And I wanted to chat with him about how he thinks  about making money from technology and what building products has taught him about startups  
**[0:01:02-0:01:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:01:02):**  and about farming. Mick and I also talk about hard earned lessons and tips for working with  technology, whether ideas or execution matter more, and which is harder farming or building  ag tech products. Mick and his wife Marnie farm in Esperance on the south coast of Western  Australia. We start with Mick telling us about the farm. We're farming just over 6000 hectares  here. We started farming in 93. My wife and I, we got married in 93 and bought our first  
**[0:01:31-0:01:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:01:31):**  farm in 93. For the princely summer $40 an acre while our friends were traveling the  world and whatever else they were doing with you. We traded our two cars in to get some  capital and bought a farm. So that's sort of how we started out and we sort of built  it up from there. We both had engineering degrees before we went farming, which has  been a really good career path for us. And we built the farm up and sold the original  
**[0:01:55-0:02:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:01:55):**  property in 2001 and bought into a better area with better rainfall and soils in 2002.  And we've grown the business since then. So we own about 4000 hectares and we lease another  couple of thousand, some off my dad and some off the native. So I'm growing wheat, barley  and canola and a little bit of legumes, just playing around with legumes. Take me back  to when you and your wife decided to sell your cars and buy a farm. Is that what was  
**[0:02:19-0:02:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:02:19):**  the thinking there? Did everyone think you were crazy?  They did. No, you hit the nail on the head. So we both went to uni. I was one of the younger  kids in a family of five and I didn't really expect to be a farmer. I always enjoyed growing  up on the farm, but I went and did an engineering degree and sorry, loved it. Actually did my  honors thesis on aerodynamics of wind turbines. So that I found that fascinating. But I did  
**[0:02:43-0:02:47](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:02:43):**  a little bit of work. I did in the field. I just did not like the office environment  at all. Just didn't agree with me. So when I finished uni, I took the opportunity to  come home to the farm for six months. Well, that was the plan just to help dad out and  just clear my head a bit. I didn't even apply for an engineering job and my wife, she did  chemical engineering at Curtin University. I studied at UWA and we met at college actually.  
**[0:03:08-0:03:13](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:03:08):**  We're both from the country. She's from up north in WA and we met at college. Had a great  time in Perth before the years and she worked for a couple of years as a chem engineer while  I was at the farm. My dad talked me into buying a farm that was out on the fringe. It was  sort of not in very good shape and it was cheap and it was affordable. So the only capital  that we had at the time was our cars. So we downsized and sold one of the cars. This is  
**[0:03:36-0:03:41](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:03:36):**  the year we got married. That was in 93. So we sold one of the cars and scratched up as  much as we could. We bootstrapped it, I suppose, is modern language for what we did.  I love it. We didn't start up firms.  Yeah, exactly. Just wanted the banks to exceed their normal parameters to lend us the money.  And yeah, we managed to buy our first farm and sort of did it pretty tough for a few  
**[0:04:00-0:04:01](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:04:00):**  years.  Was it scary to do that? Like, were you nervous about it?  Well, I don't, I mean, my long-term memory has never been good and I sort of forget things.  I think I'm busy looking ahead. I forget to sort of retain things. But the only emotions  that I recall from back then is excitement, really. Obviously there was stress and everything  
**[0:04:22-0:04:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:04:22):**  else with it, but really it was the excitement of the opportunity. And probably one of the  saving things for me was I just, I didn't know. I didn't know about farming. I was raised  on a farm, but it was a livestock farm predominantly. And we were getting into cropping and just  a huge learning curve, which I've always enjoyed learning. It was just a big exciting opportunity.  I think if we had have known what we were going into, we would have been, we probably  
**[0:04:44-0:04:49](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:04:44):**  should have been frightened, but I think we were just excited. It was really exciting  times. We actually went backwards for the first three years, which is, seems to be what  we've done every time we bought a farm. We've had a bad run the first few years or just  invested heavily in trying to build the property up or something. So, but even then we didn't  really worry too much about that. I suppose we had nothing to lose, you know, like we  
**[0:05:08-0:05:13](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:05:08):**  came in with nothing. So the worst that would happen is we'd leave with nothing.  Mick says that in the early days they probably did make a bunch of mistakes, but he's really  positive about these experiences as they've helped him to learn and to get better.  I've never been the kind of beat myself up for my mistakes because I see them as a learning  opportunity. It's the same with, you know, with the ATEC stuff I've got into more recent  
**[0:05:31-0:05:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:05:31):**  times. You know, it's normal to make mistakes actually. I sort of push the boundaries a  bit and I don't want to make mistakes, but I don't mind making mistakes because there's  such great learning experiences and then you can use that learning to do better in the  future. So yeah, we've made lots of mistakes along the way, but it's been those mistakes  that have sort of made us into good profitable farmers now, I'm sure.  
**[0:05:54-0:05:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:05:54):**  Yeah, I think that's one of the things we hear a lot on the podcast and other farmers  I talk to the biggest kind of advice around, especially some of this AG tech stuff, but  I guess farming more generally is you're going to lose some skin along the way.  Exactly. And, you know, a mistake is only a failure if you don't learn from it. You  know, that's sort of one of my sort of senses of how we go about these things. So long as  
**[0:06:16-0:06:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:06:16):**  you learn from it, you can actually make a mistake into something valuable. If you're  not standing on the edge, you take too much space. Well, that's what he thinks is my attitude.  So it's a little bit like that. You know, we do push the parameters a fair bit and sometimes  that works and sometimes it doesn't. But in the balance, you're constantly learning new  things and you retain the things that were good and you drop off the things that didn't  
**[0:06:39-0:06:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:06:39):**  work out. And over the long term, and farming is a long game, you know, it pays off.  An example of Mick pushing the boundaries happened early on when he decided to move  from mixed farming to just cropping and to adopt new systems and technologies like controlled  traffic to make this change work.  Well, our controlled traffic journey, I suppose, had been evolving for some time. I think it  
**[0:07:03-0:07:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:07:03):**  was about 2002 when I bought my first John Deere auto steer controller, which is 10 years  before we sold the cattle. So we never went down the guidance path. I never had a guidance  screen or anything. I just went straight into an auto steer controller and put it in the  seeder, auto steered the seeder and then left wheel tracks unceded on the seeder and everything  else followed those visually. So that was sort of how we started down the path of controlled  
**[0:07:27-0:07:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:07:27):**  traffic. I liked the idea of it and I suppose it grew from there. So, you know, about 20  years ago now and even now it's still not pure controlled traffic. You know, some of  our machines are 2.7 metre wheel tracks and some are 3.2. But I think the important thing  is that we've still got, you know, 80% plus of the paddock almost never gets driven on  and we do see the benefits. So I suppose it was a pretty slow burn for us. And by 2012,  
**[0:07:54-0:07:58](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:07:54):**  you know, we weren't making money out of the cattle. The prices were disastrous. They're  about 25% of what they are nowadays. And yeah, we weren't making a lot of money out of the  cattle that would distract us from our cropping business, which has always been our main enterprise.  And going to Moree, I was looking at some machinery actually and going to Moree and  seeing how those guys around there are doing it. You know, I was really motivated when  
**[0:08:16-0:08:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:08:16):**  I came home, we had a conversation about it together and decided let's take the plunge  and do this thing properly. So that's what we did. And it's been great. Like I'm so pleased.  I know cattle have improved a lot since then, but as you get older, you get wiser and I'm  starting to work out. I think most people can really only specialise in one thing. It's  hard to be a specialist in more than one thing and trying to be a specialist in livestock  
**[0:08:41-0:08:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:08:41):**  as well as in cropping. Well, for me, I always found that one or the other was being compromised.  So I do feel like, and in fact, our metrics will show, you know, business performance  has definitely improved since we got rid of the cattle. And we can just focus solely on,  you know, high performance cropping.  For Mick, pushing the boundaries hasn't just been about farming systems. It's also about  
**[0:09:02-0:09:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:09:02):**  technology and engineering, things he's had a passion for since he was little.  Yeah, well, I am a sort of a natural innovator. I loved mechanical engineering and you know,  as a kid, I was pulling apart bloody transistor radios and motorbike engines and whatever,  you know, like I just love knowing how things work. So it worked out well for us when we  started farming because like I mentioned, we didn't really have any money to bless ourselves  
**[0:09:29-0:09:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:09:29):**  with. So we had a lot of old worn out equipment, but I was able to fix it, get it working and  get it working well and modify it to sort of do the job we needed it to do. And even  build some of my machinery in those days, you know, out of old metal and whatever. So  that certainly helped us to get started. But as the business grew and we started making  some profits and being able to buy equipment, I sort of stopped doing all that because it  
**[0:09:55-0:09:59](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:09:55):**  just made more sense to buy what we needed that did the job and get on with actually  farming rather than fabricating things. But we sort of turned a bit of a corner 10 or  15 years ago where we started to feel like the things that I knew we needed in our business  from my own experience weren't really available. You know, like I'm really trying to customise  things a bit and I tended to find it became a bit of a standing joke on the farm as a  
**[0:10:22-0:10:26](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:10:22):**  staff actually that before a new machine could go into the past, it would spend a week at  the workshop and that was sort of how it started happening. So I was modifying things a lot  because while you can buy something that sort of, I mean, most of this machinery you buy  particularly stuff from North America, which is where a lot of it comes from, it's a one  size fits all solution. It's the same machine that you get in Canada, the USA, right through  
**[0:10:46-0:10:51](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:10:46):**  Europe, South America, Africa, everywhere. You know, they're all identical equipment,  but it's a bit fanciful to think that one machine is going to suit all of those environments.  So I would always be just fine tuning it, just trying to get that extra bit of performance  out of it or make it sort of do more for me.  Mick has done a lot of this customisation work, tweaking existing products to make them  
**[0:11:08-0:11:13](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:11:08):**  work for his farm. But in a few cases, Mick has gotten to the point where customisation  just wasn't enough. It was actually easier and ultimately better to start over and build  something new.  I was using a John Deere disc seeder and having all sorts of problems with it, but I really  liked what the bits were doing to our soil, but it just wasn't performing the way I needed  
**[0:11:29-0:11:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:11:29):**  it to in our soils and with our chemistry that we're using. So I heavily modified it  and it was working really well, but I had all sorts of reliability problems and I actually  decided to start building my own units from the ground up. And that's sort of evolved  over five or six years now into the Alpha Disc, which is an all new unit, which is basically  custom made. It's mass produced, but it's custom made for the sorts of things that we're  
**[0:11:56-0:12:01](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:11:56):**  trying to do here in Australia in terms of using Treflan, which is a problem with normal  disc seeders and not wetting sands, which are a bit of a problem. But it's sort of dealing  with that moisture seeking. All the things that disc seeders don't normally do are the  things that I've sort of built into my Alpha Disc. We've seen our water sufficiency and  just our overall productivity and profitability just been on a steady rising plane probably  
**[0:12:21-0:12:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:12:21):**  pretty much since we started doing that. So I can see that we're definitely on the right  track.  Over time, as technology has improved, mix innovations have gone beyond equipment and  machinery to apps and more of what today we call ag tech.  When the iPads came out in 2011, I got a few iPads with some chemical, it was a bit of  
**[0:12:40-0:12:44](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:12:40):**  a, you know, like one of those freebie things that you actually pay for. But anyway, I got  a few iPads, I was keen to try them out. And as soon as I got them, I could just see, you  know, that sort of mobile portable device with data sharing was just going to be priceless  in our business. And I had a look at all the different apps that were around and I could  just see that they were built by IT people, your business people, entrepreneurs, you know,  
**[0:13:03-0:13:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:13:03):**  they weren't really catering the sorts of things that I, the practical things that I  knew we could do with those devices. So took the plunge. We're ready for something a bit  new in the business and we set up our paddock to develop a couple of apps. And in 2013,  we released two apps, which was our paddock spray and our paddock yield. And our paddock  spray was really taking control of the spraying operation because we're going through a rapid  
**[0:13:30-0:13:34](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:13:30):**  growth phase in the business at that stage. And I was relying on staff to do a lot more  of the key operations like spraying. And I was having trouble managing our inventory  of chemicals and managing the quality control on the spraying and just keeping the communication  open between myself and the spray driver. And we were making mistakes, you know, like  you'd have a paddock, I've had an instance where a paddock got sprayed twice and I've  
**[0:13:53-0:13:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:13:53):**  had other instances where parts of the paddock didn't get sprayed and you thought they had  been, just communication breakdown. So one of those failures can cost you 10, 15, $20,000.  So I took the plunge and decided to build these apps based on what we knew we needed.  And I thought, well, if we're going to do this, then we'd be silly not to commercialize  it because I'm pretty sure if we need it, then other people do too.  
**[0:14:19-0:14:24](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:14:19):**  It was at this time around 2013 that Mick set up iPaddock, a company that would help  him bring these apps to market. So what was driving Mick to not only build technology,  but also to commercialize it?  Right from the get go, the primary reason for doing it, I suppose, was to develop what  we needed. You know, we were growing our business and I could just see the value to our business  
**[0:14:42-0:14:48](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:14:42):**  of having good tools like that. So when Marnie and I discussed it, one of the things that  we considered was even if we don't make money out of it, it's worth doing it just, I mean,  this is how crazy it is. And at the end you can buy for $180 in the app store, you know,  as a buyer of apps, you know, it's cost us thousands of times to produce it. And even  then it was still worth doing. So the value proposition for people just buying the app  
**[0:15:11-0:15:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:15:11):**  is pretty good. But even in our case, even if we didn't sell a single copy, it was really  a case of needing it for our business. So the way we priced our apps, it's sort of a  protest really. Like I get grumpy at all these, you know, everybody wants you to sign up to  an account and pay subscriptions before you've even seen what the product is and then you're  locked in and it's really hard to get out again. So it probably doesn't make a lot of  
**[0:15:38-0:15:44](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:15:38):**  sense from a business point of view, but we just had a low entry price and no subscription.  So when you work it out, we never really set out to make any great fortunes out of my apps.  And as much as anything, I just, I sort of have a passion for the industry and I'm a  bit of a sharer. Anybody who follows me on Twitter will know that. I like to share and  I like to share in a two way stream, you know, people helping me and me helping people where  
**[0:16:05-0:16:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:16:05):**  I can. And I suppose really the apps have always been a bit of an adjunct to our business  and I sort of don't mind having them there and supporting them because I know how important  they are to the people who use them. And I guess in some ways it's a bit of a contribution  to the industry that I love is helping drive the productivity of the industry.  Another reason Mick felt it was important to create iPatic was because he saw limitations  
**[0:16:32-0:16:37](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:16:32):**  in the current system of research and development, whether from big or small companies or research  organizations or industry bodies, he's seen a lot of money and time being wasted on products  that weren't actually helping farmers.  That sort of takes me back to my motivation for doing this stuff. You know, a lot of my  friends look at me and think, why the hell do you do this? You know, like, just go and  
**[0:16:52-0:16:59](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:16:52):**  buy what you need and just put up with it. Don't constantly have the need to change things.  But I do get frustrated because I can tell people to I'm blue in the face what I need  and they just keep churning out the same stuff. And same with our R&D system. It's become  very bureaucratic. I mean, there's hundreds of millions of dollars every year invested.  A lot of that directly from people like me on our farms. But by the time the good idea  
**[0:17:18-0:17:24](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:17:18):**  is make it through the food chain, it's really difficult to actually get progress in terms  of innovative solutions. So the established process, and it makes commercial sense, but  the conventional process, I guess, is to commercialize stuff that you know there's a market for. And  what that actually means is anything innovative and disruptive, you have to actually build  that market and you're not going to get a great commercial return on it any time soon  
**[0:17:47-0:17:52](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:17:47):**  unless you plan to stick with it for 10 or 15 years. So getting the R&D bodies and commercial,  you know, mainstream brands to develop stuff like that, it ain't gonna happen in my last  time. So if you feel strongly enough about it, you've really got to get in there and  do it yourself, pick up the shovel, do the work. And I mean, we're very fortunate. We've  got a good farm business which pretty much bankrolls iPatic for us. So iPatic doesn't  
**[0:18:11-0:18:15](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:18:11):**  have to sort of churn out a profit every year, or certainly doesn't have to churn out a big  profit. Mind you, the money keeps a blow torch on me to make sure we're not losing money  with it. But you know, we do have the security of our farm business. So yeah, we're not compelled  to be turning out a million dollars turnover every year from iPatic. So it's good, we can,  it's really our own R&D program, which we're commercializing, and that's iPatic.  
**[0:18:38-0:18:43](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:18:38):**  But doing it yourself isn't always easy. Though there's a whole ecosystem of options out there,  people who really want to help startups and programs like accelerators and incubators,  for someone like Mick, who's farming full time, it can be really hard to get access  to this support in a way that works for him.  This is so difficult when you're a farmer, because you're already isolated, you're not  
**[0:19:00-0:19:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:19:00):**  in the networks where you meet people who can do stuff for you and other people you  can share knowledge with. And in Esperance, you know, we're in Western Australia, and  there's very small sort of technology seen in WA, because most people go straight to  Melbourne if they want to sort of further their careers. So I'm in a remote part of  WA, which is a remote part of Australia, and Australia is a remote part of the world. So  
**[0:19:24-0:19:29](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:19:24):**  just having access to people who can do the sort of stuff that I'm trying to do, and trying  to build skills, and even access to things like Spratix, and your Farmers for Founders,  you know, those kinds of things are great, but very difficult for someone in my situation  who's full time running a farming business. You know, I don't have family, I don't have  other family on the farm other than my wife, of course, sort of no one to fall back on  
**[0:19:47-0:19:52](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:19:47):**  and I can't just disappear for two or three months. So yeah, that's been one of the biggest  challenges really is those sort of the time limitations and the access to support and  networks and all of the other things that come with it.  So what has Mick learned? And what does it mean for I-PATIC?  Like I said, I've sort of been around the circuit a couple of times, and I'm probably  
**[0:20:08-0:20:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:20:08):**  at a point now where I guess I understand some of those constraints and I'm working  within them. So I haven't downscaled I-PATIC or anything like that, but I'll probably revise  my expectations in terms of, you know, how quickly we can reach our goal with I-PATIC  and how important it is to, you know, to sell it and flog it and all that stuff. I've sort  of backed out of those kinds of things that were taking an awful lot of my time. And while  
**[0:20:34-0:20:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:20:34):**  I-PATIC as a standalone business, I think the sky's the limit really in terms of what  the potential of that business is to actually realize that would take me away from our farm,  which is worth a lot more to us than I-PATIC is.  Has anyone ever approached you to partner and maybe integrate it with some other tech  and kind of take on some of that and still reward you for it, but you wouldn't have to  
**[0:20:56-0:21:01](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:20:56):**  do the work? Has that ever come up or been an option or something you considered?  I think that's every entrepreneur's dream that you come with the ideas and someone else  takes all the risk and does all the development. It doesn't happen. What my experience has  been is if you have a new idea that you know is a good one, which I've had and there  have been good ones, and I know that because the people who buy and use them love them.  
**[0:21:22-0:21:28](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:21:22):**  And certainly I know the value that we get from them ourselves. But to start with something  like that, which other people haven't thought of, it's a hard sell. You're pretty unlikely  to get other people to adopt that and then offer to buy it from you. In my experience,  what happens is you have to do all the hard graft, take all the risk, invest all the money  and do all the development and the prototyping and all the waste that goes with prototyping  
**[0:21:49-0:21:53](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:21:49):**  when you come up with something that's not better than what you had before and so on.  And then once you've got something that's just a hit, then it's of value to people.  But unfortunately, what I've found is once it's of value, then people try to take it  from you rather than buy it from you. So there's all sorts of challenges. It's sad, but it's  true. You know, that's actually, I'm sort of a little bit gun shy now because of some  
**[0:22:14-0:22:19](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:22:14):**  negative experience I've had and that I'm still having there. You sort of become a bit  gun shy and less inclined to sort of put yourself out there until you've got all your eyes  guided and your teeth crossed. But unfortunately that does limit the uptake of innovation and  the development of innovation because a lot of people go through the same experience where  they do all the hard work and then someone else just tries to take all the profit from  
**[0:22:38-0:22:44](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:22:38):**  them. So there's also, I don't want to be negative and I'm not negative, like I'm  buoyant and optimistic about all of the things that we're doing. But like I say, I've said  it a few times, when you get older, you get wiser. And I suppose one of the lessons I've  learned has been farming is a damn sight easier than being an entrepreneur. So farming is  not easy as everybody knows, but I tell you, trying to mix it in the cut and trust of the  
**[0:23:08-0:23:13](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:23:08):**  commercial world where there's a lot of people out there who don't seem to share your same  sort of idea about fairness. Yeah, farming is a much easier place to make a crust and  it's a much better place to trade. So there's all sorts of challenges there, but there's  opportunities as well. This is a learning experience and like I said earlier, you make  mistakes and it's not bad to make mistakes. What's the saying? It's good to fail fast.  
**[0:23:35-0:23:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:23:35):**  And it is. And we've done a bit of that and you learn along the way and you get wiser  and in the long game it pays off. But in the short term it can hurt a little bit.  Are there any things you learned from the ag tech side that you've taken back to the  farming business? Like any lessons that have gone back the other way?  Probably the lean development approach is an important one. And for the benefit of people  
**[0:23:59-0:24:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:23:59):**  who don't know quite what that means. Basically lean development means to do things in incremental  stages and to be constantly testing what you're doing before you expand it to the next step. So  in contrast, the traditional approach to development was, I think they call it the  waterfall approach, where you have this idea, so you sit down and you build it as long as it takes  with all its features and all its pre- and then you use it and if it doesn't work, well you just  
**[0:24:30-0:24:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:24:30):**  waste that entire process. Whereas lean development is more about starting with a minimum viable  product. There you go, there's another jargon word for you. And so basically just develop the  absolute base minimum version of what it is that you're talking about, start testing it  and work out what it is that's good and what it is that's bad and then you build the next feature  and then you start testing that and then you build the next feature and you start testing that. And  
**[0:24:53-0:24:59](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:24:53):**  if something doesn't work, you pivot, you change direction and you make a little iterative changes  all along the way. And one of the benefits of that is, is you don't get halfway through a really high  investment process and then the wheels fall off for some reason, you've got nothing, you've got  half of something which is useless. Whereas with the lean development process, you've always got  something and then you can keep adding to it. So on the farm, you know, a lot of the R&D that we do  
**[0:25:20-0:25:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:25:20):**  on our farm and we do have a pretty extensive R&D program, it's not a formal one, but you know,  I've got lots of kegs on the driveways, marking out all the different trials that we're doing.  And it's the same thing, you know, rather than sort of just decide I'm going to build an air  seeder system, a feeding system and just have an idea and then build it and then who knows whether  it's going to work on it. This has been, you know, 5, 6, 7 years in the making, the alpha disc and  
**[0:25:46-0:25:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:25:46):**  every year it's sort of been improved on a little bit and I'm finally at the point now where I've  got a machine that we're mass producing and it's a really good machine. So if I hadn't just started  out building what I thought was a good idea at the start, it may never have been any good and it may  well have cost us an awful lot more. One thing we hear a lot from farmers is all these ag tech  startups are trying to flog us a half-built product and then the ag tech startups are saying,  
**[0:26:10-0:26:15](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:26:10):**  no, no, it's just an MVP, like it's just the early version and then I guess that's, it's an  interesting kind of question because we often tell entrepreneurs, well, if they're saying that, then  it's actually not an MVP, you know, it's not valuable, you haven't hit the minimum yet, but  there is definitely a tension in that it's, you know, it's not fully there yet, it's not better  than maybe the giant spreadsheet that you've built and used for 20 years, but it's hopefully adds some  
**[0:26:34-0:26:38](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:26:34):**  kind of value. I don't know, do you have any thoughts on that kind of tension in the tech world?  Look, I think it's okay to have a minimum viable product in the market so long as it's priced  accordingly or it might even be free, but what's not okay, I mean, as I've mentioned, I'm primarily  a farmer, you know, farming is our bread and butter, the ag tech stuff is very much a sideline,  so I'm speaking as a farmer here and that was what actually motivated me to a large degree to do what  
**[0:27:02-0:27:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:27:02):**  I've done with Hypatic was you'd be paying really high prices for a lot of this stuff that would be  pedalled out to us by big companies and small companies and you'd get it and half of it didn't  work and it would be buggy and it wouldn't work when you've got no phone range and there's no  support, you ring up and then you've got to sign up for a support service to get support for  something which should have worked in the first place and it doesn't, you know, that's not  
**[0:27:26-0:27:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:27:26):**  really minimum viable product, that's just a rip-off, so I think if you have a base level  product that works really well but it doesn't have too many bells and whistles on it and it's priced  accordingly, I think that's fair enough and not that that's what we've done with Hypatic, but the  apps that I've released, there's a whole lot more that we're doing to the apps and features that  we're adding but the apps as they stand now are really good valuable apps and they add value to  
**[0:27:51-0:27:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:27:51):**  every farm business and they're cheap enough to buy, so there is a value proposition there and  people appreciate that but yeah, no, it has been a bit of a scam and the reason why is most of  these things, most of the technology and even the equipment that we buy, they're coming from a  position of someone trying to make a heap of money, which is fair enough, we all want to make money  but that shouldn't be the primary reason for doing something which it is for a lot of this stuff, so  
**[0:28:19-0:28:23](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:28:19):**  you know, the machinery is going up five, eight percent every year and it's not really performing  any better, in fact it breaks down more, the software is, you know, several thousand dollars a  year to have a subscription to some software package that still crashes and doesn't really do  what you want it to do, that's not a good base proposition from my point of view and I've actually  found doing it ourselves, even though it has been an expensive process, at least we've got what we  
**[0:28:44-0:28:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:28:44):**  want and what we need and the value to us hasn't been through selling apps and machinery, it's been  through improving our productivity and our profitability on our farm and a lot of the time  that actually has been through just reducing costs, like for instance with our feeding system  that we're using now, we harvest tall because we're using this, so we're saving money at harvest,  we can have less headers going faster and losing less grain, so there's a lot of profit there,  
**[0:29:09-0:29:13](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:29:09):**  we don't touch the stubbles until, you know, until we sow them the next year, we're not out there  with slashes and double choppers and doing all this other stuff that other people have to do  in the running time, so while at faith, you can look at this in time and say, oh look they do a  similar job, when you look at the profit, I mean it surprises us some years how much profit we make  when we really don't think we've performed spectacularly well and it's really because  
**[0:29:32-0:29:39](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:29:32):**  we're still performing well but we're not having all the costs, so the value to all this innovation  that we've been doing is just, it's really reflected on the bottom line for our farm business.  Yep, I think that is something that many of the startups don't understand and you get it when you  don't come from agriculture, haven't spent time on farms, they haven't actually thought about what  the real drivers are in the business and so maybe they're only solving for one part of the system  
**[0:29:59-0:30:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:29:59):**  but they haven't thought about where that actual real value can be unlocked or what will really  move the needle. And that's what I find actually with a lot of the solutions these days, everyone's  excited about IoT and you know, telematics on the headers and all this stuff, it costs a lot of  money to have as complexity to your business and okay it's nice to look at your computer and see  you know where your head is driven around or you know see what the fuel consumption was or  
**[0:30:24-0:30:29](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:30:24):**  something but how is that actually adding to my bottom line? You know for me, adding to my bottom  line means reducing my cost in a tangible way you know, doing less passes across the paddock  or getting the job done more quickly or having better communication or making sure that every  paddy gets braved with exactly the right amount of product, it's those kind of things that they  don't reflect directly onto the bottom line and they're few and far between in a lot of the  
**[0:30:48-0:30:52](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:30:48):**  solutions that we can just buy off the shelf because we're paying more and more for all the  technology and our equipment now and it really does all this stuff that it looks nice but really  it's complicating life and it's not actually adding to the bottom line so I'm not actually  the bloke who buys all that stuff, I try to option it out as much as I can because I just want a big  capacity machine that's going to be productive and get the job done efficiently and that's  
**[0:31:11-0:31:14](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:31:11):**  actually getting harder and harder to find even though we're paying more and more for all this.  Well Anne what did you say before? You're gonna have to go take it in the shed for a week anyways  and rip it apart so it'll take you a bit longer. I'm still doing it yeah even now like I'm buying  all this stuff and quite often the time in the shed is actually spent just disconnecting all the  things that came on the machine because they just drive me mental. I know my dad is exactly like  
**[0:31:37-0:31:42](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:31:37):**  this, I get a new backpack and he's got to tweak it, he's got to cut off the strap and reattach it  like it's my whole life so I totally understand what equipment's the worst. Mick you mentioned  the lean start of the book before and are there any other resources, books, podcasts, anything  that you'd recommend or mention that have been valuable to you in your journey? I read a book  a few years ago called How to Build a Billion Dollar App I think it was and that was good. I've  
**[0:32:06-0:32:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:32:06):**  read a few of these books over the years and not that I plan to build a billion dollar app but  it's just lots of good tips in there. In fact some of that stuff I wish I had read before I started  because there were some like golden rules in there which would have been quite useful when I was  starting out. What not to do and you know one of the big problems I've had actually probably my  biggest limitation with the app side of it is that I'm not a coder. I mean I learned computer  
**[0:32:31-0:32:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:32:31):**  programming when I was at uni and I wrote programs and stuff when I was there but the world's moved  on since you know the 90s and I could learn to code but again farming's my bread and butter and  it would take me too long and it's not really my cup of tea. So I've had to use third parties to do  100% of that side of it and when it comes to building machinery I love welding. I'm  quite practical. I've got all the gear down at the shed so I can actually build the prototypes  
**[0:32:58-0:33:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:32:58):**  myself and then I can give them to somebody and say look I want you to mass produce this  and that's just been such an advantage. I wish I could do that with my tech stuff  because my designs are good they work well but it's a really long and difficult process trying  to communicate to someone who specializes in coding exactly what it is that I need.  In fact quite often they try to get involved in the design but they don't really understand  
**[0:33:23-0:33:29](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:33:23):**  the application so you're not going backwards or forwards a lot and it's just a much harder  thing when you can't do it yourself and I think the people who have done spectacularly well  you know you look at Twitter and all your Facebook and all these things the people who  built them they are the people who do it and you've got the skill and you're not having to  try to explain your amazing ideas to someone who can actually you know type it into a computer.  
**[0:33:50-0:33:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:33:50):**  You know that's probably if there was one word of advice for people wanting to go down this  pathway is if you have to outsource or the technical side of it you're already on the  back foot. So I wish you know in a perfect world I wish I could have had a better idea  and I wish I could have had an outsider who was the technical person working with me on this stuff.  Another big thing that Mick has learned on his journey is actually something that we talk a lot  
**[0:34:15-0:34:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:34:15):**  about at Agtentik that ideas are important but it's execution that really matters.  It's not actually I heard a quote not that long ago was that the world needs thinkers  and the world needs doers but what the world needs most is thinkers who are doers.  That's great. Which is actually you know and I guess you know everyone has ideas a number of times  people have contacted me said oh look I've got this great idea I want to make an app or whatever  
**[0:34:40-0:34:47](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:34:40):**  it is you know what do you reckon and I need to say a reply was just one word which is no there's  like a hundred o's in it. Like you know it ain't an easy process you've got to be absolutely  committed to go down that pathway but yeah no it's you know it's one thing to have an idea  and it's another thing to actually turn it into reality and probably the key thing is persistence.  Like it's just a long hard slog particularly if you want to make a dollar out of it and I've been  
**[0:35:13-0:35:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:35:13):**  lucky I haven't had to get investors in because we've been able to bankroll it through the farm  business and while it would have been nice to have investors in terms of the mentoring and  the experience that comes with that what I do enjoy is not having other people telling me look  you might think that's a great practical feature but we're going to dump it because we need to put  something in that makes it sell more which I don't like you know I don't have to deal with that so  
**[0:35:36-0:35:41](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:35:36):**  yeah I don't know it's an interesting sort of interesting experience.  Yeah I think it's something we're really proud I mean now I wear an investor hat too right but the  balance between how do you stay like I guess I truly believe and we wouldn't be doing what we're  doing if I didn't that staying truly user-centric and building what the users want and will truly  add value is the only way to build a good business and you have to believe that you make money out of  
**[0:36:02-0:36:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:36:02):**  that down the road but I totally understand the challenge that you have which is slightly a  different one of just how do you spend your limited time and you have one activity that's way  more profitable than than the other so that that makes a whole lot of sense that you have to pick  that one. Yeah well and what it may mean is it just limits you know what we do with our padding  when I first started out I thought you know let's just let's just see what happens and I just knew  
**[0:36:26-0:36:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:36:26):**  that the potential for what we were doing was you know was global and massive but you know it's  probably what I how I started the conversation you know you can't really be a specialist in two  things if you want to be a specialist it's probably you're going to have to focus on one and for me  I've chosen farming now it doesn't mean I can't do the whole egg check and the startup side of it  because we are doing it and it's successful but I can't really expect to be the next Bill Gates as  
**[0:36:50-0:36:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:36:50):**  well as you know a profitable successful farmer you have to choose and you know farming is what  I love that's what sort of drives it also that's what I've chosen and then the other thing just  has to sort of has you know I have to devote my spare reserves to it rather than it being my core  exercise I guess it's a pretty good hobby to have though of all the things you could be doing that  are probably a lot worse for you it's great look I love it and I've got to meet some amazing people  
**[0:37:16-0:37:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:37:16):**  I've you know I've got I've had some great experiences I won the um growth awards productivity  in 2017 I think that was and I think a lot of that was largely on the improvement to national  farmer productivity because of the sorts of innovations that I've developed you know which  was a real honour and I got to go on an international study career as part of that prize  and I met some really good people and I think now of all the things that we've adopted in our  
**[0:37:43-0:37:49](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:37:43):**  business just on the back of some of those kinds of things I've been exposed to I think it's  actually central to why our business is performing well these days is is all these other experiences  and learnings that we've had which don't necessarily relate directly to farming so you know no  education is wasted and every every experience you have can be useful and it's just it's just  an amazing journey I'm loving every second of it it's great to um yeah I hear you so positive  
**[0:38:12-0:38:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:38:12):**  I feel like some of um some of your I read more of your no with a thousand oh comments on Twitter  and I I never actually knew how positive you were so it's it's good to speak with you  good to speak with you maybe my maybe my online persona needs to adapt to more reflect my attitude  oh I'm just teasing actually but it but it is really good to actually chat with you Mick and  um yeah thanks so much for doing this I really appreciate your time and and um hopefully get  
**[0:38:37-0:38:41](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:38:37):**  the chance to meet in person I would I would really enjoy that that'd be nice looking to  have it coming over this way or if you think of an opportunity for us to catch up I would like to  meet you it's just great to know other people in this space I mean I'm sort of like you know what  is it um that's like on um on little Britain the only gay in the village I'm the only AgTech  startup guy in the town you know like I think everybody looks at me like I've got two heads  
**[0:39:02-0:39:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:39:02):**  sometimes thank you for joining us on another episode of AgTech So What you can stay up to  date with the latest episodes and news at agtechsowhat.com and as always if you have  any feedback or other guests to recommend we'd love to hear from you just hop on the website  and leave us a comment or send us a message finally if you like what you're hearing and we  hope you do please share the podcast with a friend or leave us a review on iTunes or wherever you get  
**[0:39:30-0:39:44](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=570327#t=0:39:30):**  your podcasts thanks again for listening catch you next time  