### Agtech - So What?  (2020-50-22)
**[0:00:00-0:00:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, and welcome to the Ag Tech So What podcast. Emerging technologies are rapidly  changing the global agricultural industry. We believe that this revolution is only getting  started, but there's still too much hype out there and too big of a disconnect between  ag and ag tech. So on this show, we try to bridge that gap. In each episode, we bring  you the story of a different innovator in agriculture and try to find the place where  
**[0:00:31-0:00:43](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:00:31):**  ag and tech meet. I'm your host, Sarah Nolette. When we think about ag tech, at least here  at Agthentic, we aren't just thinking about the technologies themselves. We're thinking  about new business models in agriculture. And of course, we're thinking about the innovators  that are driving changes along the value chain. Today's guest, Fiona Aveyard, is definitely  an innovator and an entrepreneur, as well as a farmer. Though Fiona does use technology  
**[0:01:03-0:01:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:01:03):**  and make lots of data-driven decisions on her farm, what we talk about today is how  she's working on a new supply chain and new value-add products that can bring more profit  to her farm and can bring benefits to her regional community. And we talk about how  Fiona is doing all of this while facing the worst drought in history and what that's like.  This episode is again part of our series in partnership with Farmers to Founders. Farmers  
**[0:01:29-0:01:34](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:01:29):**  to Founders is an innovation program designed specifically for primary producers. Fiona  is one of the businesses in the program. Applications are open now at farmerstofounders.com for  the IDEAS program. So if you're a producer with an invention that you think could be  commercialized or an idea for a new product, check out the IDEAS program. It provides support,  coaching, funding, and a community of other innovative and entrepreneurial producers.  
**[0:01:55-0:02:01](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:01:55):**  So with that, here's Fiona. She starts by giving us a rundown of her property.  So we are mixed farm, what I would call a traditional mixed farming operation in central  New South Wales. We're about an hour southwest of Dubbo. Our nearest small town is called  Tullamore. We're about 25 k's from there. So there's me, my husband, Bill, and we've  got four children. We live on a farm that joins the farm I grew up on and we would be  
**[0:02:24-0:02:29](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:02:24):**  fifth generation farmers in the area. So even the farm that we live on is actually is a  soldier settlers block that was cleaved off the original holdings that my ancestors had,  you know, 130 years ago. But after the second world war, I think they did, they broke a  lot of the properties up to give the return soldiers blocks, which worked really well  in the small communities for a long time. But as farming changed and mechanization and  
**[0:02:53-0:02:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:02:53):**  expansion and all that sort of stuff, that a lot of the smaller properties were eaten  up by the adjoining ones. And so that's how Bill and I had the opportunity to buy here.  And so it's 1500 acres at West Point where we live. We own the next door place, which  is Warranilla in partnership with my sister. I've got another block that is on the other  side of the Aurora Park, which is my dad's place called Robbo's, which we bought a few  
**[0:03:21-0:03:26](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:03:21):**  years ago. And then my husband has his block up at Trundle, which is part of his family  succession. He's got two other brothers and they've got block country there as well.  And all mixed farming across all those different properties?  Yep. So we have Merinos for the wool production. We usually run around 1000 Merino used and  we've got crossbred used. We usually run between 1000 and 2000. It sort of depends on the seasons  
**[0:03:49-0:03:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:03:49):**  and how much cropping we're doing and that sort of thing. And then we have, we do mixed  cereal cropping. So wheat, barley, canola, chickpeas, oats, that sort of stuff, cut our  own hay, store grain on farm for the dry periods and do all that sort of thing. Bill's brother  has a Merino stud. My sister breeds camp drafting horses and my dad breeds standard bred horses.  But yeah, generally it's the sheep and cattle and we haven't got any cows at the moment.  
**[0:04:23-0:04:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:04:23):**  We normally have Angus cattle, but they've been long gone in this dry period.  Fiona, like many farmers in Australia, has been experiencing some seriously extreme weather.  Though the floods, drought and fires have been in the news locally and globally, it's  really hard to get a sense of what's actually happening, what it's like for the farmers  and for the regional communities they live in, without seeing it yourself. When I spoke  
**[0:04:46-0:04:52](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:04:46):**  with Fiona, the east coast of Australia had just gotten some much needed rain. West Point,  Fiona's farm, did get some as well, but it came with another challenge.  We did. We got under a jagged, very narrow storm the other day. We had 20 mils. That  was before the massive dust storm. I don't know if you've seen it all over social media  today. It stretched honestly from the northwest to the southwest. It was the biggest dust  
**[0:05:12-0:05:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:05:12):**  storm I've ever seen. It looks like a movie. Like it looks like when they go to like a  different planet in a movie and they're like, oh, this planet is a desert planet with dust  storms. No, no, that's just Australia. Yeah, that's just central New South Wales.  So that's exactly what it was like. And it came in like normally you get a lot of wind  and there's a bit of a build up before it gets a bit stormy and all that. But this was  
**[0:05:36-0:05:44](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:05:36):**  so, there was no wind. Like it moved really quickly and it was quiet and very eerie. Like  it was very, yeah, just a bit unsettling to be honest.  Oh yeah. It looked like a mountain. It was really crazy. So that impacted you guys then  directly like does the dust come over your property and what impact if any does that  have?  
**[0:05:58-0:06:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:05:58):**  It's more like it's the house. Like it's, it covers everything with this fine red dust  that is, it doesn't matter. Well, our house is an old farm cottage anyway, so it's not  dust proof at the best of times, but this is the sort of the permeates like a sealed  chamber. It just, it covers everything in your house, the walls, everything with this  layer of dust that you just like, it's so hard to move. So that's what, that's what's  
**[0:06:28-0:06:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:06:28):**  disheartening. It doesn't really do anything per se. I mean, apart from obviously the obvious,  which is blow your top soil away and all that sort of thing, but we'd had some rain and  you know, things were a bit more grounded here. That's obviously coming from out West.  Yeah, it's just more the, and it gets dark like it's like in the footage that you see  of the bushfires, literally it just blocks out the sun for the 10 or 15 minutes that  
**[0:06:50-0:06:51](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:06:50):**  it's going past.  Oh my gosh, that is terrifying. It literally is a movie, but not a movie.  It's just that sad, sad real life.  As if the dust storm wasn't enough, Fiona is still battling the drought.  We ran out of farm water on the farm that my, where my sister lives that joins us about  
**[0:07:11-0:07:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:07:11):**  six months ago and our house ran dry this week. So we've moved all our livestock up  to another property at Trundle where there's better water and we've got a couple of hundred  deer that we're just carting water for. So it's just, it's like one step in front of  the other, like it's a grind actually. It'll have to end soon.  You say that so casually, like, Oh yeah, and then we're just out of water and it's like,  
**[0:07:34-0:07:39](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:07:34):**  what? I'm sorry. That's a massive deal. I actually did want to ask you about that. If  you're okay with that, just a little bit about kind of some, some color for people who maybe  haven't been in regional Australia during the drought or don't actually know kind of  what it's like. Cause I think you, you talk about it in a way that's really honest and  would love to share a little bit of that if you're up for it.  
**[0:07:56-0:08:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:07:56):**  Yeah, no, absolutely. And it's the hardest thing to explain. Like it's because it is  a grind. Like you just, it's just one foot in front of the other day after day, you're  doing the same thing and you know that the seasons will change. But then as you get closer  to like last year is a good example, as we've got closer to that autumn break and we didn't  get an early autumn break, but there was some forecast of some, of some weather. So we're  
**[0:08:22-0:08:26](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:08:22):**  pretty optimistic. There were a couple of cyclones up in the North and that usually  feeds in down here pretty well. And that's certainly what all the forecast was saying.  So you're, there's an anticipation and excitement that comes with farming because it's an exciting  time to be planting your crops or, you know, joining your sheep and all that sort of stuff.  And it's a bit like we've got horses as well. I always say it's like when you pick a stallion  
**[0:08:44-0:08:49](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:08:44):**  for your mare and all the foals born and it's always the Derby when I'm liking it, it's  the excitement of the possibilities. So you get, you do get excited, even though as it  turned out, we didn't get that early autumn break, you didn't get a mid autumn break and  we didn't get a late autumn break. We've got no rain all year. So that's really hard. And  as you get those trigger points for your plan for where you're going to be, if you're going  
**[0:09:08-0:09:13](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:09:08):**  to do stock or how you're going to manage, you know, do you buy more feed and you're  doing those sort of budgeting and talking to your bank managers and trying to figure  out exactly how you're going to do things. And as those, as those trigger points get  closer, you get more and more anxious because you're like, if there's a forecast rain event,  you know, you've got a date on the first of September or something, there's a forecast  
**[0:09:29-0:09:34](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:09:29):**  rain event for the middle of September. You're like, do I hang on another two weeks or do  I stick to my plan? Like it's just anxiety and just, you get, you just, you can't second  guess at it. It's awful. I can't say it any other way. It's awful.  It sounds like the up and down of it is just exhausting too. The kind of constant hope  and then not hope and then hope again and then not hope that, that in any context is  
**[0:09:55-0:09:59](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:09:55):**  exhausting and in one so important as this seems overwhelming.  Yeah, that's it. And it's gone on for years, which is really, that's the grind, I guess,  in terms of it does get you down. I mean, people are obviously, people are well aware  of mental health issues and particularly in farming because there is, you know, in high  incidence of people suffering or having suffered, you know, taking their lives and that sort  
**[0:10:18-0:10:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:10:18):**  of thing with mental health. But there's not that many of us. So people really keep an  eye out on each other and reach out all the time. And most of us have been here for such  a long time. We do, like we're optimists in that we know it will rain again. Like we've  all been in droughts. We've never been in a drought like this. And there is the added  reality I guess of climate change and this is what farming is going to be and what's,  
**[0:10:44-0:10:48](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:10:44):**  how are we going to deal with that and what's the legacy we're leaving for the next generation  that is a, again, another burden of how you're approaching your job and what changes we have  to make now for it to take effect to benefit the next generation. So there's, there's a  lot, lot of things that people have to consider that are very, you know, nobody's got the  answers, I guess. You just have to really believe in what you believe and pin your ears  
**[0:11:10-0:11:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:11:10):**  back and hope for the best.  Yeah. I want to go back to something you said before, if you know about trigger points,  is that a kind of concept, like conceptual trigger points or is it actually more of a  set of management decisions you guys would set up in advance?  Yeah, so that's exactly what it is. So if when there's grass in the paddocks, like what  
**[0:11:31-0:11:37](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:11:31):**  point you're going to move sheep on, when there's like no rain and you're getting to  a point where you want to join stock, what are you actually going to join and what's  not going to be productive for you for the next 12 months going forward. So do you sell  them? Do you, you know, how do you market them? All that sort of stuff. Do they go into  a fat market? Are they fat enough to go into a fat market? Are you looking for a restock  
**[0:11:54-0:12:00](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:11:54):**  or all that sort of thing. So, and the trigger points for most of us where we're not on irrigation  life, we are usually around a date. Like it'll be, if we haven't had rain by the end of the  autumn, then what are we going to do for the winter? Right. We're going to carry this many  stock. We've got this much feed. How are we going to manage that? And you know, what are  we going to look after and all that sort of thing.  
**[0:12:18-0:12:23](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:12:18):**  The coverage of the drought in the news talks a lot about the impact to regional communities.  Speaking with Fiona helped me to understand what that really looks like, the cash flow  challenges that individual businesses are facing and the flow on effects to other businesses  and to the community as a whole. The hardest thing is when you're, it's year cash flow.  So when you're basing your decisions around rain events and you might have a budget for  
**[0:12:45-0:12:51](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:12:45):**  a certain time or you'll have commitments in terms of maybe fertiliser or stock feed  or shearing or stuff outgoing so that you can't not pay. And then all of a sudden you're  like, oh, the shearers ring, they're coming two weeks earlier. You've just got a load  of feed. The money's not in so you will because it didn't reach them what you wanted at sale.  So you held off pushing you think you needed it for another month. And it's those cash  
**[0:13:11-0:13:19](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:13:11):**  flow kind of components that are very tricky and it just makes you, that's what puts people  under enormous pressure because then they don't want to go out because they're not,  it's not that they can't pay their bills, they're just slow paying them because the  money in these economies when you're in regional areas, everything slows down. So one, if you're  slow paying your fuel and they're slow paying their bill, like it just flows on. And that's  
**[0:13:36-0:13:41](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:13:36):**  when people isolate themselves, which is the real danger. So it's in terms of your mental  health and that type of thing. So it's very, it's hard to stay on top of everything all  the time when there's so many variables, I guess.  Yeah, exactly. And with the, I mean the joke I've been seeing around Twitter recently is  like how can any of these weather people or tech companies predicting the weather keep  
**[0:13:58-0:14:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:13:58):**  their jobs because they just keep being so wrong?  Well, we all know it's hard, like, and particularly in the summer, like we're not, it's unlikely  we're going to get general rain in the summer. It's all going to be storm events because  that's traditionally what happens. It doesn't, you know, climate change or no climate change,  you get your good general rain in the autumn and the winter time. We, you know, pray for  
**[0:14:22-0:14:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:14:22):**  a spring break to get crops through. And if you're lucky enough to jag something in the  summertime, then you'll grow a few cat heads and some bathyspheres, you know.  Despite the truly catastrophic challenges that farmers like Fiona are facing right now,  it's situations like these that can also really help to bring people together.  I think we're all seeing it with the fires as well, so that probably people will understand  
**[0:14:47-0:14:51](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:14:47):**  so much more. But we do farm tours on the farm and the number of people that have come  out in the holidays to do a farm tour and because they follow us on social media and  they know it's really dry and they want to come and spend some time in the country, that  type of thing. And so that's really, and they bring, the rule is usually, like when we were  growing up, if people came to visit you, they always stopped in town and got some fresh  
**[0:15:09-0:15:14](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:15:09):**  milk and the daily newspaper because they're the sort of things you don't get on the farm.  And the people that come out here, you know, they'll grab some fresh fruit and veg and,  you know, just pop out and do a farm tour and hang out, have lunch with us. And it's  the fact that they care is what, you know, sort of catches in your throat. It makes you  really just a better person, really, because then, you know, hopefully we can pay it forward  
**[0:15:32-0:15:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:15:32):**  one day and everything will go around nicely.  Seeing the challenges in her local community and thinking about the future is actually  what inspired Fiona to look at a new business model for their farm.  We were looking at our local community, Tullamore, which is really struggling to stay afloat,  really. You know, it's always to have a little shop or all that sort of stuff. It's just  
**[0:15:55-0:16:00](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:15:55):**  a battle for everybody to, the population isn't really here to sustain it. We used to  be a three teacher primary school and then they had to drop down to a two teacher and  we'll just thinking about that and just going, gosh, I wonder what the future is. And it's  a pity we don't have any industry and all that sort of thing. And part of it is that  as farms, you know, through the factory farming year and the age of mechanisation and all  
**[0:16:21-0:16:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:16:21):**  that sort of thing, we've all expanded, we've all got bigger equipment, we've all bought  out our neighbours as they've moved on and that type of thing. So we're all running pretty  big properties. But then in terms of the community, there's less people that you don't have the  workmen, people are having less kids probably. I mean, we have four, but most people would  have two or three. And it just, you reach a point in the community where you wonder  
**[0:16:46-0:16:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:16:46):**  if it's sustainable and it's like, well, we can't keep buying properties and getting bigger  and bigger because we can't do the work. And as time goes on, you miss the old quality  of life. You know, everyone always says about living in regional areas, it's the lifestyle.  We love the lifestyle. When you're working seven days a week and really long hours, you're  going, well, the lifestyle kind of sucks at the moment. So we were just sort of thinking  
**[0:17:10-0:17:14](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:17:10):**  about how that was going and what it would look like for the next generation. We had  a bit of a family meeting and my husband had just gone through their family succession,  which worked really well. And it's held up to be a great example where the boys had always  known what they were getting is has a sister who's off farm and she'd always known what  she was getting. And it worked brilliantly that nobody fell out and everything was good.  
**[0:17:34-0:17:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:17:34):**  But each of the boys have gone on to lease or purchase additional country. And it's again,  it's unlike, is it really like, is it the great answer? Because what, you know, where  do we want to live and what do we want to live in in the next 20 or 30 years? Or, you  know, what, what are our children going to live in? And I just thought, well, maybe we  should do more of a value add to the country and what we're producing and create jobs within  
**[0:18:01-0:18:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:18:01):**  the farm, like vertically rather than horizontally. So that if the kids want to have work on the  farm when they're older, we don't have to buy another property and, you know, borrow  all that money and do that sort of thing. Maybe we've got the opportunity within the  farm already to create business and jobs and that would have a benefit not just for our  immediate family, but for the community and at large.  
**[0:18:23-0:18:26](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:18:23):**  When you were thinking about that, did you find yourself, were you like the crazy uncle  that's like thinking totally differently or was everyone kind of on board? Was it a thought  you shared with anyone?  Yeah, no, Bill and I talked about it at length and we, you know, were chewing over it from  for many, many evenings and car trips and, you know, what can we do? And, and I was like,  
**[0:18:45-0:18:49](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:18:45):**  well, I reckon with the lambs, there's a great opportunity, you know, we can do a value add  and we've always like, we do live in a bubble and I say this all the time in regional areas.  Like I'm, I kind of had a feeling that people would be interested in the story and that  was part of us as well of wanting to do Outback Lamb was that we get, farmers get such a bad  rap from vegans and environmentalists and people who just think we're the worst environmental  
**[0:19:12-0:19:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:19:12):**  vandals and cruel to our animals and do all these terrible things. And most people love  their animals and do, you know, would, if they was an animal in distress and it was  nearly dark, they wouldn't leave it. Like they'd go out and catch it and bring it back  in and treat it and do all that. They'd look after animals before they'd look after themselves.  And yet the general public don't seem to recognize that or acknowledge it. And whenever there's,  
**[0:19:36-0:19:41](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:19:36):**  you know, something in the media, it's always about how we're mistreating the animals or  cruel or doing, pushing down trees or doing all this sort of stuff. And it was like, I  really think that if people knew the story that they would be so much more connected  to the land and, and their food source and just to understand it a bit better and be  a bit kinder about what they think. And we had a lot of backpackers coming through the  
**[0:20:00-0:20:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:20:00):**  place as well. So we, I was sort of telling the stories to them as they were coming through  and they were going, Oh, but isn't organic much better? And I'm like, well organic is  much better, but sometimes organic, it just means that people have taken chemical out  of the equation. It doesn't mean that they're addressing everything else. And I said in  the same way that a good farmer might be doing everything else really well, but some glyphosate  
**[0:20:24-0:20:28](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:20:24):**  at an opportune time might be a great solution, even though it's not something that they will  use all the time, but they don't qualify as organic, even though the food might be more  nutritious than its organic counterpart, if it's not managed properly. And as they lived  here and worked here for ages and really got to see how things were done, they, they developed  a greater understanding and it made us want to share that a bit, a bit more widely.  
**[0:20:51-0:20:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:20:51):**  And what was the first time where you like took a step? You were like, okay, I'm going  to go from these concepts and this belief and passion to like Brandon Lamb and sausage  rolls, like, like take us forward to when you actually decided to do something and what  that was like.  Well, I think I Googled a lot of stuff and I was like, right, I'll do a business plan.  
**[0:21:10-0:21:13](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:21:10):**  That'll be a great idea. And, um, anyway, I've got about three quarters of the legs  for the business plan and I was like, Oh, this kind of sucks. I think I'll just start  it and see how it goes. And we went, I had a meeting with, um, a great fellow in Dubbo  who has a business called Principal Focus and they were so generous with their time.  Bill and I went and saw them and I just said, look, I'm thinking of starting this paddock  
**[0:21:31-0:21:34](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:21:31):**  to plate business. What do you, you know, what do you think? Blah, blah, blah. And we  sat down with them and had a massive three hour conversation and they'd done a lot of  research and talk just through a lot of things. And one of, and it was his suggestion. He  said, well, whatever you do, don't call it West Point Lamb. West Point being the farm  name. And he said, cause that means nothing to anybody. He said, call it something. And  
**[0:21:52-0:21:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:21:52):**  we developed Outback Lamb then as a company because I didn't want it to just be something  that we started and then it disappeared into consolidated revenue and nothing ever happened  again. I thought if it had its own entity, then I'd be a little more driven and focused  about getting it up and running.  One of the best pieces of advice that Fiona got when she was starting Outback Lamb was  
**[0:22:13-0:22:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:22:13):**  during a course that she took. The course was actually more about the farm business,  but the instructor told her something that would prove quite pivotal for Fiona.  I remember him saying, you don't need a lot of capital to start up. And this work for  me was a real, a little bit of an epiphany because I was thinking, Oh God, I've made  you 10 or 15 grand to get a webpage and blah, blah, blah. And after talking to the guys  
**[0:22:35-0:22:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:22:35):**  at Principal Focus, it was, you know, we need like 10,000 hits before you can get one sale  and you know, looking at all those stats. And then he said, Oh, well why don't you do,  you know, you can just start up like do it. You can get a webpage, you can do weeks or  something like that. Pay a month for subscription and it doesn't have to cost you the earth.  You can build it yourself. And I was like, Oh yeah. And then I thought about a bit of  
**[0:23:00-0:23:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:23:00):**  a logo and I talked to a girlfriend I went to uni with and I was like, you know, rip  something off the internet and I was like, can you make this enough different that it  can be mine? And we just kind of meandered along, I guess basically in terms of right  I need a brand, right I need a webpage. Okay. Then I went and spoke to a couple of butchers.  There was a, an abattoir. So a lot of things happened. Opportunity. There was a micro avatar  
**[0:23:28-0:23:34](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:23:28):**  opened up at Tenandra where we could get minimum kills done. Like you didn't need a minimum,  sorry. Like you just get any, anything done. So that was a great starting point for us.  It was quite expensive, but it was a great way to dip our toe in the market. So doing  the whole bodies and they would do the butchering, box it all up and then we could pick it up  and get it delivered to the people that were buying it on the online store.  
**[0:23:53-0:23:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:23:53):**  After getting stuck in and getting going, Fiona had a few tough decisions to make.  A lot of people asked us if we were going to do farmer's markets and that type of thing,  but we were very conscious early on that we didn't want to make another job for ourselves  in just, you know, have another, we really wanted to go into whole bodies and, and be  more wholesale, but have our own brand attached to us and the, that prominence that it was  
**[0:24:17-0:24:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:24:17):**  grown and bred here. And we can do all that kind of thing ourselves.  But of course, like any startup, getting Outback Lamb off the ground was not easy. Fiona had  to challenge herself to learn new skills and to get out of her comfort zone.  I struggled a lot with social media in the early days. It's a bit hard to get over yourself  early on where you just like, Oh God, I saw much such a tool and you just don't want to  
**[0:24:43-0:24:48](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:24:43):**  put things out there and you're a little bit embarrassed. But then I was talking to a friend  and she's like, well, when do you ever look at somebody's post and go, Oh God, they're  such a tool. And I was like, well, I never actually, I never do. So that was, and you  just, it's yesterday's news, you know, you put it up and it's, you know, you think, Oh  God, I saw much an idiot, but anyway, and tomorrow I'll put something new up and it'll  
**[0:25:07-0:25:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:25:07):**  be gone. So I just practiced and just got into it and just, yeah, got over myself really.  It's so funny. Like it's just like any startup and all the same pitfalls, like we should  start with a business plan or we have to spend tens of thousands of dollars. Those are really  common myths, whether you're a farmer starting a business or a tech person starting a business  and they're not true either way, which is always interesting to see those parallels.  
**[0:25:33-0:25:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:25:33):**  Yeah, no, it was absolutely that. And then sort of early on, we've got a little bit of  traction early on and it was going quite well. And I said to Bill, I think they might get  like somebody in the, like a Mark Holmes kind of a person on board to really help out in  terms of just tidying up the webpage. And it was, I was happy with it. It was good,  but it wasn't great. You know, like it was my first effort, so you can imagine what it  
**[0:25:59-0:26:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:25:59):**  was like, but it was clear and I knew what I was saying, but I needed more, just a bit  more spit and polish on everything. And so there was a lady in Dubbo that who'd been  recommended to me and she came on board for three months and she just like cracked the  whip and really got me into gear in terms of getting a bit more of a plan with the social  media. She got me doing the recipe blog and getting sort of the idea of being to offer  
**[0:26:26-0:26:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:26:26):**  more than just, you know, this is our outback lamb, it's better than other lamb, I promise,  to try and get people to, to give them more than just the lamb. So we're doing the recipe  blogs fortnightly, I was doing quarterly EMAG with just news and stories on the farm and  we're doing the social media kind of stuff and just trying to, just connecting generally  with the public and the people that were interested in what we were doing and she was great. So  
**[0:26:52-0:26:58](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:26:52):**  that gave me a lot more focus and a bit more drive and definitely lifted our profile.  Building a strong social media profile helped Outback Lamb to get started and to attract  some customers. It also led to other opportunities for Fiona, like being invited to participate  in a business course.  Regional Platters in Dubbo, which is a combination of a few shy councils, but to promote the  
**[0:27:17-0:27:23](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:27:17):**  region as food producers. And they did like a business and social media course that went  on for three months and we popped in every couple of weeks type thing. And the culmination  of that was that we had to do a pitch and we had to have a project. So I collaborated  with the gourmet goat lady at Coli and Farmer Browns Pastured Eggs at Wellington. And we  did a pitch to say that we really wanted to get a refrigerated truck. So we'd take our  
**[0:27:45-0:27:52](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:27:45):**  full body sheep and goats and the eggs into the Sydney markets and we won that. So that  was a $15,000 boost to the kitty. So then we proceeded to get a little refrigerator  truck, which we drive now and that has really helped to grow the business as well. So just  the publicity we got from that, but also the cash and let us get a really good quality  truck.  
**[0:28:09-0:28:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:28:09):**  There's such a good theme there of the combination of do it yourself and get started and that  kind of hustle with really strong partnerships and surrounding yourself with good people  because you did that both with the initial advice and with the help with the website  and then with the partnerships there. It takes a village to raise a child, same with a startup,  but also you have to put in the hard work yourself and it sounds like you've done both.  
**[0:28:37-0:28:42](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:28:37):**  As I said, it is hard because you're coming from a point of pretty much zero knowledge,  but you can pretty much Google anything that I've discovered. So you just find out and  if you can see a gap in your business or something's not quite right or whatever, then you can  usually find somebody that is an expert in that area or source out that information.  The hardest thing sometimes is spotting the gaps and that's where Farmers to Founders  
**[0:29:05-0:29:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:29:05):**  was quite good because when you're working in that bubble and you're just moving forward  all the time, sometimes you don't stop and think, why did I choose that or why am I doing  that? You don't give it enough thought, you're just progressing all the time. So Farmers  to Founders for me was a great opportunity to sit back and look at the business from  a bird's eye view and go, well now why am I doing that? What am I trying to get to?  
**[0:29:30-0:29:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:29:30):**  Now that we've done this, what does that tell me and how can I get to the next point and  that type of thing? So that was a wonderful opportunity that I don't think you could do  on your own.  One of the aspects of the Farmers to Founders bootcamp program, especially for the teams  doing value-add products like Fiona, is a focus on the macro trends that are driving  
**[0:29:49-0:29:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:29:49):**  today's consumers. Learning about these trends has inspired Fiona to make some changes to  Outback Lamp.  Our business is whole body carcasses into Dubbo, Sydney and Wollongong. That's what  we do. But in order to build on that brand, we try and have a presence at local events  and festivals and that type of thing when the opportunity arises. So we did a Beers  
**[0:30:12-0:30:18](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:30:12):**  to the Bush Festival in Dubbo last year and I was thinking, oh gosh, what could we have  with a beer? I know, I'll do a lamb sausage roll. So we went to a local baker and I was  like, if I bring the lamb, can we do like a gourmet sausage roll? And I think we did  lamb, harissa and almond. Honestly, it was so easy. I dropped the lamb off, we mucked  around with the recipe for half the morning and then we cooked them up and it was like,  
**[0:30:37-0:30:42](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:30:37):**  yeah, that's good. All right, I'll bring some more lamb next week and we'll have 500 for  the festival. That'll be great. And that was literally how easy, how much effort we put  into it. And they were a huge hit. So people really liked them. And when we did other festivals,  there was Trundlebush Tuckaday and there was a Jimmy Barnes concert at Tullamore. So we  did the sausage rolls as well. We did other stuff. We did lamb cofters and I'm trying  
**[0:31:03-0:31:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:31:03):**  to think what else we've done. Anyway, all like different sort of foods, but the sausage  rolls were always popular and people were asking for them outside of those events and  you know, can we put in an order and all that sort of thing. So when the Farmers to Founders  came up and part of what we want to do with the lamb is really, we'll maximize our return,  I guess is the focus, but it's about using all of the animal. So we were like, you know,  
**[0:31:28-0:31:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:31:28):**  we can do bone broths and we can do sausage rolls and you know, how do we manage all of  that type of thing? So we just went with the sausage rolls and to do that with, when we  got to Farmers to Founders, they're like, well, you know, have you thought about doing  something that's preservative free? And I was like, well, I hadn't, no. And when we  talked about all those mega trends and things that are happening in the world and what people  
**[0:31:51-0:31:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:31:51):**  are looking for and about that, you know, what would make somebody eat a sausage roll  and that type of thing. Well, the preservative free really jumped out at me as something  that we could do to differentiate what we're doing and connect with that sort of artisanal  market and that patticoat plate sort of theme that we're already building on. And then the  other thing was looking at the mega trends and it was more the snackability, like how,  
**[0:32:18-0:32:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:32:18):**  when would people eat a sausage roll and all that sort of thing and what size do they have  to be? And we were doing quite more massive, big, long sausage rolls for the festivals.  And so we've fine tuned that and made them a little bit smaller.  I love it. Snackable. It's such a big trend actually. And like everything is snackable  now and it's like cute and bite size and you can have a little baby one and especially  
**[0:32:42-0:32:49](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:32:42):**  things that are more indulgent, like something that's otherwise maybe seen as not something  you eat every day or it's a bit of a treat or it's indulgent, like having a small one,  it's like, oh, it doesn't count. Well, my kids love them. They have them as afternoon  tea when they come home and that's exactly, so I want them to have something but not ruin  their dinner, if that makes sense. So I was like, yeah, well that definitely works for  
**[0:33:06-0:33:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:33:06):**  me. So we'll do something like that. And also that, you know, when do you eat sausage rolls?  Well, they're always great at a party, you know, that five o'clock sees having a beer  and a sausage roll or, you know, when people pop around for drinks in the Friday afternoon,  that type of thing. So we're just really, yeah, it just made me try and think about  how we might see into that market and what people were interested in.  
**[0:33:30-0:33:34](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:33:30):**  So with all these changes, what's up next for Fiona and for Outback Lamb and what does  the future hold?  Well, I guess in terms of our next plans, hopefully we'll launch the sausage rolls in  the next month is what I'm really gearing towards now. And then in the, and this is  drought breaking and, you know, a whole heap of other provisos, but I'd dearly love to  
**[0:33:54-0:34:01](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:33:54):**  either develop a microbrewery on the farm or close by that we could utilise. I'd like  to do it in a community like Parks or Dubbo, somewhere close to the Inland Railway line,  because I think that there'll be a lot of other farmers that would like to do similar  things and to have access to a little micro abattoir would be a great asset to a small  community. And in that way, we can really then own all of the animal. We can really  
**[0:34:23-0:34:31](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:34:23):**  try to find markets for the offal and the, I can develop bone broths and do that type  of thing and really get to a point where the whole animal is utilised really well. So it's  the whole animal and how we can really maximise the return for it.  At first I thought you said microbrewery.  I think I said microbrewery. I was like, oh shit.  
**[0:34:48-0:34:51](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:34:48):**  And then I was like, oh, this is really gone to left field.  Yeah. I think I did say microbrewery. It's clearly, it's clearly five o'clock isn't it?  No, micro abattoir. That's what I meant to say.  Oh my gosh. Too funny. I was like, well, I'm going to be your first customer, but not to  the abattoir, just to the brewery.  
**[0:35:06-0:35:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:35:06):**  Bill, my husband, Bill loves beer. So he would be all over a brewery if we, he's like, can  you make beer from land?  Maybe last question, Fiona, what, um, would you have any advice for another farmer who's  thinking about maybe having a go with an idea and maybe is in that stage of feeling like  it's too hard to get started or they're the crazy uncle, um, with, with just not their  
**[0:35:31-0:35:34](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:35:31):**  idea. What, what advice would you have?  I think that I would actually say just get in and do it. Like it's, you won't, like you  won't know unless you try. So it's, I guess I just feel like agriculture is really changing  that the, you know, these eras of productivity and expansion and where in order to increase  your profits, you increase the, what your carrying capacity is and all that sort of  
**[0:36:00-0:36:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:36:00):**  stuff and you do pasture improvement. But I just feel like it for us anyway, in this  where we don't have irrigation and we're more, we're not marginal country at all, but we  are marginal rainfall and it's really important that we're on the lighter end of stocking  rates and all that sort of thing. And we've got to look after our soils and we've got  to look after to have a future in agriculture of what we do. It needs to be, we need to  
**[0:36:25-0:36:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:36:25):**  be making better returns on what we're producing. We need to basically make more from less.  And that's how agriculture has to change. And that's what we're trying to do here at  Outback Lamb. And I think that surely it's not just us that think that, I think that  other people would be seeing the same things and you know, the pressure you put your country  under to try and make ends meet is just not, it's not a sustainable option. And we, you  
**[0:36:53-0:36:59](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:36:53):**  know, the opportunities that come from the regenerative ag portion and how people are  really looking at their soil health. And we're in a great position because we are mixed farming.  So it's that benefit of grazing and producing meat. And it's just so it works really well.  And the cropping is obviously a big component of our income, but it's like you know, living  in a banana republic, if we keep mining our country and trying to put it back in, in terms  
**[0:37:24-0:37:29](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:37:24):**  with artificial fertilisers and using chemicals and all that sort of stuff, then it will ultimately  deplete. Like we can see that already. So we need to change what we're doing. And I  always say to the kids, it's a bit like living off McDonald's, you can get the calories you  need, but you don't get the nutrition. And that's the kind of farming that we're heading  towards. So that's why we need to stop and rethink that and change. And that's what I'd  
**[0:37:47-0:37:51](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:37:47):**  say to other people is, you know, what sort of farm do you want to have? And how can you  change your business to make that?  You can tell by the confidence in Fiona's voice that she's come a long way and that  she really believes in what she's doing with Outback Lamb. It's not easy for any entrepreneur  to keep this conviction, especially when you're starting a new business, and let alone during  
**[0:38:08-0:38:13](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:38:08):**  a drought when everything feels like an uphill battle. And Fiona says it's not always easy,  and she's not always confident, but that hasn't stopped her.  As I said, like, honestly, I feel like I'm sure everyone's the same, but you mill around  aimlessly and the fear of fear of fraud or, you know, there's some special talk, you're  like, I'm really not the expert, but I'll tell you, you know, I can talk about what  
**[0:38:31-0:38:37](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:38:31):**  I can talk about, because that's what I know. But I wouldn't be so vain to think that I'm  absolutely right. But I can, it's the direction that we've chosen, because I think that I  can see there's a need for change. I don't know what the answers are, but this is, you  know, we can't just keep doing what we're doing, we've got to change.  Yeah, so true and so hard to get started, but that's really all you can do, right, is  
**[0:38:55-0:39:01](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:38:55):**  take that first step. So I'm just continue to be impressed and humbled by stories like  yours and the tough times you're facing, but how positive and forward looking and innovative  you are, because it's definitely not easy, and it's really hard to understand from the  outside. So yeah, just appreciate you sharing the story.  I know you guys have been amazing. It is honestly to give you such a lift, like to apply for  
**[0:39:19-0:39:23](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:39:19):**  something like Farmers to Founders and then to be selected, you feel like you feel like  you've won a little bit of lottery, like it's like, oh, I really like what I'm doing, you  know, like you, it gives you a lift because you just think otherwise, you know, unless  you're doing things like that, you're like, oh, it seemed like a good idea at the time,  but how are we, you know, is it is it and it and it's a crazy time to be trying to evaluate  
**[0:39:42-0:39:48](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:39:42):**  the lands because the drought has meant that the lands increase in value exponentially  because of the basically supply and demand. Like it's, it's like, I don't even know why  I'm trying to value add because I could just take them an extra two weeks and add them  to the, and put them in the sale yards. But anyway, we've got a, we've got a plan and  we're sticking with it.  
**[0:40:02-0:40:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:40:02):**  Yep. And yeah, like I said, you got to start somewhere and it's, I mean, startups are like,  you know, experimenting and trying new things, seeing what's working. So you're definitely  on that journey.  Thank you.  Cool. Um, thanks so much, Hannah. Well, I will, um, let you get to your beer in your  
**[0:40:20-0:40:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:40:20):**  new microbrewery.  I am on microbrewery. Oh my God.  Thank you for joining us on another episode of Ag Tech. So what you can stay up to date  with the latest episodes and news at agtechsowhat.com. And as always, if you have any feedback,  or other guests to recommend, we'd love to hear from you. Just hop on the website and  
**[0:40:42-0:40:47](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=562386#t=0:40:42):**  leave us a comment or send us a message. Finally, if you like what you're hearing and we hope  you do, please share the podcast with a friend or leave us a review on iTunes or wherever  you get your podcasts. Thanks again for listening. Catch you next time.  