### Agtech - So What?  (2020-25-04)
**[0:00:00-0:00:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, and welcome to the Ag Tech So What podcast. Emerging technologies are rapidly  changing the global agricultural industry. We believe that this revolution is only getting  started. But there's still too much hype out there and too big of a disconnect between  ag and ag tech. So on this show, we try to bridge that gap. In each episode, we bring  you the story of a different innovator in agriculture and try to find the place where  
**[0:00:31-0:00:42](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:00:31):**  ag and tech meet. I'm your host, Sarah Nolette. Today's guest is Alastair Tulloch of Keith  Tulloch Wines. Alastair has a business degree from the University of Newcastle and is currently  studying applied science, both wine and viticulture at Charles Sturt University. Alastair came  recommended to us by a previous podcast guest, Karen Stark, for the work he's doing in sustainability  and carbon sequestration. Thanks, Karen. This whole area is such a hot topic right now with  
**[0:01:06-0:01:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:01:06):**  a lot of big claims out there. So it was really exciting to talk to a grower who's actually  on the journey to carbon neutral. In this episode, Alastair shares what made him go  down the path to carbon neutral, what practices and technologies they're using and what is  and isn't working, and the financials. What are the expensive parts and where are the  returns coming from? Alastair starts with an overview of the family business. I work  
**[0:01:31-0:01:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:01:31):**  at Keith Tulloch Wine, which is my father's business. I've worked there pretty much my  entire life. He's a fourth generation grape grower in Hunter Valley wine country. So we  have an estate in Peculban. We farm there about 50 tonnes of grapes and then we have  a production winery on site as well, using the grapes from the vineyard there as well  as a couple of other vineyards, some which we own, some which we manage and others which  
**[0:01:54-0:01:58](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:01:54):**  we just buy the fruit. So yeah, it's pretty full time for a small family business. It's  a pretty big operation, but there's always something to do. Keith Tulloch is certified  as a carbon neutral winery, the first actually in the Hunter Valley. But how did Alastair  working there see this opportunity and realize that the business needed to change? The reason  that sustainability is really key to the way I view agribusiness is because viticulture  
**[0:02:20-0:02:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:02:20):**  and grape growing is such a sensitive style of farming, such a sensitive crop. And we've  been able to track and watch the changes in the climate and the warming effect in terms  of the growing season on our vineyards and even my grandfather's vineyards going back  with some of the records I have right back to the 1950s and 1960s. And we've been seeing  since the mid 1980s this really gradual moving forward of the date of harvest, which is actually  
**[0:02:48-0:02:52](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:02:48):**  linked further ahead in the growing season when the vines come out of dormancy and their  bud burst. It's moving further forward each year because our winters are just disappearing  slowly but surely. And that rate of warming has really started to increase and the shift  forward of our harvest dates has really increased in the last decade. And more and more I wanted  to do something about it rather than just watching it.  
**[0:03:12-0:03:15](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:03:12):**  You would have seen years and years of that data. Was there a moment you said, right,  like we're going to actually do something about it?  Yeah, it was really through the 2017-2018 growing seasons when we just had temperatures  that were unbelievable, sort of 47-48 degrees Celsius. And after those years, it wasn't  just the single days but like prolonged heat waves. We had to invest in a huge amount of  
**[0:03:34-0:03:39](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:03:34):**  money in rolling out irrigation across vineyards, which were 50 years old, had never needed  irrigation before. But just due to these heat waves that we were seeing and the change in  these maximums and the frequency of the heat waves, we started to route this irrigation  and I'm there going like this. We're looking at the warming which we've seen now and how's  this picture going to look 20-30 years down the track. So there was this moment where  
**[0:04:00-0:04:03](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:04:00):**  in the wine industry we've seen this problem for a long time. There was this moment where  it just kind of was really clear to me that this warming trend and the issue we have with  the change in climate and viticulture, it's got a really bad endpoint. And I started speaking  publicly more about the effects of climate change in viticulture and in grape growing  and then the effects in winemaking. And I wanted to make sure that we were doing everything  
**[0:04:24-0:04:28](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:04:24):**  on farm that we could so that I wasn't just complaining about it but I was actually doing  something.  What was the conversation like with your family? Were they like-minded to do something as well?  Yeah, well I'm lucky that in terms of the way that I see chatting about climate change,  there isn't really a generational divide in most grape growers I've talked to, just given  
**[0:04:46-0:04:51](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:04:46):**  how clear the issue is. So when I talked to my parents, they were really positive about  the idea of doing things. The thing was getting past then the idea that our small change wasn't  going to make a difference because they're being realistic and saying, you know, reducing  our carbon footprint or eliminating our carbon footprint is not going to change the heat  wave, it's not going to change this. But I really wanted to be part of solutions. And  
**[0:05:11-0:05:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:05:11):**  the other thing is that when I go into the supermarket in my personal life, I try and  find sustainable products, I try and look for sustainable products. I know a lot of  people that do the same. And if there aren't the options on the shelf, people kind of pick  the best worst option. So for me, being that sustainable option wasn't just a good thing  that people could produce their carbon emissions by buying a carbon neutral product. But I  
**[0:05:37-0:05:41](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:05:37):**  know how much people are looking for products like that as well. So it made good marketing  sense as well.  This idea of being carbon neutral was the start of a journey for Alastair, a journey  that would lead to some big changes in the vineyard and at the winery. Some were changes  that consumers would see, some were experiments that have yet to work out, and others just  
**[0:05:56-0:06:01](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:05:56):**  made good business sense. But when Alastair started out, he really didn't know where he'd  end up.  We started on the carbon neutrality, because, first of all, I was just interested to figure  out and assess what our footprint was, and then see about how I could go reducing it.  It wasn't looking to be carbon neutral, it was just kind of, you know, it was just kind  
**[0:06:16-0:06:19](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:06:16):**  of seemed like something really interesting to do. I mean, at the time, we were pretty  happy with the way the farm was running, we were happy with the grape quality, we were  happy with the yields. So we weren't really looking too hard at things like the soil carbon  and things we'll get on to later. But it just became something really obvious when I was  looking for ways to link the business's carbon neutrality to soil health. And there are some  
**[0:06:41-0:06:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:06:41):**  parts of the vineyard inputs like synthetic fertilizers, and their release of nitrous  oxide, which is not carbon footprint, but greenhouse gas footprint. And we include those  emissions, convert them to CO2 equivalents. And that's a part of our carbon footprint  for our business.  So what did it feel like to take the first step and go down the path toward being carbon  
**[0:07:03-0:07:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:07:03):**  neutral?  I was kind of scared at first, because when you pick the grapes, and then you ferment  them, the fermentation releases huge amounts of CO2. I think the amount is about six liters  of CO2 for one litre of wine. So proportionately, I was like, our footprint is going to be massive.  It actually didn't turn out that way. And it seems really obvious when you point it  
**[0:07:25-0:07:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:07:25):**  out that every single molecule of carbon, every single atom of carbon is released from  the fermentation is actually sequestered by the plants in that growing season. Given its  perennial horticulture, most of the carbon is stored in the woody parts of the trunk,  in the canes and the leaves, in the fruit that gets left behind after we've finished  pressing it and even the alcohol that's in the wine.  
**[0:07:48-0:07:53](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:07:48):**  So the carbon footprint wasn't as massive as I thought it was. And it was mostly linked  to things like electricity use, some of the fertilizers in the vineyards, and then, annoyingly  enough, transport and glassware, which is something which has been really hard to reduce  beyond what we've done the last couple of years.  Did you get in a consultant to do that and kind of do that, what I think is called a  
**[0:08:11-0:08:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:08:11):**  life cycle assessment and how long did it take? And you don't have to say in exact figures,  but I imagine growers listening are going to wonder roughly what did that cost if you're  willing to share?  Yeah. So we did have experts come in to help us because just going through your business  and looking at every single item and calculating its greenhouse gas emissions is tricky the  
**[0:08:34-0:08:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:08:34):**  first time without help. Finding accurate information and even knowing some things to  look for like going around and accounting all of your greenhouse gases from refrigerant  gases, for example, or from the amount of waste that's going to landfill. These things  that don't really strike you as really obvious the first time around you do them, but once  you've got the frame of mind, they start to be easier.  
**[0:08:57-0:09:03](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:08:57):**  And so, yeah, we used a consultant who basically showed us the carbon accounting and like you  said, the life cycle assessment. So we have two different types of carbon neutrality for  our business actually. One is the products, which is like a bottle of wine and that has  its life cycle assessment from the moment that the first grapes are picked includes  the glassware and the caps and the labels and all of the inputs we put into it and includes  
**[0:09:23-0:09:28](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:09:23):**  getting it to the customer. And then in terms of the organisational carbon neutrality, that's  our other sort of form of carbon neutrality that includes just your day to day operational  overheads and things like getting to and from work in the cars, the sort of emissions we'll  use to go and fly and market the wines and then things like running the tractors on site  and using those fertilisers and things like that. So they are two different things to  
**[0:09:48-0:09:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:09:48):**  get through and some of them, as I was saying before, they're not the most intuitive, but  getting the accounting side done is actually not expensive. You can get an accountant to  do this life cycle assessment with you for just a couple of grand. It's not really a  huge expense. And even offsetting any emissions that you can't avoid or that you can't sequester  on farm isn't that expensive. What is expensive is going through the more rigorous auditing  
**[0:10:17-0:10:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:10:17):**  and certification that goes to the level we've achieved where we're certified by the Australian  government because they're just trying to make sure that that is a bulletproof level  of certification. So once you get to that level, there's a lot more financial involvement.  And are there tiers of it? So like you, is it, is it a tier of claims where you can,  you get your assessment, you know how much carbon you're emitting and then you can buy  
**[0:10:41-0:10:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:10:41):**  offsets and then you can say something, but to get, are there kind of an accreditation  one, two, three, and it tiers up in price or how does that work?  It's really just the different styles. Like I was saying, there's the product and the  organization and some people might run an event and decided that event will be carbon  neutral or they might have a big range of products and decide, you know, we'll have  
**[0:11:04-0:11:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:11:04):**  this one carbon neutral product over here that we can sell to customers that are more  environmentally friendly, but we don't have to do anything with our other products.  It's so interesting. Like you have this, you have this scheme that's, um, good, like as  we'll get into, I think good for the vineyard and good for the business and good for the  consumers, but the people, there's like this middleman making money, making the certificate  
**[0:11:24-0:11:29](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:11:24):**  expensive. But I find it so fascinating that the actual expensive part is the paying for  the thing you've already done to get to get the marketing value of thing you've already  done, not doing the thing, which doesn't seem that great.  Yeah, it's frustrating. Definitely frustrating. Did you know that going in when you, when  you kind of did all the work and then you really got to the end and we're like, Oh,  
**[0:11:42-0:11:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:11:42):**  we have, we have, now we have to pay for this thing. Or how did that happen?  The thing that the financial thing, I guess is an interesting conversation and just talking  about like the carbon neutrality and that license fee itself doesn't tell the full story.  And it's just because we knew about the phase for the licensing when we started and we knew  about the audits that was all kind of laid out to us, even including all of those licensing  
**[0:12:05-0:12:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:12:05):**  phase and all of the investments we've made in emissions reduction, we're actually saving  so much money through this emissions reduction. And as mostly because if you are doing the  carbon accounting and you're looking not only at where your emissions come from, but  then seriously trying to reduce them, you can actually just find all these parts of  your operation, which is so wasteful and eliminate that waste. So, and that vineyard and in the  
**[0:12:30-0:12:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:12:30):**  winery and in the entire operation of the business. So yeah, we'll continue on with  the story. So you went down this process, got the life cycle assessment, did the offsets,  got the licensing to be able to approve it. And then did you start saying right here were  areas where we could actually tick boxes to do efficiencies or what happened next?  Yeah. So when it comes to like the actual certification of being carbon neutral, it  
**[0:12:53-0:12:59](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:12:53):**  isn't enough just to say that you'll have this carbon footprint and just offset it every  single year. That's not really the goal of the certification. I don't think it's really  that helpful in that aspect. It actually involves a plan for emissions reduction consistently  across a number of years. And so in the first year, we took out about 20% of our carbon  emissions through installation of the solar PV and the other donation of synthetic fertilizers  
**[0:13:25-0:13:31](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:13:25):**  was about another 10 or 15%. We changed over to a lighter weight glassware, which saved  I think about 25 tonnes of CO2. So looking at like about three or 4% of the operational  CO2 footprint. And so like there was a number of things that we could just change straight  away and that was before we were even carbon neutral certified.  And on the fertilizers, what did you do instead? Yeah. So changing over the fertilizers was  
**[0:13:55-0:14:01](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:13:55):**  actually a really good farming practice and reduced our CO2 footprint massively. Basically  what we do is we're sowing cover crops into the mid rows. So that's between where the  grape vines grow. And more recently we've actually started seeding in cover crops that  underneath and around the vines themselves in what we call the under vine area. And that's  having really good effects, not just to reduce the amount of fertilizer that we're using.  
**[0:14:23-0:14:29](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:14:23):**  It also reduces cost. It eliminates the use of herbicide and to do with some of the effects  we were talking about with heat waves as the climate's warmed, we've actually seen that  by keeping this soil underneath the vines covered and greened, better retention of soil  moisture and cooler temperatures in the vine canopy and on the ground during these heat  waves. So the management technique of going to cover crops, which keep the soil covered  
**[0:14:51-0:14:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:14:51):**  and fix nitrogen and fix carbon into both the mid rows and the under vine has been like  a really big transformation in the style of agriculture that we're doing on farm.  Was it scary to do that? Cause it is pretty different than, you know, going through and  spraying and get rid of, were you like nervous the first year that like, how's this going  to go? What's going to be impact on yield?  
**[0:15:12-0:15:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:15:12):**  Yeah, no, I mean not just nervous first year, but nervous second and third, because my grandfather's  always walking around and he's very old school. He doesn't like weeds. The thing about making  these changes is that you have to look at the holistic picture. It's not just enough  to say, well, your yields may decline slightly because you're also really reducing your inputs.  So looking at your, the amount of dollars you're spending per hectare of farming and  
**[0:15:40-0:15:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:15:40):**  you yield per hectare, it needs to be kind of relevant and it's, you need to fix those  two things to one another. Also, we're all going through what has been a pretty incredible  drought, so you have to take a grain of salt with that as well. But that said, we have  two blocks running, one with the sort of more holistic style, the more regenerative soil  and one with not using chemical fertilisers, but using compost and chicken manure. And  
**[0:16:08-0:16:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:16:08):**  where we're using these cover crops, even though there's slightly more competition,  we didn't see a change in the yields between those two vineyards. And actually in this  last season just gone, anecdotally speaking to other growers around the area, our yields  were very healthy, even though they were 50% down on what we'd normally expect. There was  people losing 60, 70, 80% of their crop and they had irrigation and they're running a  
**[0:16:31-0:16:34](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:16:31):**  traditional agriculture.  That's such an interesting insight that you, so tell me if I'm right on, but you've moved  wholly off of the old practice, but you actually did some R&D within that to see which kind  of fork in the road was actually the best one to go down, that kind of approach of,  you know, make the switch, but do it with some backup plans or kind of options for how  
**[0:16:52-0:16:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:16:52):**  it could actually play out.  Yeah, well, I mean, I guess going back to my grandfather before, he's a research scientist,  a viticultural research scientist before he started planting vineyards. And so for him,  controls in studies are really important. So all of these things that we've done have  been implemented and rolled out over a number of years. Also, you know, me not being the  
**[0:17:16-0:17:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:17:16):**  vineyard manager, me having these ideas and wanting to implement them and linking them  into things like our carbon neutrality. As a lot of people out there will know, things  can be really difficult to change. You change everything at once and things can really go  pear shaped. I understand that, but going through these incremental changes and talking  with family members who have been farming for, you know, 50, 60 years, there's definitely  
**[0:17:40-0:17:47](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:17:40):**  some to and fro as ideas get passed around. And I'm really happy to say that some of these  ideas have really worked and changed their mind in how we farm.  Is there anything you've tried that totally didn't work?  Yeah, so the Undivine cover cropping, it worked really well in sandier soils because we used  a clover, a white clover, and that was fantastic. It made this nice big blanket of web that  
**[0:18:08-0:18:13](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:18:08):**  suppressed other weeds. You know, you can pull up underneath the vine, it's still moist,  the soil, you can see the nitrogen that's being fixed on the roots of the clover, but  up in the clay soils on the red wine soils, oh my God, it failed so miserably. Yeah, like  there was no coverage. The weeds came in and took over. There was wireweed and cooch everywhere.  And my old man was looking at it going like that did not work. And so, you know, there's  
**[0:18:37-0:18:42](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:18:37):**  definitely more work to be done that we managed to establish the clover and it's doing an  amazing job with about 50% of our vineyards. And, you know, I'm looking to increase that  and sow out more clover over the next growing season.  I asked Alastair about the possibility of using livestock like sheep to manage weeds  in the vineyard. Unfortunately, their property isn't set up well for this, but it is something  
**[0:19:02-0:19:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:19:02):**  that he's looked at.  Yeah, that is a great management technique, but unfortunately our property is actually  only a section of what used to be a larger vineyard that was split into smaller lots.  And so our borderlines are not fences. They're just unfortunately where one vineyard ends  and another starts. So a lot of rows would have to come out to introduce grazing into  
**[0:19:26-0:19:34](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:19:26):**  that agricultural system. I actually went to a agricultural workshop just regarding  this weed control and the agricultural scientist who ran it ran about 12 different studies  using herbicide, like organic alternate herbicide, like slasher, undervine, flaming, steaming,  cultivating, mowing, like undervine slashing. And at the end of it, he said, actually I'm  kind of embarrassed because the vineyard that we were working on, their control beat every  
**[0:19:59-0:20:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:19:59):**  single method we tried. And their control was adjusting sheep in the vineyard between  harvest and bud burst. And when they went and looked at the dollars per hectare that  it costs, it was like all of these inputs had operator costs and costs of the machinery  and stuff, all the chemicals and the grazing was like earning money because they're getting  the sheep into just things. Yeah, for the people that can work livestock into a agricultural  
**[0:20:31-0:20:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:20:31):**  system is something that I would love to do, but it's just not practical with our side  unfortunately.  Yeah. Someday when we have virtual fencing, then you can add the sheep in and you won't  need actual fences.  Yeah. Yeah. Look forward to it.  
**[0:20:45-0:20:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:20:45):**  After picking off some of the low hanging fruit for emissions reductions, Alistair started  looking at ways to improve biodiversity.  I got into the idea of planting, trying to reestablish native trees in some areas of  our vineyard, which weren't that practical for viticulture, like around the riparian  areas we have like creek lines going through some of the blocks. And so that opens up that  
**[0:21:08-0:21:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:21:08):**  corridor to potentially planting, trying to reestablish some of the native plants, which  have been displaced obviously somewhat by the viticulture that comes in and creates  to a degree a monoculture across the vineyard side.  So what I did was I went and started planting trees, native trees that also promoted beneficial  insects to the vineyard system. And I planted about 200 by the time that a research scientist  
**[0:21:38-0:21:43](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:21:38):**  from the New South Wales department of primary industries gave me a call. His name is Darren  Faye and he said, this is great. And we want to turn this into a bigger trial, a trial  that they can track. And so with him, we established about another 300 trees and I've done another  planting about 100 trees myself. So about 600 trees in total on the property that are  specifically aimed at increasing the populations of beneficial insects. And so when we obviously  
**[0:22:10-0:22:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:22:10):**  use pesticides for controlling pests in the vineyard, that also knocks back all of your  beneficials as well, apart from setting aside pesticide use potential impacts of that, purely  looking at the vineyard landscape, the not losing all of your beneficials really just  leaves a vacuum later for pests to come back into. So what we've looked at is can we increase  the populations of these assassin bugs, parasitic wasps, lady beetles, the kind of things that  
**[0:22:42-0:22:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:22:42):**  are going to eat hoppers, they're going to eat light brown apple moth or vine moth, the  kind of things that can really cause serious damage to crops. Can we boost their numbers  to the right kind of level to control these pests and then eliminate pesticide use from  our vineyards. So that's an ongoing study. But apart from the fact that we get to plant  trees and reestablish the flora biodiversity of the vineyard, I think that the fauna and  
**[0:23:10-0:23:14](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:23:10):**  that beneficial insect populations are really exciting thing to be looking into.  So what's next for Keith Tulloch on this journey towards carbon neutral? Alastair has been  looking at other areas of the supply chain, like processing and waste.  Most of the other things that we've really been doing are more going to the production  end of the wild business. So looking at investment in new refrigeration, it's been a massive  
**[0:23:34-0:23:41](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:23:34):**  save of emissions for us, optimizing our use of refrigerant, changing our, I guess something  that's a bit relevant is just based from the business. What we're doing there is introducing  birds so that we can reduce the amount of organic material that's going to landfill.  What's especially amazing to me is that they've made all of these changes and reduced their  carbon footprint by over 30% in just the last two or three years. But now that the big changes  
**[0:24:03-0:24:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:24:03):**  have been made, each incremental improvement will be harder to achieve.  It doesn't happen in the blink of an eye, but to slowly work through some of the more  minute problems now that we've got to the point where we've reduced these large emissions  and then try and search now within our business for suppliers, which are also on a similar  vein, we can start rolling over those contracts and replacing suppliers with those that are  
**[0:24:30-0:24:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:24:30):**  carbon neutral or lower emissions and see where we go from there.  And how do you think about the return on this? If you like, if there's any skeptics out there  who still think that kind of sustainability stuff is all about either feel good or you  have to have heaps of money to do it, how do you think about the return on investment  from a financial perspective?  
**[0:24:49-0:24:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:24:49):**  So for me, the actual process of becoming carbon neutral has been something that's really  good from both points of view. There's the financial point of view because we've seen  all of these efficiencies that we can find in our business, all this wastage that we've  cut out. And we're still looking at the yields of the vineyards and being really happy with  what we have in the picture of what people around us have seen.  
**[0:25:16-0:25:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:25:16):**  So the actual bare bones finances of becoming carbon neutral has been really positive from  our business, from a profitability point of view. The other thing that people have to  keep in mind if they're selling discretionary products like wine, like I sell, is that customers  really care about this. And so the enthusiasm that's been from our direct sales and the  sales in our direct sales has been really, really good. Also, we've started to see really  
**[0:25:47-0:25:53](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:25:47):**  big sales come in from businesses who are searching for product lines, they're searching  for business to business purchases that reduce their carbon footprint. And I think you'll  see that as becoming more and more a feature of the corporate social responsibility that  may seem a million miles away from on-farm activities that can really influence the demand  for these sustainable products. When you have big businesses that set themselves lower emissions  
**[0:26:18-0:26:24](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:26:18):**  targets, they then have to go around and try and find these products. And if you can offer  them the product, then you're basically walking into a sure thing as a supplier. I think it's  important to differentiate that from the bare bones finances of being carbon neutral because  there's early adopter advantages in doing this right now, which will obviously diminish  the more people that are doing it. And I want to see more people do it. And if everybody  
**[0:26:43-0:26:47](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:26:43):**  thinks that they've lost the first mover advantage, then they'll kind of go, nah, don't worry  about it. They've got that sale now, that's their thing. It's not like that. It's much  more fundamental than that to the business. So that's been a really good outcome for our  business, the visibility of the business. And there's been so many people in the local  industry who have been interested in getting on board and looking at not just some of the  
**[0:27:11-0:27:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:27:11):**  emissions reduction we're doing, but some of the on-farm activity that we're doing.  Because you drive past our vineyards and things look a little bit different to our neighbours.  And you know how people are in industry, sometimes they can give a peek over and say a thing  or two that they think maybe we need to get the weeds under control and you actually walk  them through and you go, no, these aren't actually weeds growing, this is something  
**[0:27:34-0:27:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:27:34):**  we've established yet. And they still kind of think you're a bit nuts. But the interesting  thing is watching the outcomes. And more and more people, I think, are coming onto this  style of farming and talking less about yields and talking more about profitability. And  you know, those numbers don't lie. Everybody wants to reduce their inputs on farm and reduce  their exposure to risk. And if you can come up with a system which is a bit more self-managing  
**[0:28:06-0:28:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:28:06):**  in some of these ways, but also that's really good for soil health and good for sustainable  farming, there's a generation of people that are getting on board with it.  You make it sound both so obvious to do this and pretty easy. So I'm tempted to ask you  what's either been hard or what do you think prevents others from doing this?  That's a really difficult question to answer. You know, I think in a general sense, one  
**[0:28:33-0:28:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:28:33):**  of the biggest issues with the broader industry of farmers not looking as much about the soil  health is because you can see when you look at the spreadsheet of the business, like where  money comes from, people look at the land that they have in front of them and they are  trying to make a profit off of it. That's basically the bare bones of it all at the  end of the day. And when it comes to things like, you know,  
**[0:29:04-0:29:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:29:04):**  soiling carbon in the soil, some of the benefits to it, they seem sort of so distant to people  in the methods of farming that they're doing now and the machinery that they've invested  into to do that. You know, if you have a huge amount, you've invested in a large piece of  machinery that has its life cycle, that has its expected amount of use you expect to get  out of it. So going and changing that midstream can be like financially damaging to people  
**[0:29:32-0:29:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:29:32):**  who are expecting to get a return on their investment in the machinery that they use  and in the processes they use. So it's more than just a technical thing. It also goes  into, I think, the way that people are running their business and the equipment that they  have to do it. At a more macro level, Alastair sees other  barriers for farmers, which are also opportunities for innovators and perhaps policymakers.  
**[0:29:57-0:30:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:29:57):**  The other thing from, I think, is a larger picture is that this idea that there are lots  of businesses in Australia which are seeking to eliminate or offset their carbon emissions.  There are very few people who are actually doing this sequestration in Australia successfully.  And the one thing is that there is this real uncoupling between carbon sequestration markets.  The markets are a bit ad-lib, to say the least. So what we really need is properly set up  
**[0:30:37-0:30:43](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:30:37):**  carbon markets. We need a real carbon market in this country that lets farmers see the  value in storing carbon in the soils, increasing organic soil carbon, seeing forested parts  of their property as an asset, potentially. Because if there are companies out there,  if there are industry out there, and now we're looking at the government itself looking at  emissions reduction and eventually reaching carbon neutral status by some point, whenever  
**[0:31:07-0:31:14](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:31:07):**  that is, it is farmers who should stand to benefit the most by seeing value out of carbon  sequestration on their lands. That's really part of the answer to this big problem. So  the joining of these things together, which are on their own, not being monetized properly  and pulling together is going to be something that's really massive for Australian agriculture  when it eventually happens.  
**[0:31:31-0:31:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:31:31):**  Yes, and hopefully exciting times to unlock more of that. But it feels like there's a  whole groundswell of this. Interestingly, you mentioned the technology and you're actually  headed off to, I think France, is it, to go spend a bunch of time where there's completely  no technology? Tell us about that.  Yeah, I'm really excited by this. So my partner and I are kind of old enough to do our own  
**[0:31:53-0:31:59](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:31:53):**  thing but young enough to not have too many responsibilities. I'll be working at a producer  in an area called Cote Rote about half an hour south of Lyon. The slope of some of those  vineyards to give people a bit of context is about 40 degrees. So there's no tractors.  There's no tractors, just very strong calf muscles.  Hopefully.  
**[0:32:14-0:32:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:32:14):**  Yeah. All of the vines are spaced out meter by meter on wooden stakes and the property  I'll be working for is a seven hectare domain and everything is done by hand. So I'm really  looking forward to seeing how that management works because, like you were saying, with  technology and the way that we have agriculture in Australia is so mechanized to see how an  agricultural system works completely free of mechanization, I think is really interesting.  
**[0:32:43-0:32:48](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:32:43):**  There's a lot that we can learn, a lot that I can learn from witnessing that and seeing  the style. They make beautiful wines, so there must be something to it.  That sounds awesome. I'm excited to hear what you learn and I'm sure it will be a lot of  fun as well and probably a bit of work, it sounds like too.  Yeah. Yeah. It'll be plenty of work, but that's one thing about the wine industry and viticulture  
**[0:33:08-0:33:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:33:08):**  is that the work at least you can take some real pleasure from.  Cool. Alastair, thanks so much for joining me. I really, really appreciate it. This was  awesome and I just think it's really cool what you're doing and I will be looking for  the wines now because I'm one of those consumers that wants to buy this stuff too. And we'll  put links in the show notes as well.  
**[0:33:24-0:33:28](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:33:24):**  Thanks Sarah. Appreciate it.  Thank you for joining us on another episode of Ag Tech So What. You can stay up to date  with the latest episodes and news at agtechsowhat.com. And as always, if you have any feedback or  other guests to recommend, we'd love to hear from you. Just hop on the website and leave  us a comment or send us a message. Finally, if you like what you're hearing and we hope  
**[0:33:48-0:33:52](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=583983#t=0:33:48):**  you do, please share the podcast with a friend or leave us a review on iTunes or wherever  you get your podcasts. Thanks again for listening. Catch you next time.  