### Agtech - So What?  (2020-31-25)
**[0:00:00-0:00:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, and welcome back to Ag Tech So What, brought to you by Agfentech.  I'm your host, Sarah Nolet.  Today's guest is coming to us all the way from Canada.  Evan Frazier joins me to talk first about ag tech adoption and three big barriers we  need to overcome.  
**[0:00:21-0:00:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:00:21):**  And second, something many of you are probably wondering about, how will COVID-19 impact  food and agriculture?  All good superheroes have their origin stories.  In ag, it's often how we got hooked on this industry.  Evan starts out with his.  
**[0:00:38-0:00:43](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:00:38):**  My origin story starts on my grandfather's fruit farm in Niagara.  And I was probably 17 or 18 years old.  And I remember the day very clearly.  And my grandmother was actually a stockbroker.  And so a female stockbroker married to a male farmer was anomalous enough at the time.  
**[0:00:55-0:00:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:00:55):**  This is the 1980s.  And I remember Gran's Lincoln town car sliding into the driveway and the power window coming  down and the puff of air conditioned atmosphere coming out.  And I've spent the entire day on my hands and knees pulling weeds out of the strawberry  patch.  
**[0:01:10-0:01:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:01:10):**  And my grandmother and I exchanged pleasantries for a few minutes and said hello and whatnot.  And it quickly became clear that she had made more money on commission from her client's  investment portfolios that afternoon than I was going to make producing food all summer.  And a couple of key conclusions sprung into my mind at that moment.  The first of all is, wow, the world's a weird place when being a stockbroker is so much  
**[0:01:40-0:01:44](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:01:40):**  more valuable to society and renumerate of the society than producing food.  And I never want to be a farmer myself.  It's a way to write about farming and talk about it, that it is to actually trying to  make a living off of a fruit and vegetable farm in the Niagara Peninsula.  From there, Evan was sold on food and agriculture.  
**[0:02:01-0:02:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:02:01):**  But his path to where he is now had a few twists and turns across a couple of different  industries along the way.  Yeah, well, you know, to be honest, it didn't take any time for me to be fully into the  space because that was the common denominator ever since being a teenager, you know, spending  summers as a teenager with grandpa on the farm.  
**[0:02:20-0:02:26](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:02:20):**  Food and ag has always been my passion, although how I've come at it has changed a lot over  my career.  So I actually have an undergraduate degree in anthropology, Celtic studies and religion.  And then and my fourth year thesis was all about the Irish potato famine and why a quarter  of a million people are sort of a quarter of Ireland's population, about two to four  
**[0:02:39-0:02:43](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:02:39):**  million people were either died or displaced because one crop failed.  I then did work on have a master's degree in forestry.  I've got a PhD in agriculture.  My first postdoc right after my agriculture degree, I did a postdoc in a basically international  relations division working for cabinet ministers.  
**[0:02:58-0:03:01](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:02:58):**  It was essentially a policy think tank.  And then I got a job with an atmospheric chemistry group talking about climate change in England.  And now I'm directing a interdisciplinary institute focused on the future of food called  the Aerofood Institute at the University of Guelph in Canada.  Evan is doing some really cool stuff at the Aerofood Institute.  
**[0:03:17-0:03:23](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:03:17):**  He supervised dozens of grad students on everything from food riots to climate smart agriculture  to the role of supermarkets in alternative protein consumption.  He's the author of two books and the creator of a card game on the food system.  And he's produced a series of animated videos on agriculture that have been viewed over  half a million times.  
**[0:03:38-0:03:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:03:38):**  All of these, of course, are linked in the show notes.  So Evan knows a lot about what's happening in the world and is excited about the potential  of ag tech.  Well, if we look at the 21st century with the various challenges that we face, population  growth, climate change, the spread of infectious diseases, diabetes and obesity, a large number  
**[0:04:00-0:04:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:04:00):**  of those in some ways track back or trace back to food and the food systems that we  depend on for life.  And I firmly believe that solving the challenge of global food security for the 21st century  is one of the critical challenges that history and the history books of this century will  have significant chapters written about food and food systems.  
**[0:04:23-0:04:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:04:23):**  Within that challenge, though, comes what is arguably one of the most incredible opportunities  facing the planet.  And that is that we have novel technologies which go from genomic technologies all the  way through to big data and artificial intelligence.  We have a flood of capital moving into the sector with interest as an investment opportunity.  
**[0:04:43-0:04:49](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:04:43):**  We have a focusing of government agendas on food as something that can deliver economic  benefit, but also serve up a pathway towards achieving the sustainable development goals.  So I think we face this extraordinary opportunity as well by deploying technology, by investing  in people, by working with farmers, by establishing policy and regulatory frameworks to actually  generate a tremendous amount of public and economic good at the same time as solving  
**[0:05:11-0:05:15](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:05:11):**  one of the greatest sustainability and public health challenges we face.  But despite this potential, there's still a lot of hype out there about ag tech.  Just a couple weeks ago, I ran a workshop with a group of Nuffield scholars from all  around the world.  And when I asked them to vote on whether ag tech is hype or reality, I'd say still about  
**[0:05:30-0:05:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:05:30):**  40% voted for hype.  I asked Evan what he's seeing in his work.  So starting at the super macro perspective, I don't think it's hype.  I think it's real.  The demand for food is rising.  
**[0:05:42-0:05:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:05:42):**  The need to change food systems is very, very evident.  And to a large extent, agriculture is, as a sector of the economy, undercapitalized  and underinvested in for the last 20 or 30 or 40 years.  So there is an opportunity for, so at a macro level, what we've got is a part of the economy  for which there's demand for the product.  
**[0:06:00-0:06:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:06:00):**  And there hasn't been a lot of investment at a global compared with other sectors in  the economy.  So we should be able to put money in technology, in agriculture, and realize some significant  gains.  But really at that macro level, that's not where farmers benefit or there's a decent  
**[0:06:16-0:06:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:06:16):**  return on investment.  What you have to get to is what the barriers and the bottlenecks are.  There are three big barriers to ag tech adoption that Evan sees for the developed world.  One, data interoperability.  Two, data governance.  
**[0:06:31-0:06:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:06:31):**  And three, cybersecurity.  So the three things that I think need to be worked on with significant urgency to realize  ag technology is one, data interoperability.  And we need our data that is driving this new digital food economy to be sitting together  and playing nice.  
**[0:06:48-0:06:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:06:48):**  And that is an enormous challenge.  As anyone that's tried to figure out how to get a smart home to work and your phone to  work with your refrigerator, to work with your TV, to work with your coffee maker, I  mean, and your thermostat and your light switches and stuff.  That is, it is so difficult to get that sort of Internet of Things technology to actually  
**[0:07:07-0:07:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:07:07):**  work as promised.  And that often results in a data interoperability problem.  So there's a tremendous amount of challenges on the area of data interoperability.  Second, we've really got to be thinking about data governance.  Who owns data?  
**[0:07:21-0:07:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:07:21):**  How do we secure privacy?  How do we maintain anonymity?  How do we give farmers a share in the benefits of data?  And until we figure out the data governance questions, the digital agricultural revolution  will forever remain a mirage.  
**[0:07:35-0:07:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:07:35):**  And the third area is that I think we need to work on hard is cybersecurity.  And I just I get terrified by the prospect of cyber criminals hacking into, say, a poultry  barn and turning off the ventilation system and holding the ventilation system as ransom  for Bitcoin.  Holding a farm ransom for Bitcoin might seem a bit outrageous.  
**[0:07:56-0:08:00](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:07:56):**  But Evan's concerns here come from good examples in other industries.  Well, I started thinking about this almost two years ago when doctors and nurses across  England went into their offices in the national health system two years ago and sat down at  the terminals to pull up patient health files.  And they'd been attacked overnight by a piece of ransomware called WannaCry.  
**[0:08:15-0:08:19](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:08:15):**  And these cyber criminals were holding patient records hostage to ransom for the national  health system.  And that tied the national health system up or shut it down for for some number of days.  Well, a poultry farmer with a ventilation on their barn can't shut themselves down for  a few days or a farmer, a dairy farmer with a robotic milker can't can't go dormant for  
**[0:08:33-0:08:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:08:33):**  even 12 or 24 hours.  Those cows need to be milked on a schedule.  So I think there's tremendous cybersecurity threats that we're opening ourselves up to.  So if we think about this, the digital agricultural revolution, we've got to work on the data  interoperability, the cybersecurity and the data management governance, or it will remain  
**[0:08:50-0:08:52](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:08:50):**  in hype world.  You're speaking the language of many of the farmers that I believe listen to this podcast  and that I know I speak to the interoperability challenge for sure is the number one that  comes up.  You know, my my this system doesn't talk to my that system and why would I because, you  
**[0:09:05-0:09:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:09:05):**  know, I just can't get data from here to there.  And so what's the point?  I'm going to argue by analogy first.  And to me, this is a Y2K style problem.  So you know, going going back in time 30 years, everyone was worried that when the clocks  
**[0:09:20-0:09:26](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:09:20):**  hit January 1st 2000, the planes would drop out of the air, and the computers would stop  running and the stock markets would crash, etc.  And in anticipation of that, there was a massive international effort to create code, essentially  computer code, that would that would harmonize those sort of issues.  Now we're not worried in this case of a plane's falling out of the air, but maybe we should  
**[0:09:41-0:09:42](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:09:41):**  be.  I think that there needs to be a similar sized mobilization at the international level to  deal with data interoperability, much like we did 25 years ago in the lead up to the  Y2K situation.  And so I think that the norm, the natural place where this solution is going to be found  
**[0:09:58-0:10:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:09:58):**  is international, but it's going to be require a coalition of public, private and academic  NGO partners to actually achieve it.  It's such an interesting one, because the Y2K example, I remember I was, my dad was  like, Yeah, we'll get a six pack of beer, a bottle of milk and a video, it was a, you  know, an actual VHS at the time, and we'll be fine.  
**[0:10:18-0:10:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:10:18):**  So well, he's not worried, so maybe it will be fine.  But that's a, you know, the fear of what could happen and the size of that challenge catalyzes  people to get involved and collaborate and do things they otherwise wouldn't do.  Do you think we'll need some kind of similar shake to the system to solve the data interoperability?  Or we'll find a way to collaborate without that?  
**[0:10:40-0:10:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:10:40):**  Well, I mean, I would like to think that we're smart enough as a species to figure out ways  of collaborating, because it's a good thing as opposed to it just avoids a bad thing.  You know, I guess I in a sense, your question, Sarah seems to be are you pessimistic and  optimistic about humans ability to forward plan.  And for the sake of being optimistic in this somewhat gloomy point of history, I'm going  
**[0:11:01-0:11:03](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:11:01):**  to say I'm optimistic we can do that.  But we need to put our, our, our shoulders to the wheel or the nose to the grindstone  in order in order to do that.  And I don't think that we will get the benefits of the so called digital agricultural revolution  until we do this.  
**[0:11:14-0:11:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:11:14):**  I sure hope Evan is right.  I know some great organizations are already working on this, maybe a topic for a future  podcast.  But for the other two challenges, data governance and cybersecurity, what is Evan seeing in  terms of solutions?  
**[0:11:28-0:11:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:11:28):**  Well, data governance is being picked up at a sort of a theoretical level by some some  some key organizations.  I know there's out of the big agriculture, University of Eigenung in the Netherlands  is taking a leadership on this.  There's the organization called Godin Global Organization for Data for Agriculture and  
**[0:11:47-0:11:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:11:47):**  Nutrition, which is trying to establish some core principles.  And really, it's the data question that we're we're facing in all sectors of the economy,  whether it's Uber or Amazon or Facebook stealing our data and using it for profit motives.  And the people who produce the data feeling disenfranchised and alienated that they're  being taken advantage of, I think it's that data writ large.  
**[0:12:07-0:12:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:12:07):**  And again, that's going to have to come or that's the solution that is going to come  out of an international collaboration to, I think, establish fair use principles around  data, which involves benefit sharing.  In other words, if you produce data and it goes into a cloud and then an app developer  uses that data to create a decision support tool that makes your job easier, all the participants  
**[0:12:31-0:12:34](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:12:31):**  in that chain need to have some way of sharing the benefits.  So that's that's one thing that has to be worked on.  And you can establish protocols around benefit sharing.  Similarly, people are suspicious that if they give up their data to the cloud for this big  data revolution, they'll also be giving up privacy and anonymity and things of that nature.  
**[0:12:50-0:12:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:12:50):**  And again, there's there's protocols that can be established that are becoming established  that they can address those issues.  Things like the data can be used, but all the metadata has to be cleaned from it such  that you can't trace it back to an individual farmer, for instance, or are there other things  like that?  
**[0:13:05-0:13:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:13:05):**  So you have to do that, sort of have that conversation, empower the agencies to have  that have that discussion and create some regulations around it.  Our team, I guess, have kind of put the challenge for farmers of the fear for farmers into three  buckets.  And it's really challenging one because it limits adoption because of some of these real  
**[0:13:23-0:13:24](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:13:23):**  and perceived issues.  But one is, you know, I can't get my data or I can't use it or I can't move it from  system to system.  The second is that someone else will benefit from the data.  And the third is that actually harm will come to me.  
**[0:13:35-0:13:37](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:13:35):**  And those are kind of escalating levels of fear.  But all of them prevent adoption of some of these tools that can otherwise be helpful.  Yep.  Sounds like we're on very convergent paths in our own little mental journeys on this  topic.  
**[0:13:47-0:13:48](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:13:47):**  So I agree with that.  And until we deal with those fears and those anxieties, we won't have the benefits of the  digital ag revolution that we're that we're all so excited about.  At the University of Guelph, Evan is involved in some Canadian initiatives to bring the  right stakeholders together to help solve these challenges for farmers.  
**[0:14:06-0:14:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:14:06):**  But as we often talk about on this podcast, bringing folks together from in and outside  of agriculture can be challenging.  So in the Canadian context, you know, a key stakeholder would be some private sector players  such as IBM or Cisco that actually have the technological expertise to do the data management.  But equally, you'd need to have the Canadian Federation of Agriculture in the room in order  
**[0:14:30-0:14:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:14:30):**  to speak for the farmers voices.  And you'd need a few academics like me that has a sense of the big picture.  And I'm useless on the details, but at least I can understand where the different groups  are coming from.  And then you'd have to work through in a very deliberate and patient way, navigating all  
**[0:14:49-0:14:52](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:14:49):**  the issues that would start with, boy, we're all speaking different languages here.  So we use the same words, but we use them in different ways.  So there's a translation problem to have that conversation all the way through to, okay,  what part of the series of recommendations this conversation would result in?  What part of it should actually be formal regulations that the government says you have  
**[0:15:08-0:15:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:15:08):**  to do this?  What part of these are simply principles of best practice that we industry and the players  agree to adhere to?  And it becomes, I mean, for purposes of this podcast, it becomes a very boring, long winded,  dry process.  
**[0:15:21-0:15:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:15:21):**  But it's those boring, long winded and dry processes that I think result in both the  cultural change and the community of understanding that we need, as well as the formal regulations  and laws to govern these things.  I love the common language challenge.  I use that a lot.  
**[0:15:37-0:15:38](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:15:37):**  Maybe you have some good examples that I can steal.  I talk about AI being artificial intelligence, artificial insemination.  Pivot is a good one because a center pivot versus a pivot.  Pivoting irrigation versus pivoting to address something.  Yep, yep, yep.  
**[0:15:49-0:15:51](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:15:49):**  That's another ecosystem, tends to have different meetings.  Incubator is another one.  I don't know.  Do you have any I can add to my list?  Oh, that's a good question.  
**[0:15:56-0:15:58](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:15:56):**  And I'm jamming on it right now.  But there were three AIs.  I was in a room and one person thought it was artificial intelligence.  One person thought it was artificial insemination.  Somebody thought it was something or other else.  
**[0:16:08-0:16:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:16:08):**  And we were just staring at each other baffled because no one understood what was going on  in the conversation.  I could nerd out with Evan pretty much all day on ag tech adoption, but I wanted to ask  him about something completely different.  Something where his experience and expertise on the history of agri supply chains and the  
**[0:16:30-0:16:34](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:16:30):**  challenges we faced as a civilization would come in handy.  COVID-19.  How will the coronavirus pandemic impact agriculture?  Well, it's so interesting, and I think I can't speak for the experience in Australia, but  I certainly was shocked when I went to the grocery store last weekend and for the first  
**[0:16:49-0:16:51](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:16:49):**  time in my life saw empty shelves.  And boy, you look at an empty shelf and you can't help but think about the zombie apocalypse.  And you're thinking, am I about to be living through the zombie apocalypse or the plague  apocalypse or whatever it is?  It feels it has felt like an apocalyptic week.  
**[0:17:04-0:17:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:17:04):**  And I think we have to acknowledge the extraordinary anxiety that being confronted with empty shelves  presents in people.  Just for a time check, as things are changing rapidly around the world, we recorded this  episode on Friday, March 20th, Canada time.  Many Australians were still out and about, but in Canada, things were quite different.  
**[0:17:23-0:17:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:17:23):**  I live just outside of Toronto, Ontario, and we essentially are leaving the house to walk  the dog, leaving the house to go grocery shopping.  That's about it.  I'm getting out for a run, but I'm not running with my group anymore.  I'm just running on my own.  
**[0:17:42-0:17:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:17:42):**  The group has been disbanded at the university, all face to face meetings have been stopped.  All staff have been told to work at home.  I know my colleagues are working on protocols for animal care because we're an ag college,  so we've got lots of animals that we're caring for, both laboratory and experimental.  And just we have a working dairy barn.  
**[0:18:00-0:18:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:18:00):**  So how to staff that when the university is in lockdown is these are non-trivial issues.  And the phenomenon of empty shelves has hit Canadians very hard in the last week.  With that being said, our demand for food hasn't fundamentally changed.  We saw a spike in food purchases last week, but our demand for food, the same number of  meals is being eaten in Canada this week as it was two weeks ago.  
**[0:18:26-0:18:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:18:26):**  So I have every expectation that our food system is robust enough to deal with this  kind of shock.  And that with the exception of a few products, perhaps like hand sanitizer, we will see the  shock, the grocery store shelves filling back up almost immediately.  And my brother works at a grocery store and I texted him this morning and he said, yep,  
**[0:18:47-0:18:51](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:18:47):**  there's a few things that we're low on, but pretty much it's back to business as usual.  Although we're restricting the number of people that come into the grocery store at a time,  and we're only operating every other cash to keep people physically distant from themselves.  And they're shutting early so that they can sanitize everything every night.  So some significant disruptions, but I don't think cause for panic and I don't think anybody  
**[0:19:10-0:19:15](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:19:10):**  is necessarily going to need to go hungry as a result of a shortage.  Of course, for a person, you know, in Canada is a country with 4 million food insecure  people, many of whom are in precarious employment situations.  I worry that many of those people may have lost their jobs in the last week because the  service sector has essentially shut down and there's been mass layoffs for restaurants  
**[0:19:33-0:19:38](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:19:33):**  and bars because essentially all restaurants and bars are closed, all theaters are closed,  all venues are closed.  And so all those people who depend on those sources of those places for their wages are  without wages.  So I think there may be a food insecurity crisis, but it's not associated with what's  
**[0:19:51-0:19:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:19:51):**  on the grocery store shelves and the lack of stuff on the shelf.  It's associated with people losing their people who are already precariously employed losing  their jobs.  Yeah, and you said in a recent post you wrote that we'll link in the show notes the first  thing is don't panic, you know, despite these challenges and how easy that is to say, but  
**[0:20:10-0:20:15](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:20:10):**  hard to do that, that obviously keeping the mood calm is one of the first keys.  Yeah, hopefully you haven't been seeing too much panic actually out there, but I'm sure  there is some.  Yeah, I mean, I think there's anxiety.  I don't think there's panic, at least in my the stuff that I'm observing.  
**[0:20:24-0:20:28](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:20:24):**  Like I said, where I am worried from a food systems perspective in terms of people going  hungry is actually loss of wages, not empty supermarket shelves.  So my recommendation to all my fellow Canadians or anybody living through a period such as  this is don't panic that the groceries aren't going to be there next week if you show up  with your cart.  
**[0:20:46-0:20:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:20:46):**  Beyond the hoarding and supermarket behavior we've all seen and the massive challenges  that small businesses across sectors are facing, Evan sees some longer term impacts for agriculture.  I think there's some interesting longer term things that may cause the food system to adjust  in the medium to longer term.  And one of them is labor.  
**[0:21:06-0:21:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:21:06):**  And I think I mean, I don't know about Australia, but for instance, in Canada, much of the labor  in the horticulture industry, the fruits and vegetables, the produce sector is done with  temporary foreign workers that come in for periods of time, either from Central America  or the Caribbean is where in Ontario, most of the foreign labor comes in, and they stay  for a few months and they prune our apple orchards and they pick our strawberries and  
**[0:21:31-0:21:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:21:31):**  whatnot.  And boy, I think we have to question the longevity of that program.  Minister of Agriculture has reassured farmers that that will continue and that we will continue  to bring in the temporary foreign workers.  And I believe last year, there was about 60,000 people that came in on temporary foreign worker  
**[0:21:48-0:21:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:21:48):**  programs to work on farms in Canada.  So it's a big number of people.  But I think that one of the legacies of COVID-19 might be a reflection on whether that is a  system that we should be relying on.  And if we say no to that system, that will, I think, trigger a lot of problems for horticulture  
**[0:22:09-0:22:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:22:09):**  and produce, fruit and vegetable farmers.  And having studied the history of these sort of things in the past, automation and consolidation  of farms is often the answer.  So for instance, in California, about 50 years ago, they restricted migrant labor coming  into California to the tomato industry.  
**[0:22:24-0:22:28](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:22:24):**  And a lot of small tomato growers in California went out of business and sold out to bigger  growers who invested in automation, mechanical harvesters.  So often, automation in agriculture comes through shortages of labor.  And if we are dependent on migrant labor and decide we're not going to use migrant labor  in the future, there might be a wave of consolidation in the produce sector.  
**[0:22:45-0:22:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:22:45):**  And that's already underway.  We know farm numbers are declining and farm sizes increasing.  So that's not a new phenomenon, but it could accelerate that phenomenon.  And I think that could be a big deal for a lot of producers.  I also think it could be a big deal for families in the Caribbean and Latin America who come  
**[0:23:02-0:23:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:23:02):**  up to Canada every year for a few months for wages.  The third big impact that Evan sees is perhaps more of a philosophical consideration.  Yeah, well, I mean, I think that, and really, I'm sticking my neck out here and speaking  from my own personal anxiety.  So maybe I'll change my tune in two weeks' time once the dust has settled on all this.  
**[0:23:23-0:23:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:23:23):**  But where I've been thinking in the last 24 or 48 hours as this story has sort of enveloped  us all is, to what extent do we want to depend on, is it appropriate to depend on, is it  desirable to depend on, is it safe to depend on a system that requires essentially the  seamless movement of goods and labor to keep us fed?  And I'm not, absolutely not saying that we should all become 100% locavores.  
**[0:23:51-0:23:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:23:51):**  I love the benefits that international trade brings us in terms of cost and convenience  and a variety of diets and all that stuff.  I'm a big fan.  But maybe one of the legacies of COVID-19 and the spring of 2020 will be a reflection  on what is the right balance of local regional self-sufficiency and global trade in both  
**[0:24:17-0:24:20](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:24:17):**  labor and food and technology.  And is there sort of a portfolio that we should be aiming for as opposed to saying we're all  one or all the other?  What's the right blended portfolio to maintain resilience alongside efficiency in our global  food system?  
**[0:24:36-0:24:41](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:24:36):**  And I honestly don't have an answer for that one because I'm speculating from a philosophical  perspective.  But my intuition is that perhaps we will think of the food system of the new 20-teens as  overly globalized and therefore vulnerable to shocks.  And maybe we will reinvigorate regional food systems as a result.  
**[0:24:59-0:25:01](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:24:59):**  Like I said, I'm working through these ideas in my mind.  I'm not coming up with a firm pronouncement.  Yeah.  Well, I appreciate you sharing those early thoughts with us.  I've definitely seen a few kind of hardcore ag economists and experts saying, oh, maybe  
**[0:25:14-0:25:20](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:25:14):**  that brushing off of local food makes less sense than I thought it did.  So I've seen a few people in this last week kind of reconsidering that balanced food system.  And it's definitely something we believe technology also can help, that there'll be a range of  food systems and farm production systems, small and large and local and global, and  that that's probably a more resilient system overall, which maybe this shock catalyzes  
**[0:25:37-0:25:38](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:25:37):**  some of that in the future.  Well, that's a really interesting point.  And I'm going to riff on that, what you just said there, Sarah, for a second.  If you go back to the Green Revolution, I mean, the technologies of the Green Revolution  were really, in my mind, all about homogenization.  
**[0:25:52-0:25:58](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:25:52):**  Can you create a massive economy of scale by doing essentially exactly the same thing  with the same genomics, with the same tractor over an enormous area?  And it was a one, you know, really Green Revolution technologies are a one size fits all kind  of management strategy.  Whereas I would say that smart tractors, digital technologies, precision agriculture, it's  
**[0:26:17-0:26:19](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:26:17):**  all about managing variation.  It's about changing, responding to things on a range of different scales, planting the  right seed in the right point in the field and giving it the right amount of fertilizer  as the promise of a smart tractor or a robotic milker that allows the cow to milk herself  when she wants it, as opposed to sort of on a schedule that's prescribed by the farmer  
**[0:26:37-0:26:42](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:26:37):**  or using accelerometers to determine whether the cow goes into heat so that they can breed  themselves as opposed to using hormones to make them, breed them on a schedule.  I mean, I think that one of the benefits of the digital ag revolution, which I hope we  realize and I hope isn't hype, getting back to our early part of the conversation, is  the ability to do farming at a range of scales and in a far more bespoke way in sort of in  
**[0:27:02-0:27:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:27:02):**  near real time on a meter by meter basis or manage each plant and animal as individuals.  And that might give us a huge amount more diversity and, to your point, resilience in  the system.  And so if anything I'm hoping comes out of this is maybe we catalyze that kind of embracing  of diversity that's enabled then by these digital technologies.  
**[0:27:23-0:27:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:27:23):**  And wouldn't that be a good outcome?  We all need a bit of positive news right now.  So we'll leave it there with Evan Frazier, just after he takes me up on the opportunity  for a shameless plug of what he's up to and where you can find more about him.  Yeah, well happy to have the opportunity to do some self-promotion.  
**[0:27:41-0:27:47](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:27:41):**  Arrolfoodinstitute.ca, that's A-double-R-E-double-L. Arrolfoodinstitute.ca is the interdisciplinary  institute that I am the director of.  I also curate a series of educational resources including a card game and a graphic novel  and a series of lectures, etc. on a website called Feeding9Billion.com.  So that's Feeding9Billion.  
**[0:28:02-0:28:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:28:02):**  And we have a YouTube channel as well where you can get access to me or track me down  on Twitter on Feeding9Billion.  Awesome Evan, thank you so much for taking the time to do this and really appreciate  it and stay safe out there.  Yep, same to you and I'm happy to talk at any point.  
**[0:28:20-0:28:23](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:28:20):**  Thank you for joining us on another episode of Ag Tech So What.  You can stay up to date with the latest episodes and news at AgTechSoWhat.com.  And as always, if you have any feedback or other guests to recommend, we'd love to hear  from you.  Just hop on the website and leave us a comment or send us a message.  
**[0:28:37-0:28:41](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=600708#t=0:28:37):**  Finally, if you like what you're hearing, and we hope you do, please share the podcast  with a friend or leave us a review on iTunes or wherever you get your podcasts.  Thanks again for listening.  We'll catch you next time.  