### Agtech - So What?  (2019-45-30)
**[0:00:00-0:00:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to the AgTech So What podcast. Emerging technologies are rapidly changing  the global agricultural industry. We believe that this revolution is only getting started.  But there's still too much hype out there and too big of a disconnect between ag and  ag tech. So on this show, we try to bridge that gap. In each episode, we bring you the  story of a different innovator in agriculture and try to find the place where ag and tech  
**[0:00:44-0:01:01](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:00:44):**  meet. I'm your host, Sarah Nolet. Welcome back to the AgTech So What podcast.  Today's episode is the first of four episodes where we'll focus on the theme of getting  ag tech ready. This theme is brought to you in partnership with Decipher. We'll be exploring  what it really means to be ag tech ready. We'll be looking at this from four different  perspectives starting today with a really innovative farmer named Tim. Then we'll summarize  
**[0:01:21-0:01:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:01:21):**  the insights from each of the episode in a blog post that goes beyond the show notes  that we've been doing thus far and an ebook for the theme with all the insights from those  four episodes. To kick off this theme, today's episode features Tim Rethis. Tim gives his  background right when we start recording. I won't say more by way of introduction other  than that Tim is very much an early adopter and innovator. In fact, he's pushing the envelope  
**[0:01:45-0:01:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:01:45):**  so much that when he first mentions the planter that they've built, I didn't even realize  that it was something they had designed and built. It took me two more questions before  I circled back to dig into what it actually meant to build something quite that innovative.  I learned a ton about what it means to get ag tech ready in this episode with Tim and  I hope you will too. As always, if you like what you're hearing, please subscribe to the  
**[0:02:09-0:02:14](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:02:09):**  podcast, leave this review on iTunes or Spotify or share the episode with a friend. That's  it for me. Here's Tim.  We'll start off with where we're Victorian farmers. We're a full cropping farmers. It's  all winter crops only. Winter rainfall dominate. It's very hot and dry in summer. Usually it's  nothing green in summer and then go for it between April and November harvesting in November,  
**[0:02:34-0:02:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:02:34):**  but we have been here since... I'm only third generation in this area. I'm pretty sure my  grandpa and his grandpa were probably farmers too. We've been working with some novel methods  here. We've got a reasonably large farm which allows us to play with a few toys. We've got  a lot of control traffic and novel machines, a lot of them new to keep up to date and to  keep reliability up. Myself, I grew up on the farm obviously. I went to university and  
**[0:03:02-0:03:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:03:02):**  I liked doing chemistry. I became a chemical engineer. I went to a university and did chemical  engineering and I did a dual degree with management commerce in there as well. From that, I progressed  to getting a job at an oil refinery as an engineer and working on problems there. Engineers  are just generally troubleshooters. We just find problems and solve them. Six years ago,  I decided to have one of those midlife crises. I came back home and my uncle was retiring  
**[0:03:32-0:03:37](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:03:32):**  and my dad and uncle had been working together. My uncle was retiring so I came in and stepped  in and filled in his role and worked with my father on the farm. Then the year after  that, my little brother came back and he's a telecommunications engineer. He went to  university and studied telecommunications. We've come back and essentially taking over  the operation now. We're a large farm in our area. My brother, myself, my dad is still  
**[0:03:59-0:04:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:03:59):**  working on the farm and we have two full-time farmhands. That's been going now for farmhands.  My first farmhand has been around for 15 years so I must be doing something right. It's going  quite well.  Interesting. A couple of themes in there I wanted to tease out. One was the controlled  traffic. Tell me about when you guys decided to start farming in that way and what the  
**[0:04:21-0:04:24](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:04:21):**  benefits were. Was it a slow decision? Could you dip in a toe in the water or was it kind  of jump in and really switch to that kind of what really is a farming system?  You could pack it away tomorrow or you could pack it away now and it's done. You start  getting the benefits of it being packed away. It's the same with the farming. It's like  if you're going to do this and you have the means to do it and we had to change some gear  
**[0:04:40-0:04:44](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:04:40):**  anyway, why wouldn't you start reaping the benefits immediately? We could see that in  what we were looking at our crops with the unevenness of them. It was pretty much get  in early and do it because we could see what was going to happen. There was no necessary  business case put together but it was quite clearly formed in your mind. You could probably  write one quite easily but you knew what was going to happen and it's one of those no brainer  
**[0:05:01-0:05:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:05:01):**  kind of decisions.  Yeah, it's interesting. There's a lot of talk I guess about the ag tech companies need to  show their ROI to farmers and do the business case but my experience and definitely chatting  to people in places like the podcast has been that it's much more like you described it  that it kind of either fully makes sense or doesn't and if it doesn't I might stick a  
**[0:05:20-0:05:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:05:20):**  toe in the water but if it fully makes sense then I'll go for it. Is that consistent with  your experience?  Yeah, I think the key thing is Sarah, is you got to have a very clear path of where you  want to go and so in this case dad knew that well we need to reduce soil compaction. How  do I do that? He'd already been doing things to retain stubble to store moisture and that  
**[0:05:41-0:05:44](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:05:41):**  sort of thing and it's like where do we go to next? There's a bit of research about when  you enter the distance and what type of distance and who are but you kind of have this vision  of what I want is control traffic and I know what I want to do and you essentially do every  decision you do from now on to finally achieve that goal in the end and so you may not get  it all right in one year because you mightn't be able to afford changing all of your gear  
**[0:06:02-0:06:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:06:02):**  in one season which is unlikely but at least you know that next time you buy a tractor  you'll make sure that it's on three meter centres because that's where you want to be  even if it's not useful now and so you're constantly working towards that whereas I  think sometimes people that they want the proof but when you've already made the mind  it's a bit like the argument between Toby Hine and self-propelled sprayers both have  
**[0:06:23-0:06:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:06:23):**  very good business cases but it really comes down to which one the farmer really wants  and then they will justify it with the best business case and it's a bit like this once  you've made up your mind you want to do it you'll commit to it properly but if you're  not if you're sort of wishy-washy about it you're going to take a lot more to get yourself  across the line because you've really got to be convinced that you're wrong and people  
**[0:06:40-0:06:41](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:06:40):**  don't like that.  And is that something that was transparent to you mentioned there's a couple farm managers  and obviously you and your brother maybe weren't making the decision at that time was this  kind of we know where we're going and this is a shift we want to make was that transparent  to everyone or was it kind of dad was thinking that and then once it happened like it's sort  
**[0:06:56-0:06:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:06:56):**  of transparent in hindsight?  I think it comes down to how you structure your business so yeah we've kind of got three  managers and our farm hand who's been here so long he's essentially part of the team  management team anyway but back then it was pretty much dad and and my uncle was was on  the mechanical side so he was pretty much the executioner he got stuff done and dad  
**[0:07:13-0:07:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:07:13):**  was the one who was guiding where that where everything was was heading and my uncle's  quite happy with that so it's about sectioning yourself into where you think your strengths  are and so my uncle was really good at keeping everything going and making sure that we had  the tools to do the job and you know making sure that they all looked after properly but  then dad likes that business management side of things he was into that and so now that  
**[0:07:31-0:07:34](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:07:31):**  we've got the three of us we've all sort of fractured into our groups to sort of I'm the  crop manager I look after growing stuff my brother looks after the marketing of the goods  we have the logistics of getting it away so we kind of don't necessarily tread on each  other's toes too much we communicate with each other but we don't want to be that you  you don't necessarily have to have a unanimous decision it's about you convincing the others  
**[0:07:50-0:07:53](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:07:50):**  that you're right and they should believe you because that's your expertise kind of  thing you know but other farms don't work that way it's sort of a bit everyone does  everything yeah sure interesting and lots of parallels to business right and whether  you kind of have a team with diverse skill sets or you want to narrowly focus in one  area and you know farms are businesses and so it makes sense it really depends like if  
**[0:08:08-0:08:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:08:08):**  two guys really like looking after the crops so then you have to come with a different  model but for us it works quite well because I'm quite interested in that and that and  I that means I look for innovations in that area and I'll be explaining stuff like with  it my brother looks after the seeder and so we know what we want to achieve and then he  goes and finds solutions to try and solve that on his side for his gear and he'll say  
**[0:08:29-0:08:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:08:29):**  oh I think this is what we should do and go fine if you think that'll work we'll run with  that but we've both got a clear idea of where we're heading we're not doing two different  divergent management strategies we're the same way it's just that one personal you know  focus their attention in a particular area to make sure the research done is done properly  and you've got a it's so much information to take in you really need to immerse yourself  
**[0:08:48-0:08:51](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:08:48):**  in it and it's hard to immerse yourself in in aspects when farming has so many different  aspects you could be an expert at yeah I want to ask your advice like you've mentioned a  few times kind of we knew where we wanted to go so then we went and researched or we  were looking for innovations or you know I was looking for something or my brother was  like where do you look and how do you like has where you looked changed or like our information  
**[0:09:07-0:09:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:09:07):**  sources equally as trusted is it more research or kind of like marketing you know trade shows  kind of where do you look for this stuff yeah it's really tricky and it definitely is changing  like right now the easiest way to look is on twitter that's the the farmers medium is  is twitter it's a great place to look for novel ideas so I guess where we are in our  business I'd say we're early adopters so we're looking for new options that are going to  
**[0:09:27-0:09:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:09:27):**  opportunities that are going to get us towards our final goal of a sustainable low-cost farm  and that that means that you know you're looking kind of beyond the bulk so you can't just  look at the neighbors because they're probably not doing it yet so you're trying to find  something outside your your zone of influence so you're looking at you know a different  agricultural region or a different industry even looking for a solution that might solve  
**[0:09:49-0:09:52](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:09:49):**  a little problem so you're trying to think really laterally and so things like twitter  are great because people throw ideas and it may not necessarily be necessarily be perfect  for your area but you might be able to adapt it to make sure it is and and that's the clever  thing is trying to find these little things that you just tweaking it oh that I could  just do this that would be perfect and that's where even with a lot of these digital tools  
**[0:10:08-0:10:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:10:08):**  it's trying to understand which is going to be the best fit for you you know you're just  looking through all these resources yeah so it's one of the things that strikes me is  like when you've named the people in your family like dad's an early adopter and and  you know my brother has these skills my uncle's mechanical and I have engineering and commerce  like did you guys strategically decide you were going to build all these skills like  
**[0:10:26-0:10:29](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:10:26):**  because I imagine you know some farms wouldn't have all those skills in house they might  have to outsource some and so does does the skill sets that you guys have had I think  so and I think that's where it's complementary but at the same point I think you identify  what the people are good at and that those are the aspects of your business that you  really enhance so you look at your business and we say look we're quite good with digital  
**[0:10:45-0:10:49](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:10:45):**  tools because my brother did telecommunications really he's got a really good feel and understanding  on how these things work and so we're not afraid to go into that phase you don't have  to go and do those things you might say I'm really good at driving trucks so I'm just  going to do a lot of truck work and I'm just going to focus on you know contracting out  or something like that and that's what you do or you might build cheap you might use  
**[0:11:05-0:11:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:11:05):**  old gear but you can keep it going because you're so good with your mechanical ability  whereas you know we tend to just sort of once it gets long in the tooth we just change it  over and get a new one you know we don't we don't like trying to keep something going  we just like the reliability because that's not in our focus so it's where you choose  to position your strength and there's not much point trying to force somebody to do  
**[0:11:22-0:11:26](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:11:22):**  something they're not very good at and the classic is sheep you know you've got mixed  farms if you don't really like doing sheep you might as well just stick to your crops  because you can do a better job than be forced to look after some sheep and it's the same  if you're a great sheep farmer you're not going to grow great crops if you love sheep  more than your crops you know so there's always that compromise and you've got to identify  
**[0:11:40-0:11:42](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:11:40):**  your strengths and play to them.  Yeah interesting so I want to go back to the Twitter example because I love that do you  have an example of something that you like found on Twitter and like and or examples  of stuff you've used from other industries because I think both of those are kind of  nuances of how to find technology that maybe aren't obvious to other people.  
**[0:11:57-0:12:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:11:57):**  Yeah yeah I guess so like with the planter we have a lot of aftermarket things we put  on there and there's not a lot of planters around here this is a twin disc precision  planter kind of planter but it's been converted to an air seeder so it's a precision planning  gear which is very standard in America and we can see that on Twitter we feel their feeds  of what they're doing and the products they're using and then we can look at that and go  
**[0:12:19-0:12:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:12:19):**  well maybe that'll work here and so you can actually get demonstrations of short videos  of what they're doing and why they're doing it so those are little tricks and trade that  works so the beauty of our machine is it is quite it's a bit like a bit like an old Falcon  you can work on it and do as much as you want you can get parts wherever you want it's got  a lot of flexibility to cater and tailor it for what you want it to do and yeah Twitter  
**[0:12:39-0:12:43](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:12:39):**  is a great source for that when you don't have those sort of gear near you to compare  directly so it gives you those fresh ideas you don't know what you don't know.  Of course do you want to ask about the decision to kind of build versus buy like you guys  have bought some stuff obviously that exists or that you've seen others using you've invested  in building your own solutions in some cases like what are maybe examples of built like  
**[0:13:00-0:13:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:13:00):**  why build something and why buy something with with the technology you guys have built  and bought?  Yeah yeah yeah okay so probably the easy one with the buy is we like we bought a tow behind  spreader and we because we're early in adopters you sometimes get in and it's not quite to  the specs you want and you're often the one training the manufacturers that maybe you  
**[0:13:20-0:13:24](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:13:20):**  should make this an option so when we bought our spreader it was on 2.25 meters just a  standard European width and we really needed it on three meters to be to be practical for  our system because they're on three meter control traffic and want to don't run a crop  down so you know we we happen to be at a field days and we'd met some people at an axle company  and they seemed lovely seemed really knowledgeable and we're really surprised with how much they  
**[0:13:43-0:13:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:13:43):**  knew and so when we came to this problem we realized it was the same brand axle as what  these people we've met at the field days and so we we just messaged them and said is there  any chance you can get an axle for this and I said yeah no problem so here it is here's  all the load ratings so you know all fine and literally it's just bolted on and away  you go and those are the simple solutions where you just ordered something special for  
**[0:14:04-0:14:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:14:04):**  you and now now they'll just release it as a three meter version because now they know  people want it and we same with our baler we have a high capacity high density chrome  baler and and the axles are steerable raked axles and and literally they said oh yeah  we've got the blueprints for that machine we can we can do that for you and the engineers  so just wait a little while the engineers are completed and they stand in a Meccano  
**[0:14:24-0:14:28](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:14:24):**  set of parts just to bolt it on and away you go and they're the clever little things you  can do where you're not it's all rated you don't have to worry about engineering failures  or anything so you've got some sort of guarantee which is the risk when you start doing things  yourself but they're very simple and easy to do it's just a matter of looking and knowing  who to talk to.  
**[0:14:43-0:14:49](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:14:43):**  What advice would you have for someone who like another farmer or that someone in the  space that's maybe less confident like it's what strikes me when you're talking is just  how confident you are and how fluent you are in this space for someone who wouldn't classify  themselves as an early adopter or who isn't as comfortable like what advice would you  have for them on a kind of build versus buy decision especially if they're not the ones  
**[0:15:04-0:15:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:15:04):**  that think they're going to influence the manufacturer of the company and kind of new  features.  Yeah I think the other thing too is yeah I think the thing is though that you need to  find a manufacturer that's willing to talk your language that understands where you're  at so some manufacturers are really keen to help you out and other guys will just be this  
**[0:15:21-0:15:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:15:21):**  is the product this is the way it is and you might be really happy with that way it is  because it's super reliable and they're going to fully back it and there's no risk but other  times the company get really excited about actually feedback from the market so you got  to remember these big companies they're trying to understand what they got to do too so if  you don't talk to them they don't know what to provide you that will make you happier  
**[0:15:41-0:15:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:15:41):**  so it's a bit like you know getting the right presence for your wife if you don't ask you  you're going to get the wrong thing and you're getting in trouble actually probably in trouble  anyway but but you know what I mean so you want to be able to be able to communicate  to these manufacturers because they enjoy the feedback as much as trying to sell you  any they want you to have the right product and they learning from you as much as you're  
**[0:16:00-0:16:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:16:00):**  learning from them so I think you just got to back yourself and and you've got to know  that that you have something that's valuable to them.  I love that because one of the things we talk about more in the startup context but it strikes  me that it's just as applicable and I hadn't thought of that before is that kind of evaluate  your suppliers just as much as they're you know they're selling to you but you're evaluating  
**[0:16:22-0:16:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:16:22):**  the product but you're also evaluating them like do they take your feedback on do they  listen do they want to improve the product that's just as important as how good is the  product right now.  That's exactly right and very quickly you'll work out that this particular particular sales  people or assets that these companies have that are particularly good at certain jobs  
**[0:16:42-0:16:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:16:42):**  and maybe not so good at others but you very quickly work out that I'll you know I should  definitely do it with this dealer because if I have any problems with this this guy's  a wizard he can fix anything where the year the other company and you like all this guy's  not he's too new he doesn't have any experience he doesn't understand anything I'm bumbling  through it myself better than he can and so very quickly you start getting it understanding  
**[0:17:02-0:17:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:17:02):**  where these guys are but at the same point with new technology having said that guys  are inexperienced you've got to give him a chance to learn as well and so when you are  doing new things you've got to expect things not to work out as well as you'd hope so I  know one grower and he's working with some really innovative gear and and his attitude  that he's running with this stuff and he knows it's going to break it's a prototype but he's  
**[0:17:23-0:17:28](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:17:23):**  still using it and when it breaks he changed back to the old gear and as soon as they've  repaired it or upgraded or improved it to make it work properly again he puts a straight  back on because he knows they need that data to make it to finish it off and get it finished  and make the product reliable and so yeah you've just got to make sure you just don't  sit there grizzling about how it's costing me money it's at that because the end result  
**[0:17:43-0:17:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:17:43):**  is going to be greater and that's keeping that eye on the prize at the end and having  that vision.  I love that because the attitude aspect of it but I guess there's some nuances there  that like expect it won't work but it sounds like in this case like also have a backup  plan like expect it won't work and be there for ready to to fill in what it doesn't so  
**[0:18:00-0:18:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:18:00):**  you're not kind of stuck without it.  Yeah that's a funny one too Sarah because I think with with the disc seaters so there's  probably a 20% uptake of discs and and it's certain areas that are really benefiting from  disc seaters in our in our region in the Wimmera and it's interesting that some growers will  have two machines or they'll ask for a machine that's interchangeable between tine and disc  
**[0:18:22-0:18:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:18:22):**  because they're concerned that wet conditions might prevent this running whereas our approach  was pretty much like we're smart engineers we should be able to make this work and we'll  just work through it and improve our system and get to know our machine and make it work  so pretty much we were like cut the cut the apron strings we've got to come into this  machine to make it work versus having a backup plan which may then compromise the end solution  
**[0:18:47-0:18:51](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:18:47):**  which is what we really want which was our disc machine to work really well so it can  lead to a lot of pain because you're still learning a lot but sometimes the cop out you  might go backwards so it's a real fine line because you don't want to lose money by not  getting things done on time but at the same point you've got to have that some incentive  to make sure you get the job done.  
**[0:19:06-0:19:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:19:06):**  Do you see that as different in the kind of mechanical space and working with big companies  versus the digital space like one thing about the digital space is how fast things can change  like push a new software release fix a bug etc. versus you know like something something  mechanical broke which you know may be easier to fix on farm depending on the skills that  you have but do you see any differences in that kind of jump in give it a go whether  
**[0:19:28-0:19:29](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:19:28):**  it's a digital product?  Well I find that the problem with the digital products is you really don't have the ability  to fix it yourself you're not going to get a custom product for you you're going to get  a custom product for your type of business so you don't quite have the same control and  that can be frustrating because then it's like well I have to invest a lot of energy  
**[0:19:48-0:19:53](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:19:48):**  to get these digital products to work and I don't want to be backing the loser and so  there's an awful lot of farmers I feel that are probably sitting back waiting to see which  are going to be the dominant players which are going to provide the best product and  and like you say it's such a fluid industry the product that was the best two years ago  is not necessarily the best anymore they haven't kept up the development at the same rate and  
**[0:20:09-0:20:14](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:20:09):**  so yeah at the moment it's such a there's so many platforms out there it's just too  much information and I think there's probably going to be a bit of a cataclysm for these  companies and they're going to have to whittle themselves down it's going to be quite a bit  of merging and and whittling down to the key players and maybe the key players still to  come I'm not sure they might not have even started producing a product yet but there's  
**[0:20:30-0:20:34](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:20:30):**  definitely going to be a critical point where we're going to have to get a bit more clarity  because at the moment the products are I don't think they're as finished as they should be.  Is there anything that would that does give you confidence like there are any digital  tools that despite this kind of winner take all dynamic and it's not clear who wins and  maybe things aren't fully flushed yet but that would give you confidence to give something  
**[0:20:52-0:20:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:20:52):**  ago like are you don't have to say which products they are but are there things you're like  well that is worth it and we will go all in on that because you know it is in line with  where we're going.  I think it's interesting yes I think it is interesting because we've had when there's  always an evolution obviously like with with guidance systems it was originally it was  
**[0:21:08-0:21:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:21:08):**  a light bar and we used to follow a light bar and then we had some primitive guidance  we had to plug in your A and B every time you want to drive and and now they're already  preset all our fields already have their lines on and now it even turns on the end for you  because you've got enough computing power.  I think it's the same with these digital programs initially the first versions coming  
**[0:21:25-0:21:31](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:21:25):**  out we're doing interpretations of data which were only giving us as much insight as what  we could already tell.  So it would be telling you that that's the wet area the paddock the bottom of the hill  and you're like well I could tell you that you don't have to spend any money with that  out.  
**[0:21:42-0:21:44](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:21:42):**  But what they're doing now is I think they're extending themselves a little bit further  they're building correlations to try and find insights that are you know second or third  degree insights ones you can't see directly and that's where the true power is going to  be.  So I think the guys that are still flogging you know like a greenness map without actually  
**[0:21:59-0:22:03](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:21:59):**  any value add to it and just assuming it's all nice and that's not adding quite as much  as telling me that this area is green because of this reason and this area is green because  of this reason and we should be doing something about it.  And also the other thing too is a lot of these are very intensive so we're getting great  data in satellite imagery now but it's almost too much.  
**[0:22:18-0:22:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:22:18):**  So I don't want to get a map every day I want to know which maps are better every day to  look at so give me the top five or give me the top three and I think they're working  that out as they're developing their tools and because there's so much competition the  ones that are doing that better are the ones that are getting ahead.  So I think they're listening but it's also that fact like when you're dealing with a  
**[0:22:37-0:22:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:22:37):**  planter it's a custom piece of gear pretty much every farmer.  Every farmer customizes their gear to a certain extent.  A harvester a lot more standard but these digital tools are a bit more like a harvester  it's a very all-rounder sort of unit and at the moment we're still providing a lot of  feedback to these digital tools to make them work best for us in our environments and the  
**[0:22:55-0:22:59](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:22:55):**  guys are still learning what we want and what we need versus what they think we might want.  Yes definitely well good to hear that people are out there giving feedback and taking feedback  because there's still probably too much push and not enough kind of dialogue around that.  Tell me about the build side so that was kind of all on the buy side when you guys have  decided to kind of fully take something in-house and build something.  
**[0:23:17-0:23:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:23:17):**  What's an example of that and kind of tell me the story of why you went down that path  and how it ended up.  Yeah okay so probably the best one is our planter.  So we've built our own plant.  We've gone through an evolution so like I said earlier we had narrow points on our flexicoil  
**[0:23:31-0:23:37](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:23:31):**  bar very common back in the in the 90s it served us really well but as people learn  more about how farming systems are working it wasn't good enough what we wanted to do.  So then we went to a disk system and we had a daybreak disk which is a large oversized  disk which has minimum soil throw as opposed to a high soil throw.  There's two different kind of distinct trains of thought there.  
**[0:23:53-0:23:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:23:53):**  Lots of soil throw for chemical incorporation in your pre-emergence or minimum soil throw  which we kind of feel is the right thing to do to prevent stimulation of the weeds in  the first place which takes load off the pre-ems you put out but then you have to use the correct  pre-ems which tend to be the more extensive ones but they also work really well because  there's less resistance to them.  
**[0:24:11-0:24:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:24:11):**  So we're running this disk system it was working quite well for about 10 years and then we  noticed that because of the control traffic our soil was becoming too friable and too  fluffy and the disks were actually some of the times they would stall and they wouldn't  rotate and so it wasn't doing a very good job in seed placement and also it still was  it was not a parallel link arm so that the seeding depth changed so there was a lot of  
**[0:24:33-0:24:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:24:33):**  improvements we could do that we'd learnt from this disk.  So then it came about there was an opportunity to buy a precision planter like a full-blown  precision planter and we were using that for a couple of years and we were amazed at the  job it did so the actual tool to get the seeds into the ground was brilliant.  The only problem was that the singulation maybe they're still doing research on that  
**[0:24:54-0:25:00](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:24:54):**  at BCG and at Adelaide Uni about what is actually going to be valuable to singulate.  Things like canola are for sure but then things like wheat is their value in it so it can  do wheat but it couldn't do barley and it couldn't do oats.  Now they're working on that and they're still improving it but once they start bringing  all of these commodities into the one machine we have an all-rounder that can do everything  
**[0:25:14-0:25:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:25:14):**  rather than having two separate machines.  We'd learnt from our time what was great for trash flow, we learnt from our disk that we  wanted to minimise soil disturbance and we wanted to be able to interrow and all this  sort of stuff and then with the twin disk we realised that this was the machine that  seemed to handle our soft soils and also give excellent placement.  
**[0:25:31-0:25:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:25:31):**  The only problem was that it was a singulator and that was no good in our system at the  moment.  So essentially we decided to build our own and we talked to some manufacturers and we  were really impressed with NDF up at Narrabri and Dale Foster builds bars up there and you  probably take out a power pole with them without too much problem, without scratching it.  
**[0:25:52-0:25:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:25:52):**  It's a great build, very reliable product and then what we did is we decided to add  on precision planting style row units.  So we put row units on that matched what we'd seen with our precision planter and we wanted  to replicate that and Dale was kind enough to set up his bar and adjust the way we designed  it to suit what we wanted so again that's a classic example of providing feedback to  
**[0:26:13-0:26:14](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:26:13):**  a manufacturer.  They take advantage of you and use you for R&D to design the new product but that works  for us because that's what we wanted and so it was a benefit for both parties you know.  And he learned a lot too, some people just love challenges and it was great what he'd  done there.  
**[0:26:29-0:26:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:26:29):**  And then on top of that we have all this precision planting gear that we put on top.  So we have individual row pressure control so each row has hydraulic downforce which  can also lift.  So if you're going through swale country and you had hard pans and soft sand hills it would  actually put up to 200 kilos or more onto it in the hard pan to get penetration and  
**[0:26:52-0:26:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:26:52):**  then on the sand hills it could lift it out of the ground to make sure it didn't sow the  seeds too deep.  So you've got very good even placement.  And then we have things like Keaton seed terms, these are all the little things that you learn  as you play with your tools and you go on the journey.  
**[0:27:05-0:27:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:27:05):**  And probably the coolest little thing we've added on last is we converted to an air seeder  so that was nice but it's retrofit-able to be a planter one day.  So we haven't lost money there so we're hoping this bar will last us a long time.  And yeah we also went and put tracks on it because we believe in keeping our stubble  standing and it matched in with our tractor and helps.  
**[0:27:27-0:27:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:27:27):**  Keeping the standing stubble is to help our lentils trellis and just saves us a bit.  So it's a mode of thought and sticks to our control traffic lines.  And then we put smart firmers on.  So we've got some smart firmers on and these devices have an optical sensor that actually  tells you the quality of the job you're doing on the go.  
**[0:27:42-0:27:47](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:27:42):**  So it measures organic carbon, it measures the uniformity of the furrow, it tells you  whether you put organic matter into the slot which is a problem if you put herbicides out  because it'll wick the herbicide into around the seed and sterilise it.  It tells you the soil temperature, it can tell you the cation exchange capacity and  there's another thing it does too that's amazing.  
**[0:28:03-0:28:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:28:03):**  Something else that's really important that I can't recall now but it's got all this  great data coming out of it.  There is a connectivity issue with it but we collected like 16 gigs of data off our  seed last year and probably get more this year because of a few upgrades on it.  But yeah it's just fascinating data and you're like once I start collecting this stuff I  
**[0:28:23-0:28:28](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:28:23):**  can start layering that up and I can use some of these new digital tools to analyse it for  me and try and find some relationships that I can't see and then make some smart decisions  about how I'm spending my money.  That's super impressive and sounds almost science fiction-y and you're like and we  also have this and we also have this.  
**[0:28:39-0:28:41](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:28:39):**  I have a couple questions.  Over how long did that happen?  You mentioned a couple iterations and we learned this and we saw this.  How long did it take from kind of alright we're going to build something ourselves to  where you are now?  
**[0:28:50-0:28:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:28:50):**  I think that once we'd had all the tools and we knew we kind of were heading forward it  was probably about a year that was spent choosing what we were going to put on it and getting  it built and it had to be designed the frame to actually take how we wanted to and so there's  a bit of visitation going on to make sure that things worked out properly.  But again it was kind of a as you work with a tool you understand the deficiencies in  
**[0:29:16-0:29:19](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:29:16):**  it and these are the things you're putting in your checklist of things in your head so  that whenever you get the opportunity to go you just download all those things and you  say right are any of these practical to put in are we going to solve all these problems  with a new machine.  So we did as many things we could to fix all the problems we'd seen in the past and improve  
**[0:29:32-0:29:38](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:29:32):**  on what was there but the key thing is you're providing yourself with a platform to spring  off to next.  So all the tools even the digital tools you want something that you can start with something  basic but it is not going to limit you to just that function in the future when something  new comes that you don't know about no problems I can just bolt it on or I can upload this  
**[0:29:53-0:29:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:29:53):**  or it'll enable me to download this now or whatever.  So it's about having a you don't treat a bar as a finished product nothing is a finished  product it's always about what can I learn from this to go to the next step so when I  have to make my next purchase or when I'm going to make my next purchase I know what  to do.  
**[0:30:09-0:30:13](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:30:09):**  Yeah what are your neighbors and other people think like are you guys crazy for doing this  do they wish they had one do they want to buy one from you like what's the reaction  been?  I think it's shiny and new and expensive so there's obviously not everyone can copy what  we're doing but I think it's I think they appreciate the fact that we're doing certain  
**[0:30:28-0:30:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:30:28):**  things and proving what can and can't work.  Now you don't have to do everything obviously but it's amazing the uptake of this seat is  even close to us a lot of farmers who never would have thought of it you hear them talking  about it and then sooner or later it's in their field so clearly they can see the benefits  of certain aspects of the business and again it's about how it fits in their model as well  
**[0:30:47-0:30:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:30:47):**  they've got to get their heads around oh I really like one of those but it's not so much  about I want one of those it's like I need one of these to fix this problem I'm seeing  now and so south of Horsham the dissed seed is very popular at the moment because they  allow people to sow the crops dry and it can get quite wet down south and so you're getting  your crops in when you can versus trying to get it in when it's all muddy and you're gonna  
**[0:31:08-0:31:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:31:08):**  do a bad job so huge benefit identified that and they can see that they had a problem they  couldn't get the crop in time why don't I do it before it gets too wet this leader can  do that to me so then there's an interest you know like one thing I wanted to ask about  is the I guess the traditional kind of research and development system has been you know the  RDCs and others investing in research or universities and multinationals that might spin out into  
**[0:31:29-0:31:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:31:29):**  a product that a multinational commercializes and come to you through an existing dealer  and then there's the kind of startup you know digital tech coming to you from you know venture  backed startups and all that and then there's producers you know building their own solutions  with contractors like do you see those worlds all existing together in the future are they  colliding do you like are they all useful tools just in different ways I think I think  
**[0:31:53-0:31:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:31:53):**  they all need to exist I mean it's the it's the entrepreneurs and innovators that are  helping the big companies get ahead they're the ones that are the sticking their necks  out for a chance on a product which could be absolutely brilliant but the big companies  are not going to fork out the research dollars for something as speculative as that so they  need those companies and the farmers obviously designing products that are specifically suited  
**[0:32:14-0:32:18](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:32:14):**  to their needs as opposed to I can sell this many units if I make it applicable to Europe  Australia and and America but you just want a product that's suitable for your farm not  for some guy in France so yeah you need to you need those local farmers that are sort  of solving things for you and especially when they're things that are not going to necessarily  add big value overseas so a digital platform is going to work really well overseas but  
**[0:32:37-0:32:42](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:32:37):**  at the same point there's parts of digital platforms that modules and stuff that we might  need that other people don't and so it's made about communicating those things so there  is some even digital innovation locally but a lot of the local innovation will be mechanical  and the research organizations I think it's really important that that they provide most  of them are there to provide for the bulk of farmers but they also need to be dedicating  
**[0:32:59-0:33:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:32:59):**  a certain amount to what you call R&D the next step where could we be going what's next  what's an option that might work for us in the future because you can't just sit static  nature is too smart for us to develop a model and agree that that's the best rotation or  that this is the best system you've got to keep adapting it to keep ahead and keep mixing  it up because it's never a static playing field and what's good is it's inspiring you  
**[0:33:24-0:33:29](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:33:24):**  know like you want to you want to encourage other people to do similar stuff to what we're  doing so that we can keep pushing the envelope forward if it's just one guy it's really hard  but if you've got a lot of people asking for the same things or getting that same inspiration  or coming up with a different idea we need to keep doing that so it's really exciting  when you when you get people out and they enjoy and learn something from what you do  
**[0:33:45-0:33:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:33:45):**  it's really good.  Thank you for joining us on another episode of Ag Tech So What. You can stay up to date  with the latest episodes and news at agtechsowhat.com and as always if you have any feedback or  other guests to recommend we'd love to hear from you just hop on the website and leave  us a comment or send us a message. Finally if you like what you're hearing and we hope  
**[0:34:16-0:34:20](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=365393#t=0:34:16):**  you do please share the podcast with a friend or leave us a review on iTunes or wherever  you get your podcasts. Thanks again for listening. Catch you next time.  