### Agtech - So What?  (2019-52-07)
**[0:00:00-0:00:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, and welcome to the Ag Tech So What podcast. Emerging technologies are rapidly  changing the global agricultural industry. We believe that this revolution is only getting  started, but there's still too much hype out there and too big of a disconnect between  ag and ag tech. So on this show, we try to bridge that gap. In each episode, we bring  you the story of a different innovator in agriculture and try to find the place where  
**[0:00:30-0:00:48](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:00:30):**  ag and tech meet. I'm your host, Sarah Nolet. Today's episode is a live recording from the  Sydney Ag Tech Meetup, which we run in partnership with SproutX. Big thanks to the team at Grow  Love Project, who recorded and produced this episode. My guest is Dan Harburg. Dan is a  senior director with Indigo Ag, and Indigo is one of ag tech's biggest startups. They've  raised over 650 million, have over 1000 staff, and are working to expand in the US and internationally.  
**[0:01:12-0:01:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:01:12):**  Dan was visiting Australia to learn more about carbon farming and the work that's happening  here that might be helpful to Indigo and farmers around the world. You'll hear my chat with  Dan and then the Q&A from audience at the end. We start with Dan telling us how he came  to work at Indigo. I come from a technical background. I did a PhD in electrical engineering,  actually, and started exploring opportunities for technology to transform new industries.  
**[0:01:38-0:01:41](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:01:38):**  And one of the first companies that I helped start was a robotics company that ended up  doing quite a bit of work in the food and agriculture sector, a company called Soft  Robotics that's also based in Boston. And in that company, we were developing a brand  new way to grip products very delicately. We started getting invited by agricultural  producers around the world to come look at production facilities, processing plants,  
**[0:02:00-0:02:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:02:00):**  and more and more go into the field and think about how we could automate harvesting operations.  I got really interested in exploring the food and ag space and seeing all these opportunities  for new tech to come to an industry that hasn't seen a lot of the digital transformations  that have happened in other places. And so through that experience and then some time  spent working with a venture capital fund, helping them explore how digital technologies  
**[0:02:24-0:02:29](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:02:24):**  could transform this industry. I found Indigo and joined about a year ago. So I've heard  that Indigo has gone from something like 300 people 18 months ago to over 1000 now. When  did you join? I signed at a point that we were like 350 and they had already grown to  almost 500 by the time that I joined, like in between when I signed my offer letter.  And now we're over 1000 as you said. So it's been amazing to see how quickly the offices  
**[0:02:51-0:02:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:02:51):**  have expanded in Boston and in Memphis where really the biggest growth is happening. But  now more and more here in Australia as well as South America, we just opened an office  in Europe as well. So we have some folks based in Switzerland now too. So how many of you  in the audience could say you know what Indigo does? Five, six. Okay, good. So let's...  Glad to see Bill's hand up. I really appreciate it. It's great to have Bill in the audience.  
**[0:03:14-0:03:18](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:03:14):**  Bill runs the Australian operations for Indigo. So maybe some questions will get thrown to  him later just as a heads up. So tell us what Indigo does. And I think that is probably  a temporal story. You might have to start out with what you guys started doing and maybe  where you're up to now. Sure. So our mission is to help farmers harness nature to sustainably  feed the planet. So we started as a company based in Boston, the home of many biotech  
**[0:03:39-0:03:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:03:39):**  companies around the world with a simple insight that was inside of every human there is a  microbiome inside of your gut that helps you deal with the stresses that you come under  every day. And we've known now for the past decade or so that modifying that microbiome  and tuning it in the right ways can help improve human health drastically. The same thing is  true of plants. So a plant has a series of microbes inside of it as well as the microbes  
**[0:04:04-0:04:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:04:04):**  in the soil, but microbes that help it deal with stresses. And so when you go into fields  that have experienced significant stresses, you'll often find that some plants will endure  while others die. And that can be because of the microbial composition, the community  that's inside of those plants. And so Indigo set out on a mission about five years ago  to try to explore those microbial populations and see if we could essentially put the good  
**[0:04:28-0:04:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:04:28):**  microbes into plants that didn't have them and help a whole population advance so that  you could reduce chemistry and other inputs and maximize grower profits in the same way.  So we started as a company in that direction. We realized as we started selling a microbially  treated seed product to growers that it's hard to transition from the seeds that you  buy as a grower today. And also the opportunity for differentiating your product and then  
**[0:04:54-0:04:59](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:04:54):**  selling it into the market is extremely unique. And if you can do that in the right way, you  can truly shift the profitability of the grower quite drastically. And you might actually  be able to start to decommoditize some of these large commodity grain and fiber industries  that exist around the world today where if a grower uses 20 percent less nitrogen in  their operation, today there's no way for them to get any more credit from that other  
**[0:05:20-0:05:24](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:05:20):**  than it might reduce their input costs. But if a consumer could be extremely interested  in that or a buyer of wheat might be very interested in the protein content of grain,  that they have very little opportunity to directly interact with the provider of that  grain. And so as we started exploring these areas, we realized that there was a huge opportunity  on the crop marketing side, not just the production side, but in helping growers deliver these  
**[0:05:44-0:05:48](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:05:44):**  commodity grains directly to people who cared about the way that they grew them. So Indigo  has expanded to try to help with crop production, help with agronomy in the field, and then  help growers market their grain in new ways.  And you guys are also involved in the ag tech space now and with the Terraton Initiative,  so I want to talk about both of those. But I guess before I do, I want to talk a little  
**[0:06:05-0:06:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:06:05):**  bit about Australia and what you guys are doing here in that microbe space. And one  of the things we were chatting about before is that Indigo has kind of been doing a few  things in Australia with, I would say, mixed results perhaps. And one of the insights is  maybe that some of the microbes in the U.S. that have worked there don't work here and  that it's quite a different environment here. So I would love for you to tell the Australian  
**[0:06:26-0:06:31](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:06:26):**  audience kind of what's happening here, what has happened, and what are your kind of activities  in Australia?  Microbes are a challenging product for many reasons. If you think about the core opportunities  that we went after as a company as we started to develop microbes, they were for things  like drought-stressed regions, nutrient-deficient regions, and so on. But you can imagine there  
**[0:06:46-0:06:51](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:06:46):**  are a ton of environmental factors that influence the performance of a plant and the performance  of a microbe in that environment. And so we perform research all over the world and try  to select the best microbes and pair them with the best soils and help them succeed  in those environments. Sometimes it works really well, other times it's more challenging,  but that's one of the reasons we continue to develop new products as we go.  
**[0:07:09-0:07:13](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:07:09):**  I think the exciting thing about what we've seen in the U.S. and now as well in Australia  is that in addition to the 85,000 or so acres in Australia that we've planted of treated  seed, we're now beginning to roll out our marketplace and some of the other initiatives  that we have in the U.S. that essentially can support growers, whether they're using  our microbes or not, our in-field agronomy, some of the other digital tools and so on.  
**[0:07:31-0:07:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:07:31):**  So as the company's mission continues to grow, getting these technologies and opportunities  to international markets always has a little bit of a delay, of course. And the company's  changing so fast right now that we're seeing unique opportunities pop up all over the place.  But I'm really excited to be here for the first time and kind of see how the work we're  doing in Australia is continuing to advance.  
**[0:07:50-0:07:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:07:50):**  Yeah, I should mention that Dan literally flew in this morning and landed at 7 a.m.  So we need to give him at least three more beers and see if he stays awake.  No idea what time it is.  It is exciting to see you guys here. I mean, we use Indigo often as an example of a company  that embraces, at least from the outside, a lot of the principles of startups around  
**[0:08:09-0:08:13](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:08:09):**  changing business models rapidly, depending on kind of what's working and what's not and  what the market needs. And so being able to really pivot in a way that a big company wouldn't  be able to do. From your perspective on the inside, how much of that has been kind of  the stages of the strategy that was laid out from the beginning versus a let's just figure  it out and see what's working and try all the things?  
**[0:08:29-0:08:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:08:29):**  I think it's certainly a bit of both. I mean, our founder and our CEO are both incredibly  ambitious people who see a future that many of us also still don't see in the same way  that they do. But as the company has expanded and realized new opportunities, every time  we uncover something, we also find that there's just huge opportunity on the other side of  it. So when we launched Marketplace, one of the things that we didn't realize was that  
**[0:08:54-0:08:59](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:08:54):**  in order for growers to be able to market their grain to a unique buyer, it meant that  you had to be able to help them store that grain. They had to be able to hold it to the  right point in the year when the buyer could accept it. A lot of growers don't have storage  capabilities right now on their farms. And so we actually set up a whole business around  on-farm storage to try to figure out ways to provide storage to growers that didn't  
**[0:09:17-0:09:23](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:09:17):**  have it. If you can sell your grain two months later, there are huge opportunities for financial  gains. Similarly, we developed a trucking and logistics business because for the same  reason. We realized there were huge inefficiencies as we started getting into Marketplace around  the actual physical delivery of grain between the buyer and the seller. So those are two  examples of things where I don't think we realized that those were such opportunities  
**[0:09:41-0:09:47](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:09:41):**  until we got into the business of marketing grain. But many of them I think we're realizing  how synergistic these components are. And that's true of some of our new work in carbon  and other areas as well.  Yeah, so I want to jump to that and I'm actually not entirely sure how separate or similar  it is with the kind of digital work with Telus Labs and with the kind of ag tech digital  
**[0:10:03-0:10:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:10:03):**  space, robotics, etc. that you're doing. So tell us a little bit about your work there.  And there's some opportunities I think for Australian startups and companies to get involved  as well.  As a company, when I joined, we just recently stood up a part of the organization called  Indigo Research Partners. Indigo Research Partners is really set up as what we believe  
**[0:10:21-0:10:26](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:10:21):**  is the world's largest ag tech lab to be able to evaluate new technologies and deploy them  and rapidly scale those that work and those that don't. For a lot of ag tech startups,  it's really hard to prove the value of your technology to growers and to market proponents.  You know, if you have a technology that you think might reduce input requirements, like  say water, a new irrigation sensor by 20%, often you're stuck as a startup going kind  
**[0:10:47-0:10:52](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:10:47):**  of grower to grower, proving it to one and then proving it to the next. And so much time  is spent with each one of those folks. And the grower is your only kind of way to demonstrate  the value. But in the case of Indigo, with these research partner networks and the way  we are spread out around the world, we're helping to deploy those kinds of technologies  to evaluate their value proposition and then to rapidly scale the ones that work well.  
**[0:11:11-0:11:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:11:11):**  And so we've done that with a number of startup companies in in-field sensors. You mentioned  Telus Labs. We realized as we started to work with them that satellite technology and the  ability to evaluate yield and performance from space was going to be a game changer  for us as a company. So we looked at all the different companies that were out there and  that ultimately led to our acquisition of Telus Labs. But startups, they play a huge  
**[0:11:35-0:11:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:11:35):**  role in our interaction with the space and we're constantly trying to get more of them  into our pipeline.  Cool. So tell us about the Teratun initiative, which is a pretty big announcement that's  made some waves in agriculture. How many of you guys have heard of the Teratun initiative  before reading the description of the meetup? Okay, four or five. Okay, great. So give us  
**[0:11:54-0:11:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:11:54):**  the kind of the background in the 101.  The Teratun initiative is something that's been in the works for quite some time at the  company. We, since the beginning, had in our mission statement to try to think about how  we can help growers improve the sustainability of their practices. And we'd thought for most  of our time about that in terms of being able to reduce input requirements to reduce the  
**[0:12:13-0:12:19](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:12:13):**  water use of products and so on. We started to realize though that soil and the opportunity  in carbon specifically was massive, but that it required pretty significant change from  growers. So if you're a grower today and you modify your practices in certain ways, there  are ways for you to significantly reduce your emissions while also potentially increasing  the amount of carbon in the soil. And so Indigo's business has, I think, is really well set  
**[0:12:41-0:12:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:12:41):**  up to try to help provide that advice to growers for what practices to choose and how to optimize  their management strategies. And then also through the crop marketing side of the business  to try to help deliver more value to the grower by being able to market the grain that you  have as sustainably grown with specific metrics. So we started to explore what are the ways  that we could quantify those sustainability gains and then help pay growers. And over  
**[0:13:05-0:13:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:13:05):**  time that has now led to us realizing the opportunity in soil carbon and launching the  Terraton Initiative, which is a global effort to try to reduce and sequester a trillion  tons of carbon dioxide into agricultural soils. That is a massive number of tons. For those  that know a thing or two about carbon, all mankind emissions that exist in the atmosphere  today that have increased since the Industrial Revolution are about a trillion tons. So our  
**[0:13:32-0:13:38](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:13:32):**  mission here is to say, is there some way that we could actually take the 3.9 billion  acres of cropland around the globe and pull all of the CO2 that we have dumped into the  atmosphere out of the atmosphere? It has a number of amazing benefits for farmers. If  you are able to increase carbon content in your soil, you reduce the resiliency of your  crop. You reduce the ability for it to be affected by a number of different diseases  
**[0:13:59-0:14:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:13:59):**  and certainly drought, stress and so on. So we think that that kind of an ambitious goal  is obviously huge in its scale and it will require collaboration with a ton of different  participants around the world to do. It is going to require a deeper understanding of  how soil carbon increases, the kinds of management practices that farmers need to take on and  then also new markets that pay growers, rewarding them for increasing soil carbon. So one of  
**[0:14:25-0:14:29](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:14:25):**  the reasons I am here in Australia this trip is to go visit the Carbon Farming Conference  next week in Albury and learn how you all have been working on this for much longer  than we have. We think there is a lot to learn from what is going on around the world.  I want to ask, what has the response been like from growers because the talk around  carbon farming and around that consumers want this and the potential of farmers to farm  
**[0:14:47-0:14:49](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:14:47):**  regeneratively and more sustainably, that is something that has been talked about for  a while. But in many cases, it has not been practical or financially viable. So have you  guys kind of changed that conversation at all or how is that changing in terms of the  response of farmers and what it will actually mean in terms of their bottom line and their  farming practices? The interest from growers in the program that we are putting together  
**[0:15:07-0:15:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:15:07):**  has been immense. Since the time of the Terraton Initiative launch, which was about a month  ago, we have actually had over 3 million acres of growers try to sign up for this program,  which is more than all of the acres of treated seed that we have delivered across the globe  since the start of the company. So it is a pretty crazy number for us to think about  trying to help more acres than we have ever been on with these new initiatives. I think  
**[0:15:30-0:15:34](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:15:30):**  growers see this as an opportunity to gain additional revenue on top of what they have  already been doing. If we can make it low cost enough for them to participate and make  the reward large enough, then it should be a no-brainer for them as well as for the buyers  of these credits. So that is our hope. What is the kind of thinking around both the economic  viability in terms of sampling and that it has to be there over time and you have to  
**[0:15:53-0:15:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:15:53):**  prove that the carbon was sequestered and continues to be sequestered? What is the pathway  to actually be able to do that without spending more money than is economically feasible?  Tough questions. It is certainly the thing that has caused these markets to break down  in the past. It is one thing to say I planted a tree and as long as I don't cut down that  tree it will continue to grow carbon in its size and I can easily measure the diameter  
**[0:16:16-0:16:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:16:16):**  of the tree and know how much carbon is there. That is a very challenging thing to do in  a system that is changing so frequently like agriculture and recognizing as well that a  single year of bad weather could potentially wipe out gains from previous or that you could  be doing everything right and still not increasing your carbon content. We think there are a  lot of technologies that can help us assess what a viable acre looks like versus a nonviable  
**[0:16:42-0:16:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:16:42):**  acre. We think recommending the right kinds of practices to growers and really being along  the journey with them is a big driver here. And then we think making, just as you said,  making the cost of sampling low enough by trying to only sample exactly where you need  to and leveraging models in every point possible essentially to increase your ability to drive  costs down. So all those things we think Indigo is uniquely positioned to do but it's a big  
**[0:17:05-0:17:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:17:05):**  task ahead of us for sure and it's not something that anybody has really figured out I'd say.  Yeah definitely and hopefully we'll keep hearing reflections from you after you leave Australia.  I'd be curious what you learn here and is it kind of as far ahead as you thought it  might be and what have you learned. One of the last questions I have before I kind of  open it up to the audience is how you see the connection back to consumers and how important  
**[0:17:27-0:17:31](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:17:27):**  is that is this something that will be fully connected to consumers and pulled through  like an organic certification that is really that kind of belief system from consumers  pulling for and voting for the way they want the food system to be and or more of the kind  of carbon market financial instruments focus upstream in that space. Hopefully it's both.  I mean I would say if a grower is able to gain additional income from a market component  
**[0:17:52-0:17:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:17:52):**  here somebody paying them to put carbon into the ground and then they're also able to actually  sell a grain that's been produced more sustainably that the consumer is interested in buying.  The hope is that both of those sort of add up to produce a really viable opportunity  for growers. I think it totally changes the game for growers as well. I mean that if you  think about for ages growers have been thinking about optimizing around profitability those  
**[0:18:17-0:18:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:18:17):**  that those that can think about it but generally the proxy for that has been yield. So if I  can improve my yield by X percent then I have the best chance of being profitable in the  market and that works well when prices for crops are high of course. I think those that  are smarter often think about it more complex. You know what are my input costs and my production  levels how do I balance profitability in the right way. If you introduce carbon though  
**[0:18:42-0:18:47](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:18:42):**  to that equation and you say carbon has a price to it then a grower has this whole new  lever on which to kind of optimize their operation. It might actually be more viable for you to  have significantly lower yield, plant cover crops, do all kinds of other practices and  grow carbon as you're kind of growing a crop and think about those two in tandem which  I think is just a really interesting economic opportunity for a grower and one that hasn't  
**[0:19:07-0:19:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:19:07):**  been explored. It also means that all the cropping systems and genetics and breeds and  varieties of everything we've developed have all been optimized on yield. We've never thought  about well what if I increase plant root biomass by X amount and what would that do to the  genetic makeup. So there are so many interesting opportunities on that side as well. And that  part is so important that the metric has been yield and that other metrics like carbon or  
**[0:19:34-0:19:39](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:19:34):**  other financial incentives are absolutely critical to kind of change the system. My  last question and then I'll open it up to the audience is you guys have raised over  six hundred fifty million dollars and are arguably kind of one of the few ag tech startups  that has built their own channel and on a path to kind of not get acquired but perhaps  list or have them other different kind of exit than many of the other ag tech startups.  
**[0:19:57-0:20:03](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:19:57):**  What has the response been from incumbents? Is it kind of collaborative in any way? Are  you totally a threat? Are there kind of opportunities to partner? What's that dynamic like? I would  say we're the only company that's actually trying to kind of master every part of the  agricultural system from inputs all the way through marketing. So any of the large incumbents  that you talk to they have a siloed view of the world that is just their piece of it.  
**[0:20:23-0:20:29](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:20:23):**  So a Cargill, a Bungee and ADM right just crop marketing. So we might be disrupting  that part of their business and they might see us as a big threat but they don't think  of us as kind of a direct competitor in that sense. A buyer Monsanto or somebody on the  input side Syngenta they might see us as a threat but we actually we take our treated  seed product and put that treatment on top of their genetics so we're not developing  
**[0:20:51-0:20:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:20:51):**  our own or looking for kind of off market products or anything like that. So those are  pretty collaborative relationships from that perspective. I think because we're so wide  that nobody kind of sees that as a big threat so it's an interesting spot to sit in from  that perspective. Farmers Business Network may be one of the only other ones that is  also kind of trying to take a wider lens there but also just a very different business in  
**[0:21:12-0:21:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:21:12):**  its fundamentals. So we'll see how the carving side develops and see who starts jumping into  that space but at the moment it's been kind of a we're racing against ourselves to try  to see how quickly we can understand the whole system which is a nice spot to sit but it's  a binary experiment from my view. Either we're wildly successful or this is a great time.  I think we're going to be wildly successful but you know you never know. Awesome. Well  
**[0:21:37-0:21:41](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:21:37):**  I want to open it up to the audience. There's some pretty knowledgeable people that do work  deeply in the ag sector here so hopefully we'll get some good questions. Any questions?  Yeah sure we'll start here. In your business model do you purchase land or you just partner  with farmers? We don't currently purchase any land. We partner with farmers who either  rent or own their land depending upon the setup. I'd say we're starting to take a  
**[0:22:02-0:22:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:22:02):**  look at the role of institutional landowners more and more. For one reason in the carbon  markets for example the landowners ultimately are the ones that own the rights to the carbon  that is being grown on the land unlike a normal crop that a renter would own. So it's a really  interesting dynamic there and if a landowner can actually help incentivize the renters  of their land to increase their carbon in some way that could be a really big way for  
**[0:22:29-0:22:34](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:22:29):**  us to get into the market quickly. I don't see us becoming a landowner from that perspective  but we're starting to take a different view of ownership. Hi I'm Kristy. I've got a  two fold question. One is I just want to understand better how you actually microbally treat seeds.  Do you dip it or do you genetically modify it? And then let's say you're planting.  I want to understand the cycle time to identify success or failure. Like can you fail fast  
**[0:22:57-0:23:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:22:57):**  if you plant something in Australia and it's not right for these soils. What's that cadence  for data? Our seed treatment process right now is actually a coating. So we take a bare  seed essentially and tumble it with the microbial product. Often that happens before the crop  is being planted. It might sit on the shelf for some period of time before it goes into  planting. So different geographies we do a slightly different process to try to modify  
**[0:23:26-0:23:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:23:26):**  it to how growers receive their seed and so on. So in the US we centralize a lot of our  seed treatment and then distribute bagged treated seed product directly to the growers.  Here the seed treatment happens much more often at the farm itself. There's no genetic  modification in that process. So the grower can kind of bring whatever genetics package  they want to the table and then we'll put our treatment on top of that. And our treatment  
**[0:23:51-0:23:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:23:51):**  does not have any genetic modification in the microbes themselves so that everything  is sort of brewed organically from that perspective. The cycle for new product development can  be quite rapid for us. We do a lot of work in lab and then in greenhouse and then in  small plot trials and then in big field trials and then in commercial operations. So many  of these things can happen quite rapidly and iteratively. Of course the mother nature and  
**[0:24:21-0:24:29](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:24:21):**  her inherent cycle for a commercial product requires a sort of seasonal approach. And  because we're doing a lot of our seed treatments today on the seed before it goes into the  ground we don't come back and do another treatment. But there are of course opportunities to explore  that as well. You could think of microbes that are put on a foliar application sprayed  on the plant after it's been planted. So we're starting to explore those kinds of things  
**[0:24:48-0:24:53](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:24:48):**  as well because we think there could be many opportunities to target the microbe to the  event. At the beginning of the season you don't know if there's going to be an outbreak  of some disease or what the drought condition is going to be. So that opportunity to kind  of treat in the moment I think is a really interesting one.  Richard Heath. I run the Australian Farm Institute now but I used to be a farmer. So that was  
**[0:25:11-0:25:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:25:11):**  I want to expand on that because that was going to be my question. So when I was farming  we did everything we could to build active soils. But the biggest problem we had was  variability both temporally and spatially. So we'd have paddocks with three or four different  soil types. Every season's different in terms of how those soil types respond. So how quickly  can you respond with a product that addresses the microbial need of the crop for that particular  
**[0:25:42-0:25:44](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:25:42):**  moment in time in that particular part of a paddock?  David  Yeah that's a great question. I would say more and more we're starting to think about  things as systems. So I would say it's not it's actually not just the microbe but it's  it's everything else that you're doing. It's the management practices that you're implementing.  
**[0:25:59-0:26:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:25:59):**  So all of those things should ultimately be able to adapt as best they can to the individual  environment. Just as you said that a unique soil type a unique variety unique slope of  the field in a specific spot might ideally call for a different mix of microbes even  in some senses to optimize performance and try to decrease overall variability of yields.  So you know all of these things I think are our future potentials for a more digital site  
**[0:26:27-0:26:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:26:27):**  specific form of agriculture. And we certainly believe in that same future and I would say  that mission of trying to think about how you would optimize each product for the specific  site that it's in is certainly in our in our DNA. It requires a lot of other technologies  though to also advance. You know right now we have planting units that can modify planting  density or planting depth depending upon certain soil conditions. This kind of a future would  
**[0:26:51-0:26:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:26:51):**  require that to the kind of the next level. We would need to be able to sense exactly  what's happening at the individual spot and modify microbial mixtures sort of in real  time. So I think it's a it's certainly a direction that we'd like to go.  Hi I'm Harvey Gaynor. I'm interested Dan in your journey from sort of the mechanical area  or soft robotics through biology and into markets and services really. So I'd like to  
**[0:27:19-0:27:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:27:19):**  hear a bit about that journey that transition how it's been for you and then how you see  we we bring all of that together and is there any one of those areas that has most opportunity  or especially for leverage for the ag industry. I started in a very technical side technical  roles as well. I had a first startup that we tried to found that was more in line with  my initial training. I started realizing personally that I was much more interested in the intersection  
**[0:27:49-0:27:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:27:49):**  of science and business and trying to communicate kind of between the two communities and try  to help direct scientific development so that it could be impactful in a way that sometimes  it can't because of those communication barriers between sides. For me that that meant as we  started to develop this robotics business starting to realize what opportunities that  could bring to agriculture and trying to adapt our our technology to meet those needs. There  
**[0:28:13-0:28:18](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:28:13):**  are so many opportunities in agriculture for new technologies to be developed and deployed  and a lot of opportunities as well to leverage technologies that have already been deployed  in other sectors. For example some of these challenges in soil sampling for carbon markets  a ton of money and research that has been poured into the mining industry. I was speaking  to Slaw about this a little earlier tonight. You know being able to optimize the way that  
**[0:28:37-0:28:42](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:28:37):**  drill rigs work and sort of where they're pulling product out of the ground and the  hydrology and and geology of mapping soils underground and so on has happened in that  industry but yet we're still kind of in the dark ages from a the soil sampling industry  for agriculture still works the way it did 70 years ago it hasn't changed at all. So  I just feel like there are there are immense opportunities that we can attract scientists  
**[0:29:00-0:29:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:29:00):**  and technologists from other industries to come and help us solve problems with agriculture.  That's true across engineering disciplines it's true across financial disciplines and  economics and so on. So we're trying to find those folks and help propel that change ourselves.  One of the things we talk about here in Australia in the ag tech community a lot is the opportunity  for ag tech to attract a lot of new kinds of talent into agriculture and we haven't  
**[0:29:27-0:29:31](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:29:27):**  really had this scale here for that to play out to say oh there's this ag tech company  that has hundreds and hundreds of employees and they've come from all these different  disciplines. What's the indigo company like do you have mostly people not from agriculture  backgrounds is that kind of story playing out? Yeah it's nearly impossible to find an  agriculture person in Boston. So almost everyone is from some other industry before before  
**[0:29:51-0:29:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:29:51):**  they've joined the company. Memphis is a little bit of a different story I think that's one  of the reasons we opened a commercial office in Memphis is because we can we can attract  the right kind of talent there that helps us helps keep us grounded. I spoke to somebody  who was an early employee at Tesla once and they said that on the day that Tesla went  public this guy who had spent 20 years in the automotive industry looked around as all  
**[0:30:15-0:30:19](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:30:15):**  these young starry eyed kids were kind of jumping around saying we're going to build  cars and he realized no one here has ever built a car. None of these people have ever  seen an assembly line for a car. You can question whether Tesla is successful or not but they  have transformed the industry and done some really amazing things. You know I think there's  huge value in trying to again bring that talent from outside to reframe problems in a new  
**[0:30:40-0:30:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:30:40):**  way. I mean you know if you bring a data scientist who has never seen an agricultural field but  instead has looked at some completely different industry you bring them to agriculture they  just take a totally different lens on it. So we try to pair up backgrounds in different  industries. I mean in Boston we're dominated by there's a lot of consultants in Boston  we have a lot of those people. Gosh. Tough life they live but but they build really good  
**[0:31:05-0:31:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:31:05):**  slides so we leverage that a lot in our company. You know in the biotech industry obviously  is incredibly strong in Boston a lot of great talent coming out of schools no one's heard  of like Harvard and MIT. And then we're constantly thinking about how do you think about problems  in health care for example and the parallels those might have to the data challenges that  we have to solve in agriculture. How do you think about the scaling of technologies that  
**[0:31:30-0:31:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:31:30):**  has happened for internet companies and how could you bring that to agriculture. So I  think we really benefit from all those perspectives. Thank you. Diane Hockie and I'm actually a  farmer currently trialing some indigo crop on the Liverpool Plains and I'm so excited  by the initiative. I think it's the first time as a farmer we've had interaction with  a company that gives us an opportunity to actually end up with a better economic result  
**[0:32:03-0:32:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:32:03):**  at the other end and agriculture in Australia is desperate to try and get that better profitability  into our businesses. The drought's sort of knocking us about a bit but I just think there's  a wonderful future for indigo in Australia and I support you wholeheartedly and glad  to be on board. So thanks Dan for coming out. This last question was not a plug for indigo  a hag. She really was an audience member and we ended the night on this comment and positive  
**[0:32:31-0:32:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:32:31):**  note for the future. I hope you enjoyed the episode. Thanks again to Grow Love Project  for recording and producing it and to SproutX for sponsoring the meetup. Thank you for joining  us on another episode of Ag Tech So What. You can stay up to date with the latest episodes  and news at agtechsowhat.com and as always if you have any feedback or other guests to  recommend we'd love to hear from you. Just hop on the website and leave us a comment  
**[0:32:59-0:33:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=406370#t=0:32:59):**  or send us a message. Finally if you like what you're hearing and we hope you do please  share the podcast with a friend or leave us a review on iTunes or wherever you get your  podcasts. Thanks again for listening. Catch you next time.  