### Agtech - So What?  (2019-30-11)
**[0:00:00-0:00:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, and welcome to the Ag Tech So What podcast. Emerging technologies are rapidly  changing the global agricultural industry. We believe that this revolution is only getting  started, but there's still too much hype out there and too big of a disconnect between  ag and ag tech. So on this show, we try to bridge that gap. In each episode, we bring  you the story of a different innovator in agriculture and try to find the place where  
**[0:00:30-0:00:47](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:00:30):**  ag and tech meet. I'm your host, Sarah Nolet. Today's episode is the third in our series  on getting ag tech ready. This theme is produced in partnership with Decipher, a precision  agriculture solution that helps growers and agronomists make data-driven decisions. Today,  we're trying something a bit new on the podcast in terms of the episode format. We hope you  like it, and I'm sure you'll let us know if you don't. Today's guests are Jess and Matt  
**[0:01:09-0:01:15](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:01:09):**  Feeley, a family farming team that not too long ago were latte-sipping corporate executives.  But Jess and Matt have farming in their blood, and they've returned to farming after years  working in the corporate world. Jess says that, what did you call it? A midlife crisis.  I call it the farmer mutant gene. So we talk about the farmer mutant gene that kicks in,  you know, farming's in your blood, it's in your blood, and it kicks in somewhere around  
**[0:01:35-0:01:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:01:35):**  your mid-30s and draws you back to the farm. So yeah, we left a big smoke out, you know,  big high paying jobs and kids in schools and everything and decided to take off around  Australia in a camper trailer on our very long way home, back to far north Queensland  to try our hand at agriculture. For many people, getting ready for something new means having  a plan, being prepared, and knowing what to expect. And in farming, it often means drawing  
**[0:02:01-0:02:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:02:01):**  on years of experience and hard-earned intuition. But for Jess and Matt, being new to farming  and not knowing was actually a benefit. When we first got here, you know, we're brand new  to the farming gig. Nobody knows about the farm, nobody knows about us. It was a real  shock to us that we would just put our produce in a truck and send it off to the markets  and hope we got paid. For me, watching all my hard work, my blood, true blood, sweat  
**[0:02:29-0:02:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:02:29):**  and tears just being put in the back of a truck, sent away and not knowing what was  going to happen to it, how much money I was going to get for it, etc, etc, was really  foreign and alien for me. It was a bit of a pivotal moment in our first season, we did  quite a bit of contract packing for external growers. And there was quite a lot of reject  mangoes that didn't meet the supermarket spec. We just took a photo of what we then dubbed  
**[0:02:57-0:03:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:02:57):**  mango mountain, which is just this big pile of mangoes out the back of the farm. You know,  I guess probably being city consumers at that point, we didn't realise that that was just  what happens. So there was this moment we looked at that mango mountain and decided,  no, look, there's got to be a better way. Bringing new perspectives to farming can be  an advantage. For Jess and Matt, it meant that they were looking at everything with  
**[0:03:19-0:03:24](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:03:19):**  fresh eyes, and they weren't attached to a business as usual approach. So after our first  season, we really sat down and went, okay, we have to build some demand around our product.  But Jess and Matt, like many farmers were selling into wholesale markets, where building  demand is not easy. As Jess said earlier, when they started out, no one knew about the  farm. Their answer was to build a following on social media by focusing on what their  
**[0:03:46-0:03:52](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:03:46):**  customers wanted. And I think we were uniquely positioned to do that because we hadn't been  the cafe latte sipping consumer in the city. So we kind of knew what they wanted to see.  Having come from big corporate jobs in the city, you might think that they had a plan  and a strategy. But that wasn't the case.  I didn't write a communications plan. I didn't, you know, there was nothing formal in place.  
**[0:04:11-0:04:15](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:04:11):**  It was more, let's just have a, let's just have a go at this. Like, let's just see what  happens. You know, I think that's the value of a family farm and Matt having an iPhone  in his pocket that he could take a snap in the shed or take a snap out in the paddock  and post that. And it was, there was a real direct connection there that people could  relate to. And it was very organic and very genuine. Well, this morning we put a post  
**[0:04:34-0:04:37](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:04:34):**  out this morning about breakfast. We just cut up a couple of avocados, put it on a piece  of toast and you know, it's just us. Was it a bit uncomfortable at all? I'm imagining  like Jess, you being like, okay, we're going to do this social media thing and have a go.  And you're like, right, Matt, take a photo of this thing in the paddock today. Like,  is that a bit how it went? And Matt, were you like, no, I don't like, that's a bit weird.  
**[0:04:54-0:04:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:04:54):**  I don't want to do it. Like, was there any resistance or it was obvious that you would  just have a go? It certainly wasn't weird. I mean, I most definitely get the whip pulled  out on me every now and then because you know, I'm a bit busy, Sarah. I don't have time for  taking photos of stuff. But for me, I'd done a little bit of international business studies  at university and there was one particular thing that really resonated with me. His name  
**[0:05:16-0:05:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:05:16):**  escapes me at the moment, but it was a Japanese man who basically saved Toyota. Now the man  he's referring to is Taichi Ono, an engineer at Toyota who revolutionized supply chain  logistics in manufacturing. Traditionally, you would build a car and then push it out  into the marketplace and hope that someone buys it. What Taichi Ono did was to flip that  and build a car when the demand was there. This is known as pull production. And the  
**[0:05:43-0:05:48](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:05:43):**  same principle also applies to marketing of a product in agriculture. It's much better  to pull your audience to your product rather than push it onto them. And this is what Jess  and Matt saw as an opportunity.  The goal was for the consumer who was following us on Instagram to go into the shop and say,  hey, do you have blue sky produce avocados? And that shop owner goes, who the bloody hell  
**[0:06:07-0:06:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:06:07):**  is blue sky produce? But the shop owner goes into the markets and says to his agent, hey,  do you have blue sky produce avocados? And that marketing agent goes, well, who the bloody  hell is blue sky produce? So they start Googling who's blue sky produce. And then my phone  rings and say, hey, can I have some of your blue sky produce avocados? So we flipped it  around from us pushing our produce through the market to our consumer, our followers  
**[0:06:29-0:06:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:06:29):**  pulling it through the market. And that, that I think is what we did differently to many  others, particularly in the beginning.  Now of course, it's much harder than just hopping online and setting up an Instagram  account. It does take time to create content and build a following. Fortunately for Jess,  it could fit her schedule as she had just had a baby. And social media was something  
**[0:06:50-0:06:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:06:50):**  she was passionate about. That would be a meaningful contribution to the farm business.  The key to it is just being authentic and genuine and being consistent, but being realistic  about the fact that it does take time. And, you know, we do try to do a post a day, but  there will be days where we don't post and people kind of get that. It's just really  kind of share our story.  
**[0:07:19-0:07:23](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:07:19):**  So what is their story? A big part of it is that out of the box thinking. And that has  also led them to changes in their production system.  Not having the preconceived ideas of how it just should be done. When we started making  new blocks and planting new trees, etc, I just looked for, okay, how's the best way  this should be done without any of that latency, without any of that legacy kind of knowledge  
**[0:07:41-0:07:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:07:41):**  and just go, okay, well, clean slate, green, greenfield site. This is how it should be  done if you were to do it in 2015 rather than just doing it the way all the other blocks  were done and they were planted in the eighties. So implementing things like drip irrigation  for me was just, well, I did the research, I did the reading, I looked at the figures,  I did the sums and there's no way it wouldn't work. And probably being a little bit naive  
**[0:08:04-0:08:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:08:04):**  too, I would just start conversations with people and just say, hey, you know, how do  you do this? How do you do this really, really well? And I sort of found a grower nearby  that was implementing a lot of the things that I wanted to implement. So I just picked  up the phone and, you know, thankfully he was a very open and sharing young fellow,  same sort of age as us. Can we still call ourselves young? No. Okay. Maybe cut that  
**[0:08:30-0:08:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:08:30):**  one there, Sarah, because we're not that young. I think on a podcast you can, right? No one  does. Well, nobody can see all our wrinkles. So yeah, let's go with young. So look, he  was really great, Hank Van Niekerk, and he sort of really just opened his books for me  and just said, hey, look, this is how it works. This is, here's some of the pros, here's some  of the cons and yeah, it went from there. For Jess and Matt, talking to their neighbors  
**[0:08:53-0:08:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:08:53):**  and finding a trusted mentor was a great way to get some practical insights. But Matt has  also done his own research, which led him to successfully apply for a Nuffield Scholarship,  a program that took Matt around the world to learn from agricultural leaders in other  countries, including the US and the Middle East. And he's positive about the future of  ag tech. But when it comes to being ag tech ready, there are still some hurdles and some  
**[0:09:15-0:09:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:09:15):**  lessons to be learned from other countries. A lot of it comes from a need. And I often  say to people, look, change doesn't happen until it's, till it's needed. And say, for  example, with the Israelis, you know, they, they have fought wars and lost thousands and  thousands of young men and women to fight for water. They just cannot continue to use  200 liters an hour sprinklers under their trees. So they, by this, through necessity,  
**[0:09:44-0:09:51](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:09:44):**  had to invent the world's most water efficient irrigation systems. And because I've got such  small pockets of very good arable land in Israel, they also then had to become very  efficient at their land use. So high density plantings in Israel are just a common thing.  And all the years of research into root stocks and plant growth regulators and  trellising methods, this is just second nature to them, because they don't have a lot of really good  
**[0:10:14-0:10:19](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:10:14):**  land. For us in Australia, land's cheap, there's plenty of it, you know, waters, particularly here  in the tropics just comes every year in the wet season. So we become a little complacent in  Australia around those things, whereas other countries had a real need to become very,  very efficient. One challenge that Matt has seen is that until farmers have a real or perceived  need to innovate, there can be a reluctance to break out of their comfort zone and try new  
**[0:10:39-0:10:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:10:39):**  things. And that is especially true when it comes to digital products. Agriculture and farmers don't  open the gate or open the door to technologists as openly as they would perhaps say, you know,  fertiliser consultant. What's behind that hesitation? Trust. Matt boils this down to two  things. First, the fear of the unknown. And second, too many technologies that have been over promised  but under delivered in the past. But things are changing. Matt's key message for growers that  
**[0:11:11-0:11:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:11:11):**  want to get agtech ready is to keep it simple. So I think for growers, they need to be a little  more open minded, lean in a little bit and adopt low hanging fruit agtech solutions, rather than  thinking that tomorrow they have to implement this new wireless technology with sensors all over the  farm with this platform that's going to start driving automated tractors and start having  robots picking fruit, you know, just some automated irrigation systems and some farm  
**[0:11:40-0:11:47](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:11:40):**  management platforms that have really been fairly well proven over the years just start implementing  those first. The reason Matt says to keep it simple is that before ag can take on big changes,  individual farmers and industry groups need to tackle some fundamental challenges. The biggest  problem approaching high value intensity, intensified horticulture is labour and the supply  of labour. So a lot of people think, oh, robotic harvesters, great, let's get those in the paddocks as soon as possible.  
**[0:12:11-0:12:15](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:12:11):**  And as I said before, I think the technology is actually there. But there's a whole lot of things  that have to change before any robotic harvest is going to go out and pick the trees. And I think  that the changes that have to happen to facilitate that technology are actually sound business choices  today to address labour concerns. And Matt says that once farmers address these business fundamentals  around labour, bringing new technology on board will be a natural progression. And he has seen this  
**[0:12:40-0:12:44](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:12:40):**  firsthand in Israel. As it turns out, they did it all to try to reduce labour and increase  productivity for sound business choices, but it's actually put them in the most robot ready position  in the world. But they didn't do it for robots. They did it for sound business sense, high density,  low water, easier for humans to pick, turns out to be really, really easy for robots.  Now that Matt has finished his nut field, he's sharing his experiences, as well as debunking  
**[0:13:08-0:13:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:13:08):**  some myths. First question anybody ever asked me after finding out about my nut field is,  do you have a robot on your farm? Where's the robots? Can I buy one? No, you can't, because your  trees are planted on 12 metre by 10 metre centres and there's no robot in the world that's  going to be able to pick that. You have to go to high density, two dimensional tree structures,  which is really easy for humans to pick. And then it'll be actually ready for robots as well. And  
**[0:13:33-0:13:37](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:13:33):**  there are plenty of examples where other sectors of horticulture have gone on this journey,  and it has paid off financially. You just have to look at the apple and pear industry. And 40 years  ago, they are where we are today with most tropical tree crops. And just look at what they did now.  I mean, they were looking at two, three, maybe four tonnes to the hectare. Now they're at 40,  50, 60 tonnes to the hectare as an average. There's people achieving 120 tonnes of hectare in apples.  
**[0:13:58-0:14:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:13:58):**  Instead of having to go out and buy more land, which is getting more and more expensive every  day, and buy more water, more importantly, which is getting more and more expensive,  start making the land that you've got work harder, work better, work more productively.  So I say to people, well, where do you want to be in 40 years time? Do you still want to be getting  four tonnes to the hectare like apples were 40 years ago? Or do you want to be getting 120 tonnes  
**[0:14:21-0:14:26](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:14:21):**  to the hectare? And if the financial incentive doesn't move farmers into action, Matt suggests  another approach. Imagine your farm tomorrow in Australia without the Backpacker Working Holiday  Scheme. Imagine it tomorrow without the Seasonal Workplace Scheme. These are two government schemes  that basically provide our workforce. This is real, and it's a government decision that could  just be changed tomorrow, completely outside of your control, that will have massive effect on  
**[0:14:51-0:14:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:14:51):**  your business. So if we're leaving it up to government to make these massive decisions that  are going to affect our farm, control what you can control. When I speak to industry,  like Hort Innovation and these people, I say, we need to pour money into rootstock trials,  plant growth regulators, trellis trials, pruning techniques. That's what I tell industry, but  growers, I say, you know what, industry is not doing it yet. So get out there and do it yourself.  
**[0:15:18-0:15:23](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:15:18):**  Start a trial, work it out, see what works for you. When we think about being agtech ready,  Jess and Matt take a big picture view. It's not just about individual farmers, but also about how  regional communities can benefit. There's a real opportunity with agtech and rural communities,  I think, because naturally the technology required is going to be developed in regional areas. Farms  need the technology, so our towns are going to have to provide the supporting services.  
**[0:15:51-0:15:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:15:51):**  In the gold rush here is, you know, a lot of people made a lot of money digging up gold,  but I tell you what, there's a lot of people making money selling shovels and picks as well.  So it's not just about the gold rush. It's not just about the agtech. There's going to be gold  in the hills for the industry that will be born out of this. And what we get really passionate  about is the fact that it will be a rural based industry. There is opportunities for kids, bright  
**[0:16:17-0:16:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:16:17):**  kids to stay in agriculture, stay in rural communities, earn good money. And in this new  emerging industry, something that both of us agree on and are really passionate about.  Jess and Matt have become advocates in this space through their involvement with the Future Agro  Challenge Australia, a competition where agtech startups pitch to a panel and the winner goes on  to represent Australia at a global event. The passion that I have for that event is really about  
**[0:16:41-0:16:47](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:16:41):**  giving people in a rural community, for us it's here on the Tablelands, the opportunity to see  what's happening around Australia in the agtech space. So bringing kind of some of the leaders  up here to the Tablelands to pitch and demonstrate what they've been working on in agtech  and also have an event like that happen in a rural community. Often there's a little bit of disconnect  between ag and tech and I think sometimes people forget that the ag and agtech comes first.  
**[0:17:12-0:17:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:17:12):**  Thank you guys so much. I love hearing how positive an impact you've had. Like I love hearing  about you guys speaking at different things, starting events, starting new businesses, like the  kind of gift keeps on giving and I think that's so important and just commend you guys for  taking that on as well, including coming on the podcast. So thank you for that too.  No worries Sarah. Thank you.  
**[0:17:30-0:17:31](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:17:30):**  Thanks for having us Sarah.  Thank you for joining us on another episode of Ag Tech So What. You can stay up to date with the  latest episodes and news at agtechsowhat.com. And as always, if you have any feedback or other  guests to recommend, we'd love to hear from you. Just hop on the website and leave us a comment or  send us a message. Finally, if you like what you're hearing and we hope you do, please share  
**[0:17:56-0:18:00](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=382797#t=0:17:56):**  the podcast with a friend or leave us a review on iTunes or wherever you get your podcasts.  Thanks again for listening. Catch you next time.  