### Agtech - So What?  (2019-09-30)
**[0:00:00-0:00:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, and welcome to the Ag Tech So What podcast. Emerging technologies are rapidly  changing the global agricultural industry. We believe that this revolution is only getting  started, but there's still too much hype out there and too big of a disconnect between  ag and ag tech. So on this show, we try to bridge that gap. In each episode, we bring  you the story of a different innovator in agriculture and try to find the place where  
**[0:00:31-0:00:43](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:00:31):**  ag and tech meet. I'm your host, Sarah Nolette. Welcome back to the podcast. Today's episode  is our first on a new theme called Responding to Climate Risk, brought to you in partnership  with the Australian Farm Institute. We still have a few more episodes to go on our Getting  Ag Tech Ready theme in partnership with Decipher. So if you haven't checked those out, check  out our last two episodes with Tim Rethis and Maki Sutton, and stay tuned for a few  
**[0:01:02-0:01:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:01:02):**  more there as well as more on this theme, Responding to Climate Risk. Our guest today  is Annika Molesworth. Annika wears many hats. She's a researcher, speaker, writer, and farmer  in far western New South Wales. In our chat, we cover the realities and challenges of diversification  and Annika's experience with technologies and other practices that her family farm has  been using to respond to climate risk. We also talk about how Annika is using technology  
**[0:01:30-0:01:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:01:30):**  to share her message and her family's story, and maybe most importantly, provide advice  for the next generation and for consumers around agricultural advocacy and voting with  your dollar. So here's Annika in our first episode on the Responding to Climate Risk  theme brought to you in partnership with the Australian Farm Institute.  We're looking at how to recycle and revalue agricultural byproducts to improve soil fertility  
**[0:02:01-0:02:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:02:01):**  in irrigated cropping systems. So that means looking at animal manures, crop residues,  biochars, how that improves soil fertility, and then the yield and the quality of the  yield of crops like cotton and maize. And half of my study has been done in the Riverina  of New South Wales, and the other half of it has been done in Cambodia in Southeast  Asia. I am super excited to talk about the differences  
**[0:02:30-0:02:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:02:30):**  and similarities between those two places. But before I do, what caused you to become  passionate about this topic? And I guess maybe more importantly, what caused you to decide  to really take action in the ways that you have around climate and climate change? Was  there like a moment that happened where you said, I have to do something about this?  Yeah, actually there kind of was. So my family purchased our Outback Sheik station near Broken  
**[0:02:57-0:03:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:02:57):**  Hill in the year 2000. And the year 2000 was the start of the decade-long Millennium Drought.  So we had purchased this property, you know, this gorgeous, raw, stark landscape out in  far western New South Wales. We began designing what we were going to do out there, sort of  researching sheep in cattle markets, bush tucker foods, and then really encountered  10 years of little to no rainfall. So our introduction to agriculture was quite a steep  
**[0:03:28-0:03:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:03:28):**  learning curve, and it became very quickly apparent to us just how interconnected different  components of the farming system are. And as we all know, when the rain stops falling,  less vegetation grows, livestock are sold at reduced weight, crop yields are not achieved,  less money in the farmer's pocket means they search for off-farm employment. We see shops  and schools and rural towns close. And then for the consumers in urban environments, we  
**[0:03:55-0:04:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:03:55):**  see food prices go up and food quality go down. So that really made me so aware, okay,  we are in this really complex but interconnected web here. What we are doing on farm, you know,  in these remote parts of Australia, has impacts to all aspects of society. It impacts everyone  who eats food and wears clothes. So with this knowledge that this part of Australia was  become hotter and drier due to climate change, that we would experience more frequent and  
**[0:04:28-0:04:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:04:28):**  intense droughts and dust storms, I became, you know, very conscious, okay, well, how  am I going to upskill myself to take on my family farm and front up to these big challenges?  Wow, that must have been quite an experience for you and your family at that time. Had  you guys been on different farming properties before or was this a first foray into agriculture  wholesale and this all happened? Like what's a little bit of the backstory there?  
**[0:04:55-0:05:00](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:04:55):**  We came from Melbourne, so we were very much city slickers. My parents had backgrounds  in environment. So they, you know, always had this desire to buy a farm one day and  we would, you know, dabble in farming. And, you know, we ended up with 10,000 acres in  far western New South Wales, you know, in the semi arid heartland of Australia, which  is arguably some of the most challenging and fragile regions of the country. So we had  
**[0:05:23-0:05:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:05:23):**  to learn very quickly about our environment, about the impact we as farmers put, you know,  on that environment, what we ask of it, how we are going to look after it the best way  possible, how can we be the best land managers, understanding all the science, you know, doing  our homework, trying to learn as much as we can. So we were the best food producers possible  for that property.  
**[0:05:55-0:06:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:05:55):**  Wow. So what was that like? Like I think one of the things I read about you was that at  some point you guys decided to, you had to take action and actually do something different  on the station to presumably deal with the drought. Is that, was that driving the decision  to convert to organic and look at different genetics or did that decision come from somewhere  else?  
**[0:06:18-0:06:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:06:18):**  Yeah, so the drought opened our eyes and opened our mind to a variety of things. It highlighted  how fragile this region is and really made us look inside, you know, what can we do to,  you know, farm sustainably for the future. And so we did a few things really. We set  up conservation reserves where we had identified rare and threatened species on the property  because we want to make sure their protection and regeneration. So we fenced them off to  
**[0:06:54-0:07:00](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:06:54):**  prevent grazing. We, you know, it's a very water scarce environment out there in far  Western New South Wales. So we established dams and tried to improve our water security.  And then, yeah, we looked at what livestock species or varieties are suitable for that  region. And 10 years, sorry, 20 years ago when we purchased the property, many people  in the region were farming hereford cattle, marinos. And we were one of the first ones  
**[0:07:26-0:07:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:07:26):**  to adopt African sheep. So Damara sheep. And then we slowly converted into Dorper sheep.  So these African sheep, they come from a similar semi-arid environment. They're extremely drought  tolerant and hardy to high temperatures. They have a high birthing rate. So they were very  well suited. We were also harvesting rangeland goats, which are the wild goats, which just  wander around far Western New South Wales. The organic side of things, because far Western  
**[0:08:00-0:08:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:08:00):**  New South Wales is naturally hot and dry. There is very little pests and diseases out  there and worming problems and things like that. So we were organic by default, so to  speak. We weren't drenching or worming our livestock. So we decided we would make that  more official. We would go down the organics pathway, get our certification. At that point  when we did it, it's quite a timely and costly process. It took about three years for us  
**[0:08:32-0:08:38](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:08:32):**  to go through the auditing and all the procedures to get our certification. And then it was  also quite costly to actually maintain that certification. And because we are so remote,  we're actually not a terribly large property for that region. We weren't covering the expenses  of holding that organic certification. So we then ended up giving it up after a few  years. So although we still run on organic-based principles, we don't have the piece of paper  
**[0:09:03-0:09:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:09:03):**  saying we are officially organic. So you've traveled around the world. You mentioned your  PhD before and work in Southeast Asia. Tell me a little bit about the lessons maybe or  insights you're seeing for farmers in the Riverino or in Australia more broadly from  farmers in Southeast Asia or vice versa. Are there things that one side can learn from  another, whether that's practices or technologies or what may have you?  
**[0:09:31-0:09:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:09:31):**  Incredibly interesting. I mean, many of these farmers that I was working with, they had  had no formal education and no formal education in climate change definitely, but they absolutely  knew their environment and their land so well that they could describe to me the number  of days that the dry season is extending each year. They could describe to me the insects  that they're seeing eating their crops, which they had never seen before. So they knew so  
**[0:09:59-0:10:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:09:59):**  acutely how their environment and their world was changing. And they were so eager to learn  how to deal with this. And how, like, I imagine you'd characterize  the farmers in the Riverino quite differently for a number of obvious reasons, but in terms  of awareness of climate, do you find the same kinds of things?  Look, I think because any farmer works and lives so closely with the environment, they  
**[0:10:27-0:10:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:10:27):**  are the first to feel the changes in their land, in their vegetation, in water availability.  So I think it's undeniable that farmers right across Australia and the world are feeling  the impacts of a changing climate, whether someone to attribute that to human induced  climate change or not is a different matter. But definitely in Australia over the last  decade, the conversation has absolutely changed and changed for the better. We're not seeing  
**[0:11:00-0:11:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:11:00):**  in the media the words like belief and debate anymore. It's very much about what strategies  we need to be putting in place now. We need to ensure that there's national agricultural  adaptation strategies put in place today. We're talking about climate and energy policies.  And that's the conversations we absolutely need to be having.  In a couple of your talks and things, you talk about fragmentation. And is that what  
**[0:11:26-0:11:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:11:26):**  you mean the kind of polarized conversation? Probably more broadly is when I've been talking  about fragmentation. It's more that, say in Australia, and a global trend also, but in  Australia, you know, a huge percent of our population are an urban dwelling population.  Farmers make up only 1% of Australia's population, yet we provide 93% of the food consumed here.  But when we've got a largely urban population who are becoming further disconnected from  
**[0:11:57-0:12:03](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:11:57):**  the people who grow their food and their fiber, they become further disconnected from the  challenges that the farmers face also. Recently, I was in Sydney giving a presentation and  someone, you know, a well-meaning person apologized to me for the rain that we were having in  Sydney. And it sort of took me by surprise a bit because we're in the middle of a terrible  drought in rural Australia. You know, we haven't had decent rain for years and years and we're  
**[0:12:28-0:12:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:12:28):**  absolutely feeling those impacts on my family's farm at the moment. But it just highlighted  how disconnected people have become from our natural environment. And also that larger  understanding of, okay, when the rain doesn't fall, that actually impacts the food that  you're going to eat at the end of the day and, you know, everyone who plays a role across  that entire food system.  
**[0:12:55-0:13:01](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:12:55):**  Definitely. Got it. Okay. That makes sense. And so obviously there are, I guess, two angles  here around technology. One being how do we overcome that fragmentation through technology?  And that's a lot of the work that you're doing through videos and speaking and having influence  despite living in a remote place and using technology. So I want to come back to that.  But the other angle would be actual technologies that farmers can adopt to help be more climate  
**[0:13:22-0:13:28](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:13:22):**  resilient and farm sustainably despite the changing climate. Can you talk a little bit  about any ag tech innovations that have maybe sparked your interest in relation to managing  the impacts of climate change?  Yeah, well, I'll touch on the first point you made first in terms of like communicating  the story of what's happening. And yeah, you're very right in saying that's something that  
**[0:13:44-0:13:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:13:44):**  I've become very interested in how to actually, you know, bridge that urban rural divide and  actually reconnect people to the food systems and the people who grow their food. And that's  something I've been doing online on social media platforms, you know, recording videos  of myself posting articles, writing blogs and trying to engage people because the farming  sector has such such an incredible, beautiful story to share. We live in these fantastic  
**[0:14:15-0:14:24](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:14:15):**  landscapes. We live with such such a rich community sometimes. You know, there's this  this wonderful story that we as farmers can actually tell people, you know, tell them  about how important this soil is and all these incredible microbes and fungi and bacteria  that lives in this soil and how that helps our plants grow and turn, you know, nutrients  into nutrients that people can consume. And then, you know, relate that to the wider,  
**[0:14:48-0:14:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:14:48):**  the larger picture of, you know, the importance of rainfall and flowing rivers and looking  after those river systems. So that's something I've been working with, you know, both by  myself individually, through my platform, Climate Wise Agriculture, and through other  groups like the Young Farming Champions and Farmers for Climate Action, really trying  to amplify the voice of farmers in rural Australia and get these messages in the press. So in  
**[0:15:15-0:15:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:15:15):**  regards to communication technology, I think that's one really exciting place at the moment  and something that's just opening up rural Australia to everyone else.  Yeah. Before you go on to the more kind of on farm tech point, I do want to discuss this  a little bit. So I guess one, like the work you're doing is truly amazing and I totally  agree with everything you've said. One potential, I guess, push back around that could be, that's  
**[0:15:39-0:15:44](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:15:39):**  a lot of work. Like if I'm a farmer and I'm busy farming, I don't also want to have to  get on social media and tell these stories. Like, so what would your response to something  like that be around the kind of, that's a lot of work and why would I have to do that?  And is that something that you think farmers really should be taking on in addition to  producing food? Yeah. Look, I think the farmers, I know they  
**[0:16:03-0:16:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:16:03):**  take, they have such pride for what they do and such love for their landscapes and the  food they produce to high quality. When I meet a farmer and ask them about, oh, how's  the crop growing? And I get a 30 minute response to that. Farmers really do love talking about  their animals, their crops, the rain, the weather and all of this. So I think the farmers  naturally have that great story telling ability and that desire to share with people what  
**[0:16:41-0:16:48](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:16:41):**  they do and why they're doing it. And I think now actually making sure farmers have the  skills to access these platforms and tell that story, not just over the fence to the  neighbor, but actually to a wider audience, to an audience that really wants to hear about  where their food comes from. I think that's really exciting.  What kinds of ideas or technologies have you seen or innovations more broadly that are  
**[0:17:12-0:17:15](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:17:12):**  helping farmers to manage climate risk or adapt to climate change on farm? Ones that  you've mentioned are kind of energy technologies. Are there others or do you want to dig in  more to that that you would say, this is really going to be part of the solution?  Yeah. Okay. Well, on my family's farm, so in regards to climate change adaptation and  mitigation of emissions. So in terms of adaptation, like I mentioned, we observe some rare and  
**[0:17:39-0:17:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:17:39):**  threatened species. So we set up conservation reserves. So these conservation reserves are  around some Eucalyptus scilii, which is curly leaf mallee. Now these trees have been dated  to be around 800 to 900 years old on our property. And we noticed that there's no new seedlings  of these trees. And that really raised concern for us. What has changed in our environment  so drastically that these trees that have lived for nearly a thousand years old are  
**[0:18:08-0:18:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:18:08):**  bringing on no new generation? So we're working hard at actually protecting these species,  raising awareness of these species that are incredibly vulnerable because we don't want  to lose biodiversity. So that's something we're doing. We've established renewable energy,  solar panels on our homestead roof. So we're using green energy to pump water to distant  troughs to sheep in the paddocks, to use solar energy to run our houses and all our electricity.  
**[0:18:46-0:18:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:18:46):**  What else were we doing? Yeah, the genetics of the African sheep. We've also partnered  with universities because we're very interested in learning from scientists as much as we  can about our property, our soils, our water, our vegetation, so we can best manage it.  So the university is doing a series of climate change studies on our farm, which is incredibly  interesting. Yeah, one thing that strikes me is that some of those technologies and  
**[0:19:19-0:19:24](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:19:19):**  innovations sound like they could cost money and probably do cost money. And you've said  before that technology, it's not about technology, it's not about money, it's not about knowledge,  it's more about policy. Do you maybe talk a little bit about how you see us enabling  everyone to adopt some of these practices and technologies? Because I imagine for some  it's cost prohibitive or the kind of worse before better dynamic is just too strong.  
**[0:19:45-0:19:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:19:45):**  Yeah, well focusing on say renewable energy as an example. Farmers are very positive about  renewable energies and being a part of the solution here because Australia, it is the  sunniest and one of the windiest continents on earth. There is just so much potential  for renewable energies to be powering our businesses and also providing farmers with  secondary and stable sources of income if they are the ones to host solar plants and  
**[0:20:18-0:20:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:20:18):**  wind turbines. Farmers have these great expanses of land. Let them not only feed and clothe  the world but help power it as well. So I think that's a really exciting place that  we can be looking in agriculture and looking at ways to make sure that there are really  good policies and regulations and strategies in place to allow farmers to play a part in  the solutions to help with this new green energy production.  
**[0:20:51-0:20:58](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:20:51):**  Do you give a lot of weight to the opportunity for premium brands and differentiating whether  it's Brand Australia or actual brands, clean green, growing middle class in Asia, etc.  Do you see that as part of the solution to climate resilience either from a financial  standpoint or practices that differentiate and how do you see that playing out?  Yeah, absolutely. That could play a really important role. I mean Aussie farmers are  
**[0:21:17-0:21:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:21:17):**  some of the best farmers in the world in the ways that we do produce food and fibre and  something that Australian farmers are incredibly proud of. Having some sort of labelling system  or some sort of system that actually says this is what we're doing in terms of energy  and water use and all of that to actually put a stamp of this is how clean and green  we actually are. That could be a really good marketing point and really encourage people  
**[0:21:51-0:21:59](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:21:51):**  to step up and really produce high environmental standard food and fibres.  So I wanted to just jump all the way back to the work in Asia versus the work in the  Riverina. Why those two places and are you looking at different policies or technologies  or practices that you can compare across them or how do those two things fit together?  What I'm looking at with my PhD is how to recycle and revalue agricultural byproducts.  
**[0:22:23-0:22:31](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:22:23):**  So in Southeast Asia, these smallholder farmers, they usually grow rice in the wet season for  six months of the year when there's lots of rainfall and then they've got the dry season  where they get very little rainfall and they struggle to grow their dry season crops, be  that maize or peanuts or things like that. And they often have a few livestock in the  field as well. And what these smallholder farmers do particularly well is to recycle  
**[0:22:55-0:23:01](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:22:55):**  those livestock manures, put that into the soil to improve the crop growth, those crop  residues after harvest are then fed back to the livestock as feed. So it's very cyclical.  There's very little wasted of nutrients and resources. In the Australian system where  we have become much larger scale, we've moved away from that traditional farming practice  of using agricultural byproducts. We've moved away from using animal manures and crop residues  
**[0:23:30-0:23:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:23:30):**  as organic fertilizers and soil amendments. But because synthetic or inorganic fertilizers  are becoming increasingly expensive, because more research is revealing some of the problems  they cause, when there's too much nutrients added to the soil and that's being lost into  waterways and things like that, there's a lot of interest in returning to those organic  amendments. Take it for the Riverina, poultry production is very large and also cotton production  
**[0:24:07-0:24:13](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:24:07):**  is very large. So my research was looking at if we collected the manure from the poultry  sheds and applied that to the cotton fields, do we get just as good yield and quality of  fiber from the cotton if we were to use inorganic fertilizers. And the research so far is showing  that it's pretty comparable that when these nutrients are applied at the same rate, that  we are getting just as good yields and quality of crop when we are using those organic manure  
**[0:24:45-0:24:51](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:24:45):**  fertilizers. You challenge everyone to take responsibility and you do that in a lot of  ways both explicitly in things like your TED talk, but also in the work you do more implicitly  in the responsibility that you take. Two angles there just quickly before we wrap up, what  do you think the role of farmers are in taking responsibility and what's the role of consumers?  And I guess I mean quite specifically, so yes, voting with your dollar makes sense,  
**[0:25:14-0:25:19](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:25:14):**  but what does that actually look like for consumers and what do farmers need to be doing  to take responsibility as well? And yeah, how do you see that?  Yeah, so look, my belief is that we're all responsible for our common home, for this  planet. We all have an impact upon it. We are all accountable for our actions and we  don't get anywhere by pointing our fingers to someone else or another group and saying,  
**[0:25:40-0:25:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:25:40):**  you know, you guys are causing the problem, you guys have to fix it. I think that we all  need to step up, we all need to, you know, channel our inner leader and go, okay, well,  how am I going to make a difference? Maybe I can't change the world, but maybe I can  change my world. And so that's when I ask people to find ways to help drive positive  change, because the enormity of the problems we are facing, the scale of the changes we  
**[0:26:10-0:26:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:26:10):**  are seeing, and by that I'm referring to, we have a rapidly growing global population,  we need to be producing more food with reduced environmental footprint on the backdrop of  social change and climate change. How does each and every one of us step up to the plate?  And three ways I think people can do that is by using, you know, your consumer influence,  your political influence and your social influence. So by using your consumer influence, we drive  
**[0:26:42-0:26:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:26:42):**  markets and when we demand products with high environmental, social, ethical standards,  then the producers, the suppliers of those goods and services, they have to step up or  they get left behind. So I encourage people to, you know, put their money towards goods  and services that are doing right by the planet. When I refer to using your political influence,  it's about being informed where politicians and parties stand on environmental issues,  
**[0:27:15-0:27:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:27:15):**  but also asking them that, you know, we need strong and ambitious climate and energy and  environmental policies. You know, no matter what the party, these issues are not political  footballs. So we demand better. And then lastly, using your social influence, that's about  amplifying your voice. It's about talking to people, getting these issues on people's  radar, working with groups, you know, making a difference on the ground. And there are  
**[0:27:46-0:27:52](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:27:46):**  just so many ways as we spoke about earlier, that you can amplify your own voice by using  the social media channels, by writing blogs, by talking on the radio, by doing podcasts  like this, by getting the messages out there, both the challenges that we are experiencing,  but more importantly, the solutions that are out there.  Love it. One, I guess, clarification question, and I promised I wouldn't ask another, but  
**[0:28:12-0:28:19](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:28:12):**  I've lied. There's lots of confusion out there about labels and a lot of people and brands  trying to market that they're, you know, environmentally friendly or we only have this many pens per  hectare or whatever. And I think it's really hard even for people who want to make good  choices to distinguish. Do you have any thoughts on that or any advice?  Yeah, it is challenging. I totally agree. You go to the supermarket and you're bombarded  
**[0:28:40-0:28:44](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:28:40):**  with all these labels and decisions and you just want to get out of the aisle at the end  of the day. So look, there's a lot of resources online these days. I mean, we are so lucky  that we're living in a time where we can access so much information. You know, obviously there's  got to a point where there's probably too much information and you just feel overwhelmed.  But if you can sit down and sort of inform yourself of where brands, where organizations  
**[0:29:08-0:29:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:29:08):**  stand in their social, environmental responsibility and try and make well-informed decisions where  you can, then that's the best way. Fair enough. Yes, we got to do our homework  and hopefully we can make those decisions easier and make the, like we said before,  the practices that are worth rewarding more easily rewardable in various ways, technology  or otherwise. Well, Annika, thank you so much for joining me on the podcast. I really appreciate  
**[0:29:37-0:29:41](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:29:37):**  you sharing your insights and taking your time out of what is, I'm sure, a very busy  schedule. No problems at all. Thank you so much for  having me on. Thank you for joining us on another episode  of Ag Tech So What. You can stay up to date with the latest episodes and news at agtechsowhat.com.  And as always, if you have any feedback or other guests to recommend, we'd love to hear  
**[0:30:11-0:30:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=378116#t=0:30:11):**  from you. Just hop on the website and leave us a comment or send us a message. Finally,  if you like what you're hearing and we hope you do, please share the podcast with a friend  or leave us a review on iTunes or wherever you get your podcasts. Thanks again for listening.  Catch you next time.  