### Agtech - So What?  (2018-15-23)
**[0:00:00-0:00:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:00:00):**  Hi everyone, you're listening to BushTech, an agtech podcast that gets to the so what  of agtech.  We'll bring you interesting things from interesting people and I'm one of your co-hosts,  Simon Mathewson.  And I'm your other co-host, Sarah Nolette.  
**[0:00:14-0:00:19](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:00:14):**  On this podcast we will bring in leading speakers in technology, entrepreneurship, investment,  agriculture, science and anything else you can think of and we can find in the world  of agtech.  We'll look to demystify it so that we're getting to the so what.  What does it really mean for farmers and for the broader agricultural industry?  
**[0:00:32-0:00:38](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:00:32):**  I'm farming and I grow it.  I'm farming and I grow it.  Well Kevin Huyckes, welcome to the BushTech podcast.  Thanks so much for joining us.  No, Sarah, it's a pleasure.  
**[0:00:48-0:00:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:00:48):**  I've been following you on Twitter and we've had a couple of conversations and I'm excited.  I am as well.  I love following you on Twitter actually and in preparing to talk to you today, I totally  got sucked into your blog.  So I definitely want to talk to you a little bit about your personal journey as well and  
**[0:01:07-0:01:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:01:07):**  some of the writing and reflecting you've been doing.  So hopefully that's okay but maybe we'll start a little bit with your professional background  and what you're up to in the agtech world.  I think when you look at the background that I have, so many people in the agtech space,  it's like we've grown up in the ag world and so I grew up on a cattle operation in Southern  
**[0:01:32-0:01:37](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:01:32):**  Colorado and when I came up, the internet was just becoming a thing.  So to put things in perspective, I just turned 40 and I sent my first email when I was a  senior in high school and really didn't comprehend the internet until I really got to college.  So I consider myself a young person but the internet and technology has changed so dramatically  over the last 18 years.  
**[0:01:55-0:01:58](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:01:55):**  So I think that's kind of the first perspective but my background is simple.  I grew up in a cattle operation, always loved agriculture but the operation was not big  enough to go back to.  So from the time that I went to college, I was looking for a way to bridge my passion  of agriculture and then I got my first computer when I was in the sixth grade and I said this  
**[0:02:15-0:02:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:02:15):**  is really cool stuff.  So I liked ag and I liked technology and a lot of times people either like one or the  other so I just kind of found this niche and that's how the career started.  That's a fantastic story and I guess it's probably still true.  I don't know if you would disagree that there are still not that many people who kind of  
**[0:02:33-0:02:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:02:33):**  have one foot firmly planted in both of those worlds.  Like it's increasingly a space where people have a tech background and an ag background  and are bringing that together but it's still not a super common journey I would say.  What's your experience been?  I think that's right.  
**[0:02:50-0:02:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:02:50):**  The term that I would use is like there's art and there's science and what happens,  my dad for example doesn't use a lot of technology so he'll go walk to the fields every single  day and he'll step back and say I don't necessarily see the value in a lot of this technology  because I'm out in the fields and there is value in that.  And then I have a lot of friends in Silicon Valley, I was at Commodity Classic last week  
**[0:03:12-0:03:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:03:12):**  and talked to a lot of my tech friends and some of the stuff that they're doing is really,  really cool and amazing.  And the reality is that when you blend the art and the science, if you take the art of  my dad walking in the field and the science of what the technology can do and you blend  those together, to me that's where we find success and that's what our company and that's  
**[0:03:34-0:03:38](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:03:34):**  what has been my passion and vision for my career is just trying to bring both of those  together.  I think that's what we have to do more of because the art, the person that's walking  just the field not using technology, I don't think they're 100% right.  And if you're designing an application and you're sitting in a conference room on a 4G  
**[0:03:53-0:03:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:03:53):**  network and an air-conditioned office, you're probably not grasping what's going out in  the field.  So I think we got to bring both of those together and that's the world that I kind of live in.  Yeah, I think that's so right.  So maybe, I mean, you have a bachelor's in Ag from Colorado State and a master's in agribusiness  
**[0:04:09-0:04:13](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:04:09):**  and really have been in this world a long time in multiple ag tech companies.  So I want to get to intent into farm trials, but just maybe briefly on your background,  having been in the ag tech world, really this intersection of the art and science for many  years now, how have you seen the space changing and evolving now that there's so much focus  on ag tech in places like Silicon Valley and outside of agriculture, more in the tech world?  
**[0:04:36-0:04:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:04:36):**  Yeah, I'll give kind of three different realms.  So my first venture into ag tech began with a company called Vantage Point.  Have you ever heard of Vantage Point?  No, I haven't.  Okay.  
**[0:04:48-0:04:52](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:04:48):**  Late nineties, it was John Deere Farmland and Growmark.  And when I was in college, this company was stood up and I was like, this is the coolest  thing ever.  And we were talking about data warehousing and information and how farmers could do things  better and really was being able to visualize commodity prices and being able to kind of  
**[0:05:06-0:05:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:05:06):**  visualize things through the internet.  Imagine a time when you're talking about the things that we're doing today, but at that  point in time, there was no smartphones, there was no high speed internet.  We would go into meetings, Sarah, and the biggest thing, we had these PowerPoints, right?  And the idea was if we could go into a meeting and the PowerPoints had so many graphics,  
**[0:05:28-0:05:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:05:28):**  which are screen captures from the web, if PowerPoint didn't crash, we'd consider it  a successful meeting.  And then it ventured into, man, if we get internet connections.  And now it's like, Hey, if I can do a live video conference, that's success.  So that's where this started.  
**[0:05:45-0:05:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:05:45):**  And what's interesting is that to me, it feels like we're just now starting to execute on  some of those ideas that we dreamed up 20 years ago, that the industry dreamed up.  So I think in some ways it is going a lot faster, but in some ways the industry does  take a while to adopt.  And the reason that we say that is because we get one chance a year to do something.  
**[0:06:06-0:06:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:06:06):**  So when you look at kind of my background and experience, it starts there at vantage  point.  And then the second phase was the dot com days.  And so when I came through the dot com phase, you know, you couldn't, there were, there  were amazing job opportunities and we were flying around on private planes and companies  
**[0:06:22-0:06:24](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:06:22):**  were talking about going public.  And there was this internet and this dot com revolution that happened.  Well, what that drove, it drove innovation and it drove a lot of the ideas trading grain  online.  It drove the ability to buy inputs.  
**[0:06:36-0:06:41](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:06:36):**  All of those initiatives and ideas started then, but a lot of those companies either  didn't make it or they evolved.  So I think that dot com phase was the next phase that really said, this is what the vision  of what it could look like happened.  And now we're going through a lot of the same things.  
**[0:06:52-0:06:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:06:52):**  There's a lot of companies that are doing really cool things in ag tech and AI and machine  learning.  And what you see today is not what it's going to look like in three to five years, but many  of the concepts that we're designing will actually be the things that benefit agriculture.  So I think it is going faster, but we have to understand that the runway to me over my  
**[0:07:12-0:07:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:07:12):**  20 year career, it's a, it's a longer runway than, than some people think getting into  it.  Yeah, I think that's an important one to understand.  And I mean, you've been through not only the, the, these different areas of enabling technologies,  but also some like real experience, you know, working at a company that did get acquired.  
**[0:07:31-0:07:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:07:31):**  So really the full life cycle now, co-founder of a startup company, working with startup  companies and you know, consulting.  So you've been in a couple of different size businesses and different spectrums.  I wanted to ask about, I guess kind of the nitty gritty just on on farms technology that  you are a part of that got acquired and just kind of that journey from, you know, an early  
**[0:07:53-0:07:58](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:07:53):**  company to an acquisition now that that's the, the kind of goal for many companies in  the tech world.  What was that journey like for you?  And you know, seeing it kind of from, from end to end, or at least that, that end of  it and that integration with a bigger company.  
**[0:08:09-0:08:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:08:09):**  Yeah, yeah.  So I've been a part of four startups and I have so many friends that are part of others.  And the thing that I've realized is that every single one of them is different.  And so the, the, the journey at farms technology was an amazing story and that was, you know,  over 10 year period.  
**[0:08:27-0:08:34](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:08:27):**  And really what I learned there is that we focused again, it goes back to that company  was developed out of ideas that came from farms.com when we were trading online at farms.com.  That one didn't necessarily make it.  But what I learned is that a small team that was focused and, and had a farmer relationships  with partner with farmers could actually be successful, but it took 10 years to get that  
**[0:08:53-0:08:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:08:53):**  company off the ground and lifted.  And we just kept iterating and listening to growers and kept driving towards it.  The thing on that one is that we were not, I don't consider that a venture funded company.  I consider that funded by an angel investor initially.  And then as DuPont invested at DuPont Pioneer invested in the company, then what you see  
**[0:09:14-0:09:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:09:14):**  is more of a strategic investment.  And Sarah, it was so much fun and it was fun not because of the acquisition side.  It was fun because there were farmers that would call, you know, it'd be a Thursday night  and the markets were open.  They were able to get their grain traded.  
**[0:09:29-0:09:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:09:29):**  And when a farmer customer calls you and says, you've made my life better, you've created  something amazing.  There is no better feeling for an entrepreneur to say, I've created something of value here  and I'm helping people.  That was what I enjoyed most about that opportunity.  
**[0:09:43-0:09:44](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:09:43):**  Yeah.  It's so interesting you bring up the sort of balance between customer pressures and  satisfaction and value and investor value.  I mean, that's kind of one of the implicit tensions and especially in terms of timeline.  So you hit on kind of venture backed companies and not venture backed companies and what  
**[0:10:02-0:10:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:10:02):**  that changes in terms of their timeframe.  I'm curious.  Yeah.  I think that's your thought on that space.  And there is a lot of venture capital activity.  
**[0:10:11-0:10:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:10:11):**  I think the latest AgFunder data just came out that it's more than ever and bigger deals  and more deals and more types of investors.  I know I have conversations with venture capital investors all the time wanting to understand  ag and ag tech and get in this game.  Do you think that that's a good fit in terms of types of capital or what are the limitations  
**[0:10:31-0:10:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:10:31):**  and challenges or maybe even also opportunities?  Like what's the kind of pros and cons of taking venture capital in this space?  I've never actually been through a true venture funded.  When you think about some of the stuff that's happening today.  So lots of money that comes in quick.  
**[0:10:50-0:10:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:10:50):**  What I would say is the good part about that is to me it's made ag sexy again.  So you have a lot of people that want to get involved in agriculture now because they see  this investment coming in.  And I think that's a wonderful thing.  The other thing that I see is that you could talk about, you look at AgFunder or the deals  
**[0:11:07-0:11:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:11:07):**  that you see.  Every one of these technologies that's out there, whether it's a drone application, satellite  imagery application, any kind of a device or hardware.  When you look at what they do, all of them are achieving a value.  If you really understand what those companies are doing in these venture backed entities,  
**[0:11:27-0:11:28](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:11:27):**  they're achieving value.  I don't believe that in the end there's too many choices right now and not all of them  will make it.  But we will find the market will settle out and the farmer customer won't be rival gets  adopted.  
**[0:11:40-0:11:41](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:11:40):**  So I think it's a good thing.  But I just think we have to be realistic and say that it may not look the same in the ag  space as it looks in other markets.  But the reality is that innovation is happening and without that investment, without that  excitement it wouldn't happen as fast as it is.  
**[0:11:57-0:11:58](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:11:57):**  Yeah.  That's such a good point and I talk a lot about new perspectives and talent and capital  coming into the space.  And yet I guess one thing that still happens a lot and you've done the same thing on your  LinkedIn and in starting out today was like reinforcing that you do come from the ag industry  
**[0:12:16-0:12:20](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:12:16):**  and grew up on a cattle operation.  I guess I'm curious because if you in the world outside of ag, if you said I'm a fourth  generation banker or I'm a fourth generation engineer, that doesn't hold very much credibility  and you wouldn't care that someone has come from that family.  But in ag that still matters so much.  
**[0:12:37-0:12:41](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:12:37):**  And I guess as someone who didn't grow up on a farm, I find myself tempted to play up  the fact that I've spent time on farms or get that credibility.  And I don't know, do you think you need it and why is that still so important when it's  also important and exciting that new perspectives are coming into the space?  I think it helps to get your foot in the door when you're talking.  
**[0:13:02-0:13:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:13:02):**  For us, we work with two clients.  We work with farmers through our farmertrials.com platform that we pay to do research and those  are our partners.  And when I can pick up the phone and work with people, for example, Jill Mathewitz,  I've worked with them for 20 years in different spaces.  
**[0:13:17-0:13:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:13:17):**  And we just have that relationship that we understand the ups and downs of the industry  and understand what we've been through.  So we don't have to start from ground zero.  It's like, what are we trying to attack?  I feel that that's the first thing that helps me.  
**[0:13:29-0:13:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:13:29):**  The second thing then is our clients that pay us, that fund intent and that do the research.  Those businesses like to have someone like us that understand the complexities of the  industry because ag is so unique.  And the difference is that you can't look at it and say, this is the way that it worked  last year.  
**[0:13:49-0:13:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:13:49):**  This is what's going to work this year.  An example is last year, March 1st, we thought we were going to have a premier planting season.  Well in most of our areas, we had rain that came in for two and a half, three weeks that  put us way behind.  That happens every year because we deal with mother nature and we deal with those elements.  
**[0:14:04-0:14:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:14:04):**  I think understanding, there's something about having that background and understanding.  We understand what the customer, the farmers are going through that makes it easier.  But I'd say it's not so much like grew up in ag, it's just that I've also spent the  last 20 years working side by side with these people.  Maybe you just call it street credibility.  
**[0:14:24-0:14:29](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:14:24):**  They're like, I'm the only one that's crazy enough to stay in this stark space.  I think that's right.  And that distinction is important.  I think just the credibility and time you spend to really understand it and empathize  with the uncertainty and the changes and how it is different and that what works in technology  
**[0:14:43-0:14:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:14:43):**  outside of ag might not work in ag.  But I do want to talk about intent and farm trials.  So you alluded a little bit to what you're doing there.  So tell us about both companies or both aspects of what you're up to and differences and how  they fit together.  
**[0:15:00-0:15:01](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:15:00):**  Yeah, absolutely.  And really the conversation that we've been through, talking about my background and what  I've seen and where I've seen success with farms technology, that's what's led to intent  and then ultimately farmer trials.  And I would love to tell you that farmer trials was our idea, but actually that came from  
**[0:15:18-0:15:19](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:15:18):**  farmers.  So in my career, the best ideas that we've ever executed against actually came from clients.  I want to give our growers credit.  Yeah, you started telling us a little bit how your journey so far led you to that.  But yeah, would be great to hear about how you've gotten to where you are and what that  
**[0:15:37-0:15:38](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:15:37):**  looks like.  Yeah.  So the purpose of intent, it starts with the companies that we work with.  Their main question is, will this product be adopted?  And if it gets adopted at the farm level, how long is it going to take to get adopted?  
**[0:15:52-0:15:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:15:52):**  And then farmers on the other side of the equation, they simply want to know how well  does this stuff work?  So it doesn't matter what they're looking at testing.  They want to know how quickly or how well it works.  So that's the gist of our company and the way that our company works.  
**[0:16:07-0:16:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:16:07):**  Randy Barker is like I said, a co-founder because of his time at Monsanto.  He would work through the commercialization of products and what he never had the ability  to work with a company that could do data analytics that could go out and engage with  growers and could also run the field trials as well as listening to farmers throughout  the entire process.  
**[0:16:26-0:16:31](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:16:26):**  So he saw this need at Monsanto and I think that's where the vision started.  So you start with Randy and then the second leg of the stool is our data analytics.  So Alice Robinson is a PhD statistics person that started studying ocean waves and she  looks at data in a different way than anyone I've ever seen.  And as long as you have that person that can analyze data, but the cool thing about Alice  
**[0:16:49-0:16:52](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:16:49):**  is that she'll, like today alone, she was on the phone with three different growers  with me looking at their fields, setting up trials, talking about heteros.  There's very few data science individuals that can talk farmer and then relate it back  to the data science almost.  That's number two.  
**[0:17:04-0:17:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:17:04):**  And then my background is simply being able to commercialize this stuff.  So being able to talk to farmers and then say, what are the applications that are out  there?  You know, someone that if we're going to look at CRM systems or systems that have already  been built, our goal is don't build anything that anyone else has already built, utilize  
**[0:17:21-0:17:23](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:17:21):**  the technology that exists.  And so most startups, and Sarah, you've probably heard this, they'll start with an MVP, right?  A minimally viable product.  What is the most minimal thing that we can build?  Take it to the market and test.  
**[0:17:33-0:17:38](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:17:33):**  What we built at Intent was an MBT, a minimally viable team.  And so it was data science.  It was someone that understood commercialization and it was someone that could tie the farmers  and the applications together.  So we started with that and that's how Intent was born.  
**[0:17:50-0:17:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:17:50):**  That is, I think that's kind of again, reinforces the importance of this, like one foot in one  world and one foot in the other.  In your case, you know, three feet or three legs of the stool where you can bridge the  gap between these different worlds and kind of speak the same language, but translate  things in a way that it makes sense to whether it's tech stuff to ag or ag stuff to tech  
**[0:18:09-0:18:14](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:18:09):**  or all that to a business case.  That kind of translation is so important.  What's it like having three co-founders?  Is there ever a two against one situation?  Is three a good number of co-founders?  
**[0:18:25-0:18:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:18:25):**  I would say yes.  And I think that we were just lucky that we were all available at the same time.  And all of us think differently.  You know, I'm the details person as a project plan and a timeline for everything.  Randy is going to be much more of a visionary that's thinking out there.  
**[0:18:40-0:18:43](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:18:40):**  And we all respect one another.  But I will tell you that I've never been part of a startup or a small business that was  bootstrapped.  And this business was formed at a time when we decided we did not want to take capital.  We said, if we can go out and create value from customers, let's build it that way.  
**[0:19:00-0:19:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:19:00):**  And there's something philosophically about building a company that's built around the  idea of the customer is the answer.  And what we say, we're just trying to get the answer for the customer.  And I think that philosophy is what drives us and helps all of us.  We all think differently and yes, we disagree.  
**[0:19:19-0:19:23](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:19:19):**  But at the end of the day, we know that what we have to do is perform for the customer.  And that's what's pretty cool about it.  And so what does this look like?  So you use trials, obviously, but is that agronomic products as well as digital products?  And where are you seeing the kind of pull either from the farmers or on the startup  
**[0:19:38-0:19:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:19:38):**  or company side trying things?  Where is their kind of momentum?  Is it really across the spectrum or there are certain products that you're seeing more  and more desire to try or to have tried?  Yeah.  
**[0:19:50-0:19:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:19:50):**  So I'll give you three examples of projects that we work with.  A lot of times you talk to companies like, well, what the heck do you do?  And so for us, I'll give you three examples.  So one of our first projects that we worked on initially was a project with Bayer.  And the idea for that project was to go out and recruit growers that could be part of  
**[0:20:09-0:20:13](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:20:09):**  a fungicide trial and also beta test a software platform.  So that was a cool one because we were doing software and we were also doing a fungicide  test.  There's a cool video that's on LinkedIn that kind of describes that process.  And what was cool about that one is you were connecting both a fungicide and a product.  
**[0:20:28-0:20:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:20:28):**  And when I listened, not from our perspective, but what farmers liked is that they had all  this equipment and their idea was, I have this equipment that can do all these cool  things and I bought it because of this.  But now because of this trial, I'm actually able to put that into practice.  Lots of the farmers told us, I can actually use some of the hardware and some of the software  
**[0:20:47-0:20:48](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:20:47):**  that I have to do this.  So that was number one.  A second project that we work on, I'll give you an example of a startup.  So Pivot Bio is a client that we work with in California.  They're developing a microbial product that allows for nitrogen development in corn.  
**[0:21:05-0:21:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:21:05):**  This one's really cool.  And you go talk to farmers and say, we've got a product that's a microbial that's going  to help with nitrogen in your crops.  That gets farmers excited in a hurry.  And so farmers are, they're reading about these new ideas, these new concepts.  
**[0:21:21-0:21:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:21:21):**  They love being able to be involved in something like that on the front row of that.  A third one is a company in Kansas City that we work with called Compass Minerals.  And we're doing a couple of different trials with them.  One is with a product called WolfTrax and one is with a product called ProAqua.  Again, when I go talk to farmers, what they say is we like these trials because we're  
**[0:21:44-0:21:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:21:44):**  looking for these kinds of things.  What they're looking for, Sarah, is not the home run.  They're looking for one or they're looking for singles and maybe some doubles.  And they say these are the kinds of things that I think can put me five or 10 percent  ahead of everyone in my county.  
**[0:21:59-0:22:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:21:59):**  And the thing that they ask us foremost is that we do compensate farmers that sign up  on farmertrials.com.  We compensate them because of their time and because we want them to follow protocols.  But the most important thing that they're after is data.  They say at the end of these trials, I want to see how well it worked on certain soil  
**[0:22:17-0:22:18](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:22:17):**  types.  I want to see how it worked in different fields, whether it's aggregate or local.  That's what they're trying to figure out.  And I think as long as we keep providing that kind of value back, that's how we're going  to help the industry.  
**[0:22:28-0:22:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:22:28):**  So those are just three different projects that we work on that kind of give you an idea  of how our company functions.  Yeah, that's fantastic.  And I think pretty unique.  I mean, that's kind of how we first connected is around this trial concept and around the  
**[0:22:42-0:22:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:22:42):**  fact that there's a lot of expectation that we'll just build this stuff and then we'll  get people to use it.  And that works when you have an app or a new website or maybe even a consumer product.  But in Aglet's core to your business, you're not just going to say like, hey, can you just  go out of your way to completely try all these things that would be helpful to me?  
**[0:23:00-0:23:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:23:00):**  So you really have to find that value for the farmers and you guys are paying them.  Does that limit or change your client base on the trial or side?  Like are startups able to pay?  Is it more big companies?  What kinds of trends are you seeing on who's able to A, see the value of what you bring  
**[0:23:20-0:23:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:23:20):**  in and B, take advantage of it and actually build in that compensation model?  You actually hit on something that we think about as a business a lot.  I will be one of the challenges that we have as a business is that startups or companies  even that come out of accelerators, they call us because now I've got my MVP and I want  to go to the market and they've seen our stuff in AgFunder and Successful Farm.  
**[0:23:45-0:23:47](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:23:45):**  They've seen our articles like, hey, can you help us?  The problem is because we're not funded, that we have a revenue model in place.  And one, they have to pay for these trials.  And number two is that these trials typically take eight to 12 months to run through full  cycle.  
**[0:24:01-0:24:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:24:01):**  And I think there's a gap and I don't know the answer yet, but there's a gap for these  small businesses that maybe don't have the R&D budgets as a more well-funded startup  or even a multinational.  I don't know how we get there, Sarah.  And I think that's a conversation we continue to have because there are some really cool  
**[0:24:19-0:24:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:24:19):**  products that we see and some amazing entrepreneurs that I'd love to help.  But the timeframe and the runway just doesn't quite match up.  And so how that works, if you've got ideas, I'd certainly be interested because there  is a gap there and you identified something that we think about and it just hurts because  you're like, how can I help this company just go for one trial season and give them some  
**[0:24:43-0:24:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:24:43):**  data as to how well this works in these types of conditions?  There's an opportunity there.  Yeah, it's a conversation I've been having quite a bit recently and now I've seen a couple  models, one where the farmers are not paid, that's sort of a volunteer basis, hey, you  want to get involved?  
**[0:24:59-0:25:03](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:24:59):**  And I think that really limits the farmers who are going to be willing and able to do  that.  It's going to limit the quality of the data.  And a point you hit on there that's, I think, an important subtlety is that you want them  to follow protocol.  
**[0:25:11-0:25:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:25:11):**  You want these to be rigorous trials and sort of a hypothesis and a test and a validation  of it and analysis after.  And if you don't have commitment to follow that protocol, then you're not going to get  the kind of quality of the data analysis that you need.  So I think that's really important too.  
**[0:25:27-0:25:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:25:27):**  Yeah, look, I don't have the answer.  I think it's really interesting and we'll see how this changes when there's more recognition  of the timeframes that agriculture is going to take and of what startups need to do this.  I think the exciting thing is that you are getting interest from startups and that there  is a willingness to say, how do we get on farm?  
**[0:25:48-0:25:49](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:25:48):**  How do we go have these conversations?  How do we try things out and then really get this data instead of saying, we'll do things  in a couple of small lab plots or you can stay in the lab and not get on farm?  So I guess it's baby steps, but progress in the right direction.  No, absolutely.  
**[0:26:05-0:26:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:26:05):**  I think that's one of the things that we think about and there's certainly an opportunity  there.  But at the end of the day, it has to work for the growers.  And one of the things that you probably hear about is integration.  How do these tools work together?  
**[0:26:19-0:26:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:26:19):**  Because the growers that we work with, they're also testing other, someone that's collecting  data and using advanced systems and understands this.  Because we work with them, they're also working with other companies out.  There's not a lot of innovators that you can go pull from.  And so looking at how do we tap into those innovators and know that they're only going  
**[0:26:41-0:26:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:26:41):**  to be able to do a certain number of trials and test a certain number of things every  year, we have to be cognizant of their time and figure out how do we get the most trials  and test the most technology per growing season.  Yeah, that's exactly right.  And even just managing that.  
**[0:27:00-0:27:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:27:00):**  And it's interesting, have you seen, like there are those kind of early adopter farmers  as we call it, that have put their hand up and that are trialing things already and are  hungry for more of this stuff.  Are there more farmers and maybe different farmers than you would have thought or saw  at first coming in because of the platform that you've created, because of the ability  
**[0:27:18-0:27:23](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:27:18):**  to get paid and make it easier and slightly less risky to try new things?  Are you creating more farmers looking to go on this journey?  Well, yeah, we paid 100 farmers last year in different capacities.  So once you do that and we gave them data back, so that was the first thing.  That kind of helped seed it, but most of our work today becomes a part of our agtech network  
**[0:27:44-0:27:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:27:44):**  and its relationships.  And what you start to find is these growers, they run together.  So if they're using this kind of software over here, they're going to these conferences.  And once they go through a trial with us and they say, I really like how they ran their  trials, it was organized, there were protocols, there were expectations, then they'll refer  
**[0:28:02-0:28:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:28:02):**  us to someone else.  And it seems like they're like minded growers that run together.  And we could always use more, but for us, it's all built off relationship.  FarmerTrials.com, it's a great place to get a few people that come in that fit it.  But the reality is that it comes from word of mouth and people have actually worked with  
**[0:28:21-0:28:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:28:21):**  us and know us.  Yeah.  And what's the role of social media?  I mean, you're pretty active on Twitter and I forget, maybe that's how we even first connected.  But what's the role of social media in this world where that is a place that people are  
**[0:28:34-0:28:39](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:28:34):**  getting advice and having these conversations and potentially making those referrals?  How does that fit into the business side or is that more the kind of social and network  and community side?  For us, it's how we built our business.  Candidly last year, our marketing budget was $800.  
**[0:28:53-0:28:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:28:53):**  That's what I spent on digital ads.  And I looked at people, I looked at farmers and said, who do we really want to get this  message?  We're talking about specific growers in areas and we say, let's get our message in front  of them.  
**[0:29:05-0:29:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:29:05):**  We don't have hundreds of thousands of followers.  That's not the objective, but we know who the right people are that we want to get in  front of.  So we work strategically on the farmer side, number one.  And then number two is on the business side, we say, who are the influencers that we want  
**[0:29:19-0:29:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:29:19):**  to be surrounded by?  And with an $800 marketing budget to be able to get in AgFunder, to be able to be in successful  farming.  And we were also asked to go to DC and testify that tells me that we're getting our message  out in front of the influencers.  
**[0:29:33-0:29:37](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:29:33):**  So for us, it's about being targeted and being strategic.  And for us, we actually spend more time building listening systems and listening to what people  say online as compared to what we put out there.  So for us, we feel that everyone's talking online, but there's not a lot of people listening.  And so let's just make up an example here.  
**[0:29:52-0:29:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:29:52):**  Let's say that we're doing a seed trial.  There's no better place to go and listen to people talking about pros and cons of a seed  placement that they're talking about on Twitter and say, hey, we actually have a trial that  fits that.  When you can tie those two pieces together, to me, that's how we found value.  
**[0:30:09-0:30:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:30:09):**  Yeah, that's super important.  But you said you went to testify.  I feel like I can't let that go.  What were you testifying on and what was that like?  Yeah, it was a joint session between the small business and the Ag committee.  
**[0:30:29-0:30:31](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:30:29):**  And so we went to DC and it was just a really cool time.  One, it validated for Alice and Randy and myself that what we were doing was important.  And we talked about how as a small business, we can help revitalize.  We're sending money back into the farms and communities and actually paying innovators.  And so that was the message that was well received.  
**[0:30:48-0:30:51](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:30:48):**  And then number two is all the things that we talk about, looking at how agriculture  is advancing and how we're helping the industry.  It was just a cool chance for us to bring awareness to what's happening in Ag.  And then also as a company said, yeah, what we're doing is filling a very unique gap.  And it was just good for our business to mature to that level.  
**[0:31:10-0:31:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:31:10):**  That's fantastic.  So what does the future look like here?  Possibly more than an $800 marketing budget.  Are you guys going to expand to different geographies to a bigger team?  Are you going to digitize a lot of this?  
**[0:31:24-0:31:29](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:31:24):**  What does five years or maybe 10 years down the road look like?  And what does that look for you personally?  Are you still involved day to day in the business or have you moved on to something else?  But what's the future hold to the extent that that's even a thing you can predict?  Yeah, no, I'm absolutely involved every day.  
**[0:31:46-0:31:51](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:31:46):**  And so we always talk about, Randy, Allison, I always talk about working in the business  versus on the business.  So when you're in the business, you're building a CRM system, you're making sure the emails  go out, you're making sure the drip campaign is set up.  You're calling 10 farmers that haven't uploaded data yet.  
**[0:32:01-0:32:03](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:32:01):**  That's what the day looks like.  I get to do that.  And so I built that from the ground floor.  Randy is working on the finance piece of the business.  He's working on writing blends.  
**[0:32:12-0:32:14](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:32:12):**  So he's working in the business.  Alice is absolutely working in the business, making sure that we have protocols set up.  And then last week when we go to Commodity Classic, we pull up and say, what does this  business look like in one to three years?  And so last year, while we did a significant number of the heavy lifting, this year we  
**[0:32:29-0:32:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:32:29):**  implemented a program called our Ag Tech Network.  So if you look at farmer trials, you can see some of the Ag Tech leads that we have.  And these are the people that have one, strong technology skills and two, they're located  in markets that when we say, hey, we've got this trial, we can go to our Ag Tech leads  and say, how realistic is this?  
**[0:32:49-0:32:52](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:32:49):**  And who are the growers that have the kind of equipment to facilitate this?  So we started to scale from that perspective.  And the question that you asked is strategically what we're talking about.  How do we scale this business?  So we've grown the business.  
**[0:33:02-0:33:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:33:02):**  We've got a business that's revenue positive.  And what we're working on now is how do we build better systems and how do we invest  in those systems in a way that allows us to continue to do more trials?  What that looks like and exactly over the next five years, I don't exactly know.  But the scaling piece is how do we continue to replicate and grow and find more answers  
**[0:33:25-0:33:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:33:25):**  for both businesses and farmers.  That is what we spend our strategy time working on today.  Well, Kevin, I look forward to seeing that all come together and maybe we can keep chatting  about ideas on how to scale, it's an important one.  And I think that this business in particular has huge potential to really continue to connect  
**[0:33:45-0:33:48](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:33:45):**  the Ag and Ag Tech worlds and really deliver value for farmers.  So I'm really excited about it.  And I really appreciate your time today.  You've mentioned it a couple of times, but just where can people find more about what  you're doing if there are farmers who want to try or companies who want to have stuff  
**[0:33:59-0:34:03](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:33:59):**  trialed or other expertise from you guys, where can they find you?  Yeah.  So all farmers that are interested in doing research, paid research, if they meet the  criteria, I would tell all farmers to go to farmertrials.com and that way when trials  are announced, they're posted there.  
**[0:34:15-0:34:18](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:34:15):**  And then also we'll send out emails letting farmers know which trials are available.  So farmers go to farmertrials.com.  Our businesses, our company, and maybe you kind of mentioned my background, but starting  at farmland, going to farms.com, there were no farms left, Sarah.  So we created a company name that was as far away from farmers possible.  
**[0:34:35-0:34:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:34:35):**  The company name is Intent.  So I N one zero T and the website is intent.io.  And it may be a really great branding idea.  Maybe the worst thing we ever came up with, but the idea is that we're intentional about  data.  
**[0:34:48-0:34:51](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:34:48):**  So we don't go in and try and sell a product or solution.  We start with what is the company's challenge?  Were they trying to solve?  And then we bring all the data elements and we were intentional about the data solutions  and data products that we can bring to solve those problems.  
**[0:35:03-0:35:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:35:03):**  So it's Intent.io.  I'm so glad you talked about that.  I had a question on here and when I was thinking about it, where does that name come from?  And it is really different.  We did a map the other day of kind of a bunch of ag tech companies and what we realized  
**[0:35:17-0:35:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:35:17):**  was they're all green and most of them start with A, the logos.  And so we had one company that's red and black and they just popped out like the most special  company in the space because they didn't follow that pattern.  So you might be onto something there with something that was a bit more meaning and  not a farm or an ag beginning.  
**[0:35:36-0:35:39](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:35:36):**  Hopefully that turns out to be a great strategy.  I hope so because there were no farms left.  So we don't know now, but in five years we'll know it.  And the thing that we've realized is the name is important, but really in this business  it's still the relationships that we have.  
**[0:35:54-0:35:58](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:35:54):**  That's how the business has taken off and we continue to nurture those and respect those  relationships.  Well, Kevin, thank you so much for coming on and sharing your story and some tips.  Really excited about what the future holds for farm trials and for intent and for you.  So thank you again.  
**[0:36:09-0:36:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:36:09):**  Well, Sarah, you're doing cool stuff as well.  I follow you as closely and it's been a pleasure and good to have this conversation and I look  forward to future conversations.  Thank you for listening to the Bush Tech podcast.  We'd love to hear what you think.  
**[0:36:28-0:36:38](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357340#t=0:36:28):**  If you have feedback, suggestions for future guests, you can find us at bushtechpodcast.com.au.  I hope you found it enjoyable.  Until next time.  See ya.  Bye.  