### Agtech - So What?  (2018-02-30)
**[0:00:00-0:00:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:00:00):**  Hi everyone, you're listening to BushTech, an agtech podcast that gets to the so what  of agtech.  We'll bring you interesting things from interesting people.  And I'm one of your co hosts, Simon Mathewson.  And I'm your other co host, Sarah Nolette.  
**[0:00:14-0:00:18](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:00:14):**  On this podcast, we will bring in leading speakers in technology, entrepreneurship,  investment, agriculture, science and anything else you can think of and we can find in the  world of agtech.  We'll look to demystify it so that we're getting to the so what.  What does it really mean for farmers and for the broader agricultural industry?  
**[0:00:32-0:00:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:00:32):**  So, Allison, welcome to the BushTech podcast.  So great to have you on.  Thanks for joining us.  Thanks for having me.  I'd love to start with the kind of origin story of agriLists.  
**[0:00:57-0:01:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:00:57):**  How did you end up in this space and doing what you're doing now?  Yeah, it's a little bit I guess I'm around about way to ag.  I studied physics in college and was really interested in the solar industry.  I was working for a number of companies that were really innovative on the solar equipment  side to manufacturing different types of solar panels for residential and commercial applications,  
**[0:01:25-0:01:26](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:01:25):**  which I love.  The thing that really got me excited about that was inefficiencies in systems.  So finding a place in a system where it's a little bit inefficient and the efficiency  is actually killing me as a user.  And ag to me was actually incredibly similar.  
**[0:01:40-0:01:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:01:40):**  It was a system as a whole that's incredibly intriguing because there are so many areas  of opportunity for disruption or for evolution or to change to meet the needs of our population  changes.  So whether it's from distribution or consumption or growing, there are just these areas that  to me seem incredibly inefficient.  
**[0:02:02-0:02:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:02:02):**  And so I started working for a greenhouse company back in 2011 that was trying to solve  a lot of those challenges in terms of the actual production side by building greenhouses  closer to the point of consumption and growing more sustainably for the local population.  And I just fell in love.  I fell in love with the ag industry.  
**[0:02:22-0:02:24](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:02:22):**  I fell in love with growers.  The idea of growing food to me was incredibly beautiful.  It's something that we all eat, but we don't all actually get to touch the system at play.  And just getting really close to it was something I just fell in love with.  And so I knew that this was a place for me, but I think the whole problem that I'm trying  
**[0:02:42-0:02:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:02:42):**  to solve at AgriList is it all originated there.  It all originated when you're doing the farming, the duties of farming every day, right?  So you're trying to make ends meet.  You have low margins.  You're trying to understand who you're selling to.  
**[0:03:00-0:03:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:03:00):**  And that to me is a data problem, which is the problem we're trying to solve at AgriList,  which is build software that can make all of those data problems, not problems, but  instead benefits to the grower.  So how can you increase the margin by looking at all the information at your hands and trying  to use that to complete the picture and really focus on that margin side?  
**[0:03:24-0:03:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:03:24):**  So a little bit roundabout, but logical also, I guess, the theme that drives it all together  is inefficiencies in systems.  I love that story coming in from non-ag.  That's been my journey as well, sort of coming more from the tech engineering side.  How has that been working in the ag industry without a kind of ag background?  
**[0:03:45-0:03:49](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:03:45):**  Have you gotten any pushback on that or because you're in a slightly different space in terms  of indoor farming, is it kind of more accepted that you might not have grown up on a farm  or come from this industry?  Yeah.  The funniest thing about that is, so whenever you talk to somebody who's in the ag industry  
**[0:04:00-0:04:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:04:00):**  but is in conventional ag, right, so any of the conventional ag fields, they'll tell me  that I don't have a background in ag and anybody in our space, in the solar environment space  specifically, I've got one of the longest backgrounds in ag, which is this very interesting  nuanced problem that exists in the industry.  So I've worked on the operations side of controlled environment ag for the better part of a decade  
**[0:04:25-0:04:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:04:25):**  now and probably want to, there's only about three or four companies that have been around  in the fast growth, vendor backed, controlled environment space in that period.  So there aren't that many of us in this group that have done that and there's not that many  of us that have a tech background as well where we can provide those two pieces of information  to actually create this interesting solution for the state.  
**[0:04:51-0:04:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:04:51):**  And so, no, I didn't grow up on a farm.  My parents weren't farmers but I actually have been one of the few people to have worked  in the industry as long as I have, at least in the specific industry, right?  Now that's not to say that it's the entire industry as a whole.  One of the challenges that you do face, or at least I face, is I know how most of these  
**[0:05:14-0:05:18](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:05:14):**  facilities operate, but the greenhouse industry as a whole has been around for decades and  decades and decades and it is more conventional.  And so that's a space that I do, you know, there is this sort of outsider feel.  But I think that there's a big trust element.  I think Ag in general is based off of an element of trust.  
**[0:05:34-0:05:38](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:05:34):**  A lot of sales happen via, I trust that this person can solve this problem for me and I  trust the product or service that they provide.  And you know, when I go in the facility and I can speak to speak because I actually understand  it and there's a curiosity there, then the growers end up tending to build that trust  innately.  
**[0:05:52-0:05:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:05:52):**  That's a roundabout answer.  No, but a good one.  And that's been my experience too, that despite sometimes being an outsider coming in with  curiosity and willingness to learn, then people want to teach you and want to see what they're  passionate about, what they're doing.  
**[0:06:11-0:06:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:06:11):**  You mentioned that greenhouses are different or that that's one kind of flavor of indoor  Ag and there are different ones that would love to get the kind of indoor farming 101  from you for those who aren't as familiar with the different types of systems.  Yeah, absolutely.  So the way that we think about the industry at least, and I know that this isn't necessarily  
**[0:06:31-0:06:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:06:31):**  standardized yet for the way that most people think about this space, is that there is really  two different types of systems at play here.  There is a fully enclosed indoor system where you're not relying on sunlight at all, and  then a hybrid system where you do have sunlight, but you might also have supplemental light.  And you're building in a greenhouse where there's access to natural light.  
**[0:06:53-0:06:58](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:06:53):**  Now there's a whole different spectrum of types of growing systems that could fit within  those two pictures.  You can have hydroponics where you're submerging the roots of a plant into water.  You can have aquaculture or aquaponics where there's fish involved in the process as well,  and you're using the fish process to actually fertilize the plants.  
**[0:07:14-0:07:18](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:07:14):**  And there's a whole filtrated system there at play.  You can have aeroponics where you're misting the roots of the crops with the nutrient solution.  So again, you can have soil, right?  You can have conventional soil as well.  So there's this sort of full spectrum of different types of growing systems.  
**[0:07:30-0:07:34](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:07:30):**  But the way that we think about it typically is that there's either no sunlight or sunlight  involved in the picture.  And one of the interesting things is the market is that they're pretty segmented as well.  The vertical farming or fully enclosed farming space has only really been around for the  last few years, and it's really in a infancy.  
**[0:07:50-0:07:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:07:50):**  There's been people who have tried it for a long time, but in the last few years, it  started to gain a lot of momentum because people are starting to figure out the unit  economics, the cost of LEDs is going down, and you happen to have a lot of things in  your favor related to the macro challenges of efficiencies, but also food safety and  challenges around pathogens in our crops, specifically for things like leafy greens  
**[0:08:14-0:08:15](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:08:14):**  and herbs.  So that space is starting to take off.  And then you've got the greenhouse industry, which I would also categorize into different  spaces, which is you've got the greenhouse industry of old.  So you've got your Almeria, Spain, you've got most of rural China, where greenhouses  
**[0:08:32-0:08:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:08:32):**  are present.  You've got sort of low tech plastic facilities that serve for low margin, high efficiency,  fast distribution and broad distribution crops.  And then you've got this high tech, maybe more automated, intelligence driven glass  greenhouses, the facilities of the Netherlands and now the US and Canada that are really  
**[0:08:57-0:09:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:08:57):**  quickly taking off because, again, of those challenges in the system of efficiencies and  supply and food safety and just the ability to get a higher margin than in conventional  applications for certain crops.  Yeah, I'm really glad you mentioned the certain crop distinction because there's a conversation  around the world about feeding the growing population and healthier food and the kind  
**[0:09:22-0:09:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:09:22):**  of macro trends, some of which you mentioned.  What's your view on indoor agriculture's ability to feed that growing population and what role  do you see it playing?  Like, are we going to move to a much more fully indoor system and can you grow everything  indoors or where the lines and maybe barriers in that sense?  
**[0:09:43-0:09:51](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:09:43):**  Yeah, indoor ag is a tool in the agricultural toolkit is how I would phrase it.  You can only grow certain crops indoors.  And I would say ever, actually, I wouldn't even say that that's a now thing.  I would say now we've got a small group of things you can grow indoors.  And I'd say in the future, you know, 10 years out, 20 years out, you can probably increase  
**[0:10:05-0:10:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:10:05):**  that spectrum.  But you're never going to do certain crops indoors because it doesn't make sense economically.  And at the end of the day, ag is about economics more than almost anything.  And so if you think about things that you can grow really well indoors, take a vertical  farm as an example.  
**[0:10:23-0:10:28](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:10:23):**  So you've got a fully enclosed warehouse and you're trying to grow things in racks.  And the reason for that is you're trying to optimize your square footage, your growable  area, right, your square footage of growable area.  So if I'm going to stack things, well, the things that I can grow there by nature have  to be physically short.  
**[0:10:39-0:10:42](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:10:39):**  You can't grow vine crops there because you're trying to stack.  So the more stacking ability you have, the better off you're going to be.  So that's limiting you off the bat to certain crops that are physically short crops.  You need shorter growth cycle crops because the more turns you can have, the more you  can generate from an economic perspective.  
**[0:10:56-0:11:01](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:10:56):**  So now you're looking at a bucket of things like leafy greens and lettuces, you're looking  at herbs, you're looking at strawberries and certain berries.  So you're limited to this sort of pool of crops that you can grow.  And then you need to look at the unit of economics.  It's expensive to operate in an indoor facility because you're running things like lighting  
**[0:11:16-0:11:18](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:11:16):**  almost 24-7, right?  And so if you take a picture of economics, now you're looking at high margin items.  So now you're still stuck in this bucket of herbs, lettuces, and potentially berries and  strawberries, so that's a small pool.  If you look at things like corn, wheat, soy, those are commodity crops.  
**[0:11:37-0:11:38](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:11:37):**  They're really cheap to produce.  You can do it in mass and you can do it pretty well outdoors.  So there's no real reason to bring that production indoors.  And at the same time, I'd say there's no real reason to look at lettuce production in Salinas  and say that that's the correct way to do it.  
**[0:11:53-0:11:58](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:11:53):**  So I think what you'll see is you'll start to see crops that can be grown to the quality  and cost of conventional or better start to move indoors if it makes sense to do that.  And then greenhouses can grow pretty much anything.  It's just about economics at this point because you can have soil production and grow corn  in a greenhouse.  
**[0:12:16-0:12:19](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:12:16):**  It doesn't make economic sense to do that, so you probably wouldn't do that.  But if you can find a crop that works economically within these facilities and you can do that  sustainably, economically, and meet the quality, and safely actually, and if you can meet the  food safety demand, I'd say there's probably no reason to grow that anywhere but indoors.  So I think it'll be a piece of the puzzle.  
**[0:12:42-0:12:44](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:12:42):**  I'm not a believer that it's the end all, do you all?  I don't know that there is one in our agricultural system.  I'm curious too about the types of farmers because one of the arguments that I've heard  made for the growth of indoor farming is anyone can be a farmer and you can farm in a city  or you can supplement more conventional farming with an indoor system.  
**[0:13:02-0:13:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:13:02):**  And so it broadens not only the type of crops and the margin and economics that you can  get but also who is a farmer and who will be a farmer in the future.  What's your view or what evidence do you have so far of who are the farmers of the future,  especially in the indoor case?  That's a great question.  
**[0:13:22-0:13:24](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:13:22):**  I think a few things about this actually.  I think that's true to some degree but I'll also argue against it.  One of the beautiful things about indoor ag is that it's a contained picture.  So you're limiting your risk to some degree on so many things.  You're limiting the risk on weather.  
**[0:13:39-0:13:44](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:13:39):**  You're limiting the risk on a lot of financial, in some regards, a lot of the financial risk.  You're taking some of the risk of conventional ag down primarily weather and stability of  forecasts and year-round production.  So you can produce year-round without the weather implications.  So that inherently makes it attractive.  
**[0:14:00-0:14:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:14:00):**  And then when you start to think about the unit economics, if you can see 30%, 40%, 50%  margins as opposed to 4% or 5% margins, then that becomes an economically attractive picture.  And so you are seeing a lot of people with non-conventional farming background getting  into the indoor farming space.  We were just talking about this actually earlier with the group because two of their farms  
**[0:14:26-0:14:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:14:26):**  are run by former Wall Street folks who wanted to have a career transition.  Their parents were in farming.  They were actually in one was in farming, one was in ranching.  And they wanted to get back into the ag space, but they didn't want to do it in the way their  parents did it.  
**[0:14:40-0:14:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:14:40):**  And so InfraAg made it a really attractive opportunity for them because they understood  what they were doing.  They knew how to run a business.  They understood the economics.  And they had this ag background where they could actually get in and operate successfully.  
**[0:14:55-0:14:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:14:55):**  So we do see that a lot.  We see a lot of career transitions from one space to another.  We see a lot of people in the manufacturing or distribution spaces come into space, which  tends to make a little bit of sense.  Where I'd almost say the flip side of this is I think there is a de-emphasis on how difficult  
**[0:15:14-0:15:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:15:14):**  it really is to operate a farm.  And that you're still dealing with all of the biological systems coupled with manufacturing  and distribution practices and the pricing volatility of different markets.  This de-emphasis is problematic because you're having people who risk it all by getting into  an incredibly capital-intensive industry without necessarily a market plan or without the understanding  
**[0:15:39-0:15:42](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:15:39):**  of the biological components.  And that to me is really scary actually to look at the picture as a whole if you back  up and you try and understand who's getting into the space and how it can grow.  So I think there's an interesting thing here because you can have people getting into the  space that aren't necessarily coming from conventional backgrounds.  
**[0:16:00-0:16:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:16:00):**  But I'd be wary of doing it if you don't have an understanding of how difficult it is to  farm and really focus on how to take some of those growing risks away.  I think that is such an important subtlety and it's one of the things that's interested  me most about this space, the lens through which I've seen it, is the different business  models of the indoor farm.  
**[0:16:20-0:16:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:16:20):**  Especially in the tech space, some of them are farms and selling a branded product on  a much shorter supply chain like a lettuce or a micro herb and then some of them are  selling the actual farms.  And then of course, all the way on the other side, a model like yours where you're sort  of the picks and troubles and enabling these systems to exist.  
**[0:16:40-0:16:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:16:40):**  And it seems to me that if you're trying to not only grow and be a farmer but then also  like sell a farming system and then also have the manufacturing and a distribution chain  and a brand, that that is so much more complexity in any of the other businesses that only take  on one piece of that.  So I think the business model of these companies, especially the ones that are raising capital,  
**[0:17:03-0:17:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:17:03):**  is fascinating and highlights all the different pieces of food supply chains and how indoor  farming can in some cases bring all of that together.  But that is in some ways risky and it's a huge opportunity.  Yeah.  I mean, if you look at the conventional space, go to an ad conference.  
**[0:17:21-0:17:24](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:17:21):**  And the first thing that you're going to see is you're going to see a breakdown of grower  versus grower shipper versus packer versus...  There's different...  And every indoor facility is almost trying to do all of those things in one.  You're trying to grow, package, merchandise, sell.  
**[0:17:35-0:17:37](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:17:35):**  And it's really, really hard.  And it's a perishable crop, so you can't get it wrong, which is challenging.  You can't hold onto the crop like a commodity and wait for the best pricing.  You're selling when you have it or it's gone, which is really interesting.  And I think there's a good and bad side to this, but these are much smaller facilities.  
**[0:17:56-0:17:59](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:17:56):**  You're not talking about hundreds and hundreds of acres.  You're talking about...  A lot of times you're talking about under an acre and then there are 100-acre farms.  But these aren't the thousands and hundreds of thousands of acres of farms that we see  in the Midwest and the US.  
**[0:18:14-0:18:18](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:18:14):**  And so that enables us to do some of those things.  But one of the interesting things I've seen is that as you get smaller on the scale, you're  doing more things, which is almost the opposite of what anybody who runs the business would  want to do.  You have a 10,000 square foot facility who's doing growing, packing, shipping, merchandising,  
**[0:18:35-0:18:37](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:18:35):**  branding, and selling.  And then you have 100-acre facilities that are just selling tomato transplants to other  growers who finish off the rest of the product packaging and whatnot.  So I think it's really interesting if you look at the scale size as well, because it  seems to me qualitatively that the small farms are actually taking a lot of the responsibility  
**[0:18:56-0:19:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:18:56):**  of doing the full see-through consumption, which is just interesting as a business owner.  Yes, exactly.  And I wonder about the investor side as well.  You guys do an awesome state of indoor report.  And do you guys see that every year?  
**[0:19:14-0:19:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:19:14):**  I know I saw this year, but is that something you've done every year?  We've done it for the last two years.  So every year for the last two years.  We are planning on doing it every year, yes.  Right.  
**[0:19:24-0:19:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:19:24):**  OK.  Fair enough.  And one of the findings was that access to capital is a big challenge for these farmers.  And I wonder, is that because of either A, complexity that these farms are taking on  in all those different pieces you just mentioned, and or B, investors' inability or challenges  
**[0:19:42-0:19:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:19:42):**  in understanding those models and that complexity, or I guess B, just a lack of a fit for kind  of venture capital, other types of capital in this space?  Like what's the challenge there?  Yeah.  So I think there's a few things here too.  
**[0:19:58-0:20:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:19:58):**  So one, I feel like a lot of farms are going after the wrong types of capital.  So I am not a believer that farms that operate and sell produce as a model should be seeking  venture capital.  And I just think it's the wrong type of capital for these operations.  These are long payback, long ROI cycle projects that are much like the solar industry, much  
**[0:20:20-0:20:24](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:20:20):**  like infrastructure projects where a debt capital or a project financing model works  much better.  So I think that a lot of growers, what we see is these small one-off, one-farm, 10,000  square foot facilities that are trying to raise venture capital because it's an expensive  endeavor.  
**[0:20:36-0:20:37](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:20:36):**  And I think that that's problematic.  I think having a lot of press around farms getting access to this capital is also problematic  because everyone thinks that they should do that.  The second thing is that if you then go to the debt side and you say, okay, well, these  farms should be seeking debt capital, then you have to look at what types of rates and  
**[0:20:55-0:20:58](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:20:55):**  accessibility that there is on the debt side.  And for most banks, you need to have operated for three years in order to get access alone,  or you need to have some type of operating history.  Well, the problem with Inverag is actually the capital intensive nature of the initial  build out.  
**[0:21:12-0:21:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:21:12):**  So now you're saying to a farmer that they have to come in with a million dollars, two  million dollars to build a facility and they have to fund the working capital.  And then by the year two or three, maybe they can start refinancing and paying back on old  loans.  And that is a pretty big sell for most people.  
**[0:21:33-0:21:38](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:21:33):**  And so I think that one of the interesting things in this industry is going to be the  evolution of how capital sees these assets.  And I would throw money at the idea that there's going to be innovation in financing models  that are focused in on capital intensive upfronts and higher working capital projects that have  a long ROI but are still profitable and are going to have a good return.  
**[0:21:59-0:22:00](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:21:59):**  It's just a longer term horizon.  And you're going to see some of the folks that are used to investing in infrastructure  projects to actually start coming into this space over the next few years.  That is fascinating.  And I'm so excited to hopefully see that as well.  
**[0:22:15-0:22:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:22:15):**  I think it's a challenge for ag tech in general, but especially these systems that are touching  technology and farming and have this capital intensity.  I think like insect farming is another example of a lot of the same challenges.  And probably there are other examples as well.  So that's really interesting.  
**[0:22:32-0:22:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:22:32):**  I just wanted to see if there's anything else from the kind of state of indoor reports that  you guys did that you think is maybe interesting to touch on.  Like sort of what was most surprising to you in doing that report and getting that data.  Did you find what you expected or were there any big surprises?  Let me see this here.  
**[0:22:52-0:22:58](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:22:52):**  So some of the surprising things or maybe there were some things that felt surprising,  but then when you step back, you're like, oh, that actually is that surprising.  So one of the things that we asked was, we asked growers to quantify what they thought  was the most underhyped and overhyped technologies being talked about in the space right now.  And the most underhyped was AI or the thing that they were most excited about was AI and  
**[0:23:17-0:23:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:23:17):**  automation or specifically in the automation side, not necessarily in the AI side.  And then the thing that they thought was most overhyped was container farming and the container  farming technology.  And immediately when we were doing the analysis on it, and we didn't provide, by the way,  we didn't provide any examples of things they could put in there.  
**[0:23:36-0:23:42](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:23:36):**  They answered that as a blank slate and something like 80% of people answered container farming  for overhyped.  And so one of the things that was really interesting was one, how many people felt aligned on that.  I think when you ask open-ended questions, oftentimes you just get a full spectrum of  random answers.  
**[0:23:54-0:23:59](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:23:54):**  So everyone seems to be pretty aligned on those two things.  But two, it sort of isn't aligned necessarily with the way that the media or investors are  thinking about the space.  And so you step back and say, hey, why is this and why is this surprising to me?  And then when you think about it and you realize, oh, well, the people who are answering the  
**[0:24:19-0:24:23](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:24:19):**  survey are commercial farmers, are commercial indoor operators.  And so, yeah, it would make sense to me that this would be something that they would maybe  feel would be overhyped because it hasn't been proven out yet.  And it's not something that they would be implementing on the farm.  And it's not something that they necessarily see valuable.  
**[0:24:38-0:24:41](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:24:38):**  And so maybe the broader ecosystem loves this idea.  But to the farmers answering the survey, it falls out of place.  And similar from automation perspective, we can talk about how much it's overhyped in  the industry a lot right now.  But to farmers, automation could be the difference between spending millions of dollars every  
**[0:24:56-0:25:00](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:24:56):**  year in labor and spending hundreds of thousands of dollars in labor, which could mean the  difference between a 40% margin and a 20% margin.  So that could be a really huge deal.  And a lot of that around data is always take a step back and remember who you're surveying  and who you're talking to and what they're thinking around these types of things is because  
**[0:25:16-0:25:19](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:25:16):**  it usually makes it less surprising.  I think that's so true and there's examples of that across different aspects of agriculture  in terms of the consumer or ecosystem perspective and what they think is exciting and what the  farmers are seeing as exciting.  Whether you talk about different kinds of sensors, probably consumers aren't all that  
**[0:25:37-0:25:42](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:25:37):**  excited about software that helps with compliance or record keeping or just data management.  But that's really valuable to farmers in helping them save time and be more efficient automation  across all different kinds of ag is another example.  And then when you talk to consumers, there's concerns about losing jobs or is it safe or  all these different perceptions.  
**[0:25:58-0:25:59](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:25:58):**  So I think that's really interesting.  And then adding in the investor perspective of how do investors see this space and what  makes an attractive instrument for them is a whole other lens on all of this.  Yeah.  And I think one of the interesting things too, again, on the scale of size issue, if  
**[0:26:14-0:26:18](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:26:14):**  you talk to a commercial operator with 100 acres of greenhouse coverage and a vertical  farmer who's operating in 10,000 square feet, you're going to get totally different answers  to those things as well because they have different types of labor needs.  They have different types of sales and marketing needs.  They have just different types of needs.  
**[0:26:29-0:26:34](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:26:29):**  So I think that's one of the things that we try and improve every year actually when we  do the survey is making sure that we can break out the size and type of facility and how  they're answering those questions so that you don't just try and lump everything into  one because it's pretty dangerous, I think, too, to look at things as a blanket understanding  when it may not be at all.  
**[0:26:50-0:26:51](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:26:50):**  Yeah, exactly.  I thought that was one of the more helpful insights that I found from the survey, which  is the difference in farm size.  It makes a ton of sense, but naively not having paid attention to this space, the vast differences  depending on the scale of the operation, just changing economics, changes what's useful  
**[0:27:09-0:27:14](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:27:09):**  in terms of technology, how many people you have, what your challenges are, that's obviously  true.  But when the hype is around these micro herbs, indoor production systems sitting in a restaurant,  you're not thinking about it at the same scale.  Totally.  
**[0:27:25-0:27:26](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:27:25):**  Yeah.  I wanted to change directions, Allison, and ask you recently you actually how we connected,  although I knew you were and had been hoping to chat with you for a while, was on Twitter  you posted a list of women in ag tech that you wanted to hear speaking at conferences  and that turned into a bit of a viral movement where you ended up making a big Google Doc  
**[0:27:56-0:28:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:27:56):**  of women in ag tech and calling out the fact that there are women innovating in this space  and that they should be more well represented, especially at conferences.  I wanted to ask you what made you start doing that and then what's been your reaction or  opinion on how this has blown up?  Did you expect that to happen and what's come of it from your perspective?  
**[0:28:19-0:28:20](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:28:19):**  Yeah.  I only did this really to go viral.  I'm just kidding.  It's actually the opposite.  I've always been pretty quiet about these types of things.  
**[0:28:27-0:28:34](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:28:27):**  I was raised in a way that was you're not a step back, but you're always going to fight  to win essentially.  That's how I drive a lot of my mentality around these types of things was when we raised our  first round of financing, I always give this example.  Back when we were raising that round, I think the average number of partner meetings that  
**[0:28:52-0:28:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:28:52):**  a man had to pitch in order to get a seed round of the size that we had was something  around like 20, 25 people.  We pitched over 80 or I pitched over 80 in order to get the same sort of size rounds  and that's something that, again, I didn't look at that as a disadvantage necessarily.  Instead, I understood the challenge and I went into it saying, okay, I know that I'm  
**[0:29:12-0:29:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:29:12):**  going to have to pitch 4X the amount of people, but I'm going to do that and I'm going to  do it because I'm going to win and I'm going to get the financing I need to carry this  business through.  That's always been the sort of attitude I've taken.  I used to avoid a lot of panels where I was asked to speak about being a woman in the  
**[0:29:28-0:29:31](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:29:28):**  tech industry or being a woman in ag.  It was funny because it all sort of culminated at this point where I speak at a lot of conferences  and I'm asked to participate at all events.  One of the interesting things is if you look around the room, you'd think that there were  no women in ag or ag tech.  
**[0:29:46-0:29:48](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:29:46):**  That's just not the case.  I get the pleasure of working with so many women, especially on the ag research side  and the big ag side who are senior leaders of these organizations that are doing real  meaningful work and on the ag tech side who are founding companies that are doing really  interesting and meaningful things.  
**[0:30:06-0:30:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:30:06):**  I kept saying, well, why is this happening?  Why are women being asked to speak?  You can look at it as a pipeline problem or you can look at it as a networking problem  or you can look at it as a combination, but something was happening that was breaking  the system for me.  
**[0:30:20-0:30:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:30:20):**  Frankly, I don't want to be involved in things that just don't have other people that I want  to learn from.  I don't want to go into a room and have the same people at the same event talking about  the same things from the same perspective because it's not worth my time or energy to  do that.  
**[0:30:36-0:30:38](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:30:36):**  So, it goes for me too.  If I'm asked to speak at every single event, that's the same thing.  I'm not the audience member in that case.  Somebody else is getting that same experience.  It's not valuable at all.  
**[0:30:50-0:30:58](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:30:50):**  So, I was sitting back and I had this event that was organized and was coming up.  They sent me an invite to sponsor the event, not speak at the event, sponsor the event.  I looked at the list and it was about 90%, the speaker list was about 90% white male  and the rest of it was either people of color, it was men, people of color.  It was all men, 100%, not one woman on this list.  
**[0:31:24-0:31:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:31:24):**  It was 30 or 40 speakers and a very, very, very limited minority of people of color.  So, I just got pretty frustrated.  I was sitting there in the afternoon.  I was like, this is really annoying to me.  I want to see more women.  
**[0:31:39-0:31:44](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:31:39):**  I want to go to an event with people that look different and have different experiences  and understand different things.  I think being a woman is important, it's not just a buzzword and this is annoying to me.  So, I just tweeted a list of women that I know personally that I'd love to have the  opportunity to go speak and listen to.  
**[0:32:02-0:32:03](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:32:02):**  It did blow up a little bit.  It was very interesting.  I wasn't really expecting it, albeit I guess it is a good time to be a woman and talking  about being a woman right now.  So, I think there's that going for us right now.  
**[0:32:16-0:32:20](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:32:16):**  But I think one of the interesting reactions was immediately after posting it, and we shared,  so I shared 75 women, I think, and then shared a Google spreadsheet.  And now it's almost 400 women because people have just been continuously adding to it,  which I think is beautiful and wonderful and is exactly what should happen.  And so, the interesting thing to me was I had a few events that wrote in to me probably  
**[0:32:39-0:32:44](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:32:39):**  within 48 hours who said, I'm organizing this event.  It's typically been 80% men and we want to change that and we need help, or it's been  90% men and we need help changing that.  Thank you for posting this.  I'm going through it now.  
**[0:32:53-0:32:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:32:53):**  Would you make interest to X, Y, and Z people?  And that to me is like the dream because it's really easy for somebody to put a list together,  in my opinion.  But it starts to show that there's this network problem.  There's a problem that event organizers may not know about women being out there or these  
**[0:33:09-0:33:13](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:33:09):**  women specifically or any women.  And maybe just don't care.  And so, they don't pay attention to it until somebody calls them out.  And I think that's what happened.  And so, I think the event organizers thing has been interesting.  
**[0:33:26-0:33:29](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:33:26):**  One of the other things that's been really interesting is we've had two of our investors  who are like, we need to do better at this and we need your help doing it.  And I don't think it's necessarily fair to put the burden on me or any individual in  general.  But it is interesting to see that they want to do something about it.  
**[0:33:43-0:33:47](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:33:43):**  And that they're actively taking steps to do something about it.  One is going to commission a research report on challenges that women might face in raising  capital in the ag space.  One is organizing a conference, actually Davos on the Delta in May.  That's like two weeks or so.  
**[0:34:01-0:34:03](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:34:01):**  Or next week.  And they are trying to have either gender parity or close to it, which I think is incredibly  ambitious and aggressive and wonderful and great.  So, I think there's things that are starting to happen which feels good.  I don't think events are the only challenge.  
**[0:34:17-0:34:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:34:17):**  I think, especially on the tech side, access to capital and those other challenges need  to be addressed as well.  But events felt like something I was doing every day.  And that's why it frustrated me.  Yeah, I agree.  
**[0:34:27-0:34:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:34:27):**  And did you, that's so cool to hear some of this changing.  I wondered where it all would go.  Because I think I caught it, I happened to see it on Twitter quite early and was like,  oh, this is either going to be like a nothing thing because people aren't ready for it or  it's so topical right now that it will kind of take off and it seems like it really took  
**[0:34:46-0:34:47](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:34:46):**  off.  And great to hear the positive.  And we'll see, right?  Like, let's just keep attending events.  And if you don't see it change, then we know it, you know, I think I just got feedback  
**[0:34:55-0:34:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:34:55):**  of a conference that just happened.  And apparently it was incredibly not diverse.  So you know, maybe that was because it's already too far in the motion, in motion.  But I think we just need to pay attention and be not afraid to voice, you know, to call  people out on those types of things.  
**[0:35:12-0:35:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:35:12):**  Have you gotten any like negative pushback or like reverse or people saying like, oh,  this is like, you know, we don't want, I don't know, one pushback I could imagine is, and  I've definitely felt this, like, I don't want to be asked to speak because I'm a woman.  I want to be asked to speak because I'm a great speaker.  And so does that, like, are there, what's your response to that?  
**[0:35:31-0:35:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:35:31):**  And like, have there been any other, maybe slightly more negative or resistant pushbacks  to this movement?  Yeah, I mean, I agree with that.  I actually think it's a total cop out to ask any woman to be a moderator just so that you  can have women involved or to speak on a panel about diversity if they're not diversity experts.  
**[0:35:49-0:35:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:35:49):**  I try my hardest to say no to things that I don't feel like I'm an expert in.  So, you know, I'm happy to talk about raising capital.  I'm happy to talk about I tech.  I'm happy to talk about your ag.  I'm happy to talk about building a team in New York.  
**[0:36:03-0:36:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:36:03):**  I'm happy to talk about many things that I'm doing and that I feel like I contribute to.  Just because I'm a woman does not make me an expert in diversity.  And in fact, it's something that I've been intentionally tripped about and trying to  navigate around myself.  But it's not something that I'm an expert in.  
**[0:36:20-0:36:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:36:20):**  And there are plenty of people who are.  So if the, you know, if the intent is to have a panel about diversity in an industry, I  would always advocate to bring on experts in that topic.  And frankly, it's not an ego thing.  I want to be asked to speak about something I'm an expert in because that's the thing  
**[0:36:36-0:36:39](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:36:36):**  that's going to be the most useful for the people that are listening.  You don't really want me talking about hockey because I'm not a hockey expert.  If you did ask me to speak about the New York Jets, I could probably be myself an expert  in that.  But, you know, you don't want to you don't want to be it's not an ego thing.  
**[0:36:52-0:36:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:36:52):**  It's not that you don't want to be asked about being a woman.  But, you know, there are certain things that I am an expert in and I should be asked to  speak about those things.  In terms of negative pushback, I've heard incredibly humorous things to me.  But yeah, I mean, we get there was there was tons of I would say most of the feedback was  
**[0:37:13-0:37:15](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:37:13):**  overwhelmingly positive.  But there are you know, there's a lot of people, especially in ads, feel like, you know, most  of the feedback, I guess that's negative is around the idea that, well, if women are representative  in the industry, then why would we ask them to be panelists type of a thing?  So, you know, the overwhelming majority of farm owners in the United States are men.  
**[0:37:34-0:37:39](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:37:34):**  And so if you're doing a conference about farm ownership specifically, then, you know,  most people feel, you know, a lot of the perspectives around this as an example would be something  that people would say, you know, well, farm owners are men.  So why would we ask women to participate?  And I think that that, too, is a bit of you know, that's a bit of just being naive.  
**[0:37:57-0:38:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:37:57):**  One, yes, the majority of farm ownership is male right now.  But there are women, you know, women are leading the way in terms of research and higher education,  and they're coming out with advanced degrees in research and biology and plant physiology  and genomics.  And when you think about the tech industry as a whole in the States, you know, the people  
**[0:38:18-0:38:20](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:38:18):**  that are leading the research side are women.  And when you think about the people, you know, when you think about big ag and you think  about the seed companies and the nutrient companies, there are tons of women in high  leadership positions.  I think if I look forward into the future, you know, women are 50 percent of the population.  
**[0:38:34-0:38:39](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:38:34):**  So when I think about representation in the industry, in industries in general, when I  think about tech CEOs or panels or employees, I want to see that be more representative  of our population.  And so, you know, that requires two things being fixed.  It requires a pipeline issue being alleviated.  
**[0:38:55-0:39:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:38:55):**  So trying to reduce the challenges of access to capital for tech CEOs who maybe are women,  but also maybe haven't our first time founders or aren't in the Bay Area.  There's a lot of different challenges there that make this a pipeline problem of diversity  or diversity pipeline problem and also a network problem.  And this is, you know, simple things like the list.  
**[0:39:16-0:39:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:39:16):**  The idea was if you don't know enough women to ask to get a gender diverse panel, then  here are some you can ask.  And, you know, it really wasn't meant, you know, it's not meant to be a condescending  thing.  It's meant to be a, you know what, if we don't have a universal list that you go to to find  
**[0:39:31-0:39:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:39:31):**  people, here's one.  If you don't know who to call to ask somebody, you know, if you don't know who to call, call  somebody on this list and they'll help you figure out who you might be able to reach  out to.  And that is like the first step to me in terms of how do you break down the network barriers?  
**[0:39:47-0:39:49](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:39:47):**  Yeah, I totally agree.  I think we I think that is a great step towards it.  And just like raising the awareness is the first step.  And then there's lots of different paths people can take from there.  And even just on the sort of vast majority of farmers are men.  
**[0:40:00-0:40:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:40:00):**  While definitely true, I would argue like a lot of the farmers I talk to fully see the  importance of having their wives in that farming system and whether it's running the books  or otherwise and think of it as a farming team and a farming family.  And so I think it's, you know, probably misses some of the points, even that that about the  number of farmers who are men.  
**[0:40:20-0:40:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:40:20):**  Which I think is always...  And I think one of the, yeah, one of the interesting things I'll just add to that, though, is that  there is this changing dynamic of who is a farmer.  You know, you asked us earlier about the indoor farming space and I answer it to be a profession,  but you're also seeing a dynamic shift of who is a farmer.  
**[0:40:40-0:40:47](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:40:40):**  We I mean, we're working with over 150 some odd customer growers around the world.  And I'd say probably, I think 40, close to 40 percent are women owned, women operated  farms.  So that's a very different number than ranching or commodities or whatever it may be.  But it's an interesting picture to look at as we start to think, you know, OK, how is  
**[0:41:04-0:41:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:41:04):**  farming changing and then who is a farmer or what is the concept of a farmer is starting  to shift a little bit.  Very much so.  And actually, I'm seeing the same thing, but on the opposite side.  So we've been running at iCENTiCA program for farmer entrepreneurs.  
**[0:41:21-0:41:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:41:21):**  So producers who raised their hand and wanted to go on the startup journey because they  have an idea or a burning pain point that they want to solve.  And that both of the cohorts we've run so far, very small sample size, but has been  much more close to sort of gender balance, sort of more of like a 40, 45 percent female  in self-selecting to be entrepreneurs coming from the producer and ag community.  
**[0:41:42-0:41:47](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:41:42):**  So starting to see that change on that side as well, which I think is really exciting  and interesting.  That's very cool.  So I so appreciate you coming on.  I have one last question, which is what does agri-list mean and how did you come up with  
**[0:41:58-0:42:00](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:41:58):**  that name?  So it means agricultural analyst is the sort of joining of those words.  I actually really love the name Salesforce for a company because I feel like it really  aptly describes what the product does.  If you look back 10 years ago, the product that Salesforce was trying to create and put  
**[0:42:22-0:42:26](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:42:22):**  into the market was something that was going to be the tool of your Salesforce, if not  automate your Salesforce at one day.  And the idea for agri-list really was that you don't necessarily have a data scientist  on site or an analyst on site, but you could.  You could have this tool that could serve as this role for your company.  
**[0:42:40-0:42:47](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:42:40):**  There's a shorter answer too, which is when you pick a name for your company, I always  advocate for picking something with an A so that you're at the top of every list.  Whenever you're at a conference, whenever you're old school, if you look at a phonebook,  having a company with an A is incredibly helpful visually for somebody to find you.  That's so funny.  
**[0:43:02-0:43:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:43:02):**  That is the advice that my dad, who's an entrepreneur, gave me in the company.  He started with an A and he essentially wouldn't back me starting a company unless it started  with an A. And I thought he was being a total metaphor, but I've been surprised to hear  how many people also still come through, even in a digital world.  My father also, he started his own business as well.  
**[0:43:25-0:43:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:43:25):**  That was his advice as well.  He had a few things that were nuggets of fun facts from the days old of starting companies  as an accounting firm.  It was things like put flyers underneath windshield wipers and pick an A name.  That's hilarious.  
**[0:43:42-0:43:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:43:42):**  Well, Alton, thank you so much for coming on.  Where can people find more information about the list of women in ag tech, about agri-list  and about the state of indoor farming report?  Where should they look to find those resources?  Yeah, so there's a bunch of resources.  
**[0:43:59-0:44:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:43:59):**  I'm on Twitter personally at Alton Koff.  My name is A-L-L-I-S-O-N-K-O-P-S.  Our company is at Agri-list and we try and post there as often as we can.  We also write a decent amount on our blog.  We're on Medium if you just search for agri-list on Medium.  
**[0:44:18-0:44:24](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:44:18):**  That's where we'll post things like insights into data, how is the indoor farming industry  evolving, who's the farmer, those types of pieces.  The survey itself is at Agri-list.com slash state indoor farming 2017 and our website  is Agri-list.com.  There's a wide array of resources, but almost all of them cross-link to each other.  
**[0:44:43-0:44:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:44:43):**  If you find one, you can probably find all the others.  Fantastic.  Thank you so much.  Just a huge shout out.  I think that the content you guys put out is really good and I've enjoyed reading it  
**[0:44:52-0:44:53](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:44:52):**  and following it.  And B, the report is so well designed.  I wasn't going to say this, but it's so refreshing to have a report that is easy to read and  look really slick and nice.  Thank you for doing that.  
**[0:45:05-0:45:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:45:05):**  Yeah, it's a very fun project to work on every year.  I write it and hopefully that'll start to change in the future years.  But it's good to learn from the growers, honestly, and it's going to give you good content, so  it's pretty easy to put together.  Fantastic.  
**[0:45:20-0:45:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:45:20):**  Well, Austin, thanks so much for joining us.  Really appreciate it and hope to meet you in person sometime soon, maybe at a conference  or otherwise.  We're both panelists.  That's great.  
**[0:45:30-0:45:31](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:45:30):**  Thanks for having me.  Thank you for listening to the Bush Tech podcast.  We'd love to hear what you think.  If you have feedback, suggestions for future guests or technologies or topics you want  to cover, you can find us at bushtechpodcast.com.au.  
**[0:45:50-0:45:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357339#t=0:45:50):**  I hope you found it enjoyable.  Until next time.  See ya.  Bye bye.  