### Agtech - So What?  (2019-36-13)
**[0:00:00-0:00:24](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, and welcome to the AgTech So What podcast. Emerging technologies are rapidly changing  the global agricultural industry. We believe that this revolution is only getting started.  But there's still too much hype out there and too big of a disconnect between Ag and AgTech.  So on this show, we try to bridge that gap. In each episode, we bring you the story of a  different innovator in agriculture and try to find the place where Ag and Tech meet.  
**[0:00:45-0:00:59](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:00:45):**  I'm your host, Sarah Nolet. Welcome back to the AgTech So What podcast.  Today, I was joined by a bit of a celebrity. Rob Sharkey is an Ag social media guru and speaker,  and now has his own radio program and TV show, really active in Ag Twitter and Ag social media,  and has his own podcast, The Shark Farmer, which is actually how we met. I came on his podcast a  few months ago, and so it was great to have him back to come on this one. We talk a lot about  
**[0:01:24-0:01:28](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:01:24):**  social media and how that's changing the conversation in Ag, whether that's getting  help for tech support stuff or bridging the gap with consumers or things like podcasts, just  going deeper into different farms and sharing the stories of different farmers. And Rob's definitely  the master at that. We rambled a bit in the beginning of this podcast and trying to figure  out what we're going to talk about. We go from tech to consumers and what Rob's up to with all  
**[0:01:51-0:01:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:01:51):**  of his different businesses. But at the end, I was really happy to get into some kind of media  issues around the rural-urban divide and what Rob's doing in that space to bridge the gap and  really listening to consumers, as well as talking about Ag and all the different complexities  that consumers might not know about. So this was a really fun episode to record. Always great to  chat with Rob and hope you enjoy it.  
**[0:02:27-0:02:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:02:27):**  So Rob Sharkey, welcome to the podcast.  I'm thrilled to be here.  Good. Well, I'm thrilled to have you. And yeah, we'll see where we go today. I have a bunch of  different questions for you about social media and Ag and advocacy and a bunch of things I've  been wanting to ask you for a while. So really looking forward to chatting today. But where  
**[0:02:48-0:02:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:02:48):**  in the world are you today?  I am in my studio at Bradford, Illinois.  Nice. And is that on the farm? Is that near the outfitter? I actually don't know much about you  setup and how the various businesses you're involved in fit together.  Yeah, I do run a deer outfitter and we have the lodge that's on the farm. So it's 100 steps  
**[0:03:11-0:03:13](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:03:11):**  from my house and that's where I've got the studio.  So you're going to have to explain this to me. I've been wanting to ask you for a while.  What is an outfitter? I know that's probably a stupid question.  No, there are no stupid questions, especially one being asked by an international assassin.  It's been a while. It's been a while since we talked, hasn't it?  
**[0:03:28-0:03:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:03:28):**  Yes, it has. But don't worry, I've been hard at work doing spy things.  How many people have you, air quotes, taken care of since we've last talked?  You know I can't tell you information like that, Rob.  I do, but I was, you know, I gotta ask. I don't know. What was your question? I'm sure it was good.  Tell me what an outfitter is.  
**[0:03:50-0:03:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:03:50):**  Oh, yeah. So, okay. So what I do is I lease ground for my neighbors, the hunting ground,  and then I insent sublease it to people. So I have people come in from mainly the East Coast  to hunt that ground, and then I have a hunting lodge too, so they stay here.  Got it. And what kinds of humans are these? Like, who are the people that come?  What's that now?  
**[0:04:12-0:04:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:04:12):**  What kind of, like, what's the profile of person that comes? Is it like a regular hunter,  or is it someone that's never hunted before? Like, who comes?  Oh, no. These are guys that have hunted a lot. I mean, we're after people that know what they're  doing because, I mean, at the end of the day, it's my reputation that's out there.  So, no, I'm not going to let some yahoo come out here and start slinging arrows in the sky.  
**[0:04:37-0:04:39](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:04:37):**  Does anyone bow hunt, or is it all guns?  It's mainly bow hunting. I think we've got four groups of bow hunters, and then we have two  groups of shotgun. Got it. Okay. Yeah, my dad does a bit of bow hunting, so I've grown up around  that, but I didn't connect it. I mean, I knew Outfitter was a hunting thing, but I didn't  piece together all the different pieces. Gotcha.  
**[0:05:00-0:05:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:05:00):**  So, cool. So you have the Outfitter, and then you have the farm as well. Tell me about the farm.  Yeah, I've taken over the family farm, and then been a hunting hunter.  I've taken over the family farm, and then been very lucky to have been able to expand that.  So I'm a full-time farmer, but you're here in the Midwest. It's not very exciting. We grow corn and  soybeans. That's it. I don't have any livestock anymore. I got out of that in 2008. So it's just  
**[0:05:31-0:05:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:05:31):**  raising row crops. And what kind of livestock did you have? Hogs?  Yeah, but I don't want to talk about that. Those are bad memories.  Right. Okay, great. We'll move on. I'll come back when you're least expecting it.  Yeah, it's awkward when you ask someone a question like that, and then you find out they don't want  to talk about it, isn't it? No, not until you ask if it's awkward, I think.  
**[0:05:54-0:05:58](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:05:54):**  Well, I guess I have a bigger heart than you do. Maybe that's what it is.  Definitely. Yeah, I think definitely. So you took over the farm, and you're farming full-time.  How, like, when on the journey did you start getting into social media and podcasting? And  like, why? How did that happen? Well, you know, here in the States, you've got  a big farm group that's kind of the way that you, I guess, make a name for yourself. I don't know,  
**[0:06:24-0:06:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:06:24):**  that you do stuff that's relevant. And I got kicked out of that. So about four years ago,  I started on Twitter, and my electricity went out on about Christmas, and I didn't get it back till  New Year's. So I went on a rant for about a week to my power company, and it pretty much went viral.  And I kind of took off that popularity and continued with Twitter as a social media platform.  And then two years ago, I started a podcast about agriculture, and that's where we're at now.  
**[0:06:58-0:07:03](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:06:58):**  So when you did this rant on Twitter, did you have any intention of it going viral?  Were you like, oh, this is a way to do something different? Or you literally were just like,  I just want to tell people about how crap this is? Listen, here's what happened, right?  So our electricity went out, and we had this little tiny generator that would run the furnace,  and that's about it. So I had to sit home and babysit that. The rest of the family went to  
**[0:07:25-0:07:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:07:25):**  the in-laws. So I'm sitting there. You can't do anything else but sit there and think of  bad thoughts towards your power company. So that's what it was. I just had nothing else to do.  Got it.  Right. And so then, why the jump to podcast? So having a following on Twitter doesn't  necessarily mean you decide to start a podcast? So why did you decide to do that?  
**[0:07:47-0:07:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:07:47):**  Because it seems to. No, I don't know. We had Keri Zoka come in. She was a hunter and a social  media presence, and she's been doing a podcast on hunting for a long time. And talking to her,  it's just something that I wanted to do. And that's basically how it got started.  And did you have a strategy? You were like, oh, I'm going to ask these kinds of questions  and this kind of guess, and I want to grow it and get a sponsor. Or was it just like,  
**[0:08:17-0:08:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:08:17):**  let's see what happens? What was your thought? No. No. No damn idea what it was, what I was doing.  And I think that's some of the beauty of it is I was asking questions that you probably shouldn't  ask people, but I didn't know any better. Zero media training. Just went at it. And I don't know.  It seemed like it was resonating with people. Do you feel like you're... Because I only know you on  social media and on the podcast. And do you feel like yourself? If I came and spent a week with  
**[0:08:50-0:08:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:08:50):**  you, would I be like, oh, he's really different on the show than he is in person? No, you would  think I'm a super guy in person. No, I don't know. I don't know. That's kind of my personality.  I don't like talking about myself. I just like asking questions. I love finding out  things about other people. Things outside of agriculture, things about the way other people  farm. Just stuff that's different than I do day to day fascinates me. So yeah, what better platform  
**[0:09:24-0:09:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:09:24):**  just to ask people. You were on it. You remember that? That was fun. Yes, I do remember that. It  was fun. I remember because I reached out asking if you'd come on my podcast and somehow I ended up  coming on yours instead. Yeah, that's when you know you're dealing with a professional, yo.  Right. Something like that. So you now have a sponsor in the form of Farmer's Edge. How did  that come about? Were you looking for a sponsor? Did you approach them? Did they approach you?  
**[0:09:55-0:10:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:09:55):**  How'd that happen? No, I mean, the podcast was gaining some traction. And we had Leaning Pines  Design approach us and they're like, hey, your marketing is horrid and horrible. Can I help you?  I'm like, well, this is just for fun. I don't want to pay. She's like, just run an ad for me on your  podcast, which I had no idea. So it started that way. And then we did some companies and then  a company called Thunderstruck Ag advertised one week and it was probably the best thing that  
**[0:10:27-0:10:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:10:27):**  happened because he did a promo code. So if someone called in to Thunderstruck, they got  like a 10% discount or whatever, they use the promo shark farm or something like that.  And that right there, so I could show that there was an effective advertising on a podcast.  And then that kind of went over to Farmer's Edge and Marina Barnes, the head of marketing,  who is a very mean person, but very smart. She grabbed me and she, yeah, so they're the  
**[0:10:59-0:11:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:10:59):**  sole sponsor of the podcast. Right. And I think it's so funny because you're pretty non traditional,  I would say, in terms of how you talk about Farmer's Edge. And I haven't really heard anyone  else doing that, like kind of being so off the cuff and it's funny, right? And it obviously  resonates with your listeners. Is that, again, did you have like a strategy there in terms of  how you were going to kind of messaging and all that, or is it just totally off the cuff as it  
**[0:11:28-0:11:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:11:28):**  sounds? No, they send me these scripts every week. There's a girl in marketing that is in charge of  sending me scripts every week for the podcast, Double J Ginger. And she sends them to me and  they're just so wordy and she wants like everything that they do in like a 60 second ad.  So I don't really even look at them anymore. So I kind of see what they're doing on Twitter and  I just make fun of them. And it seems to work. Right. It does seem to work. It's obviously  
**[0:11:58-0:12:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:11:58):**  going well. I love it. And I think it's funny and I'm sure it helps them too. I wanted to kind of  ask you about that ag tech space because Farmer's Edge is one of the companies that's doing pretty  well in the ag tech space. Is ag tech even a word that you would use to describe the technology in  agriculture or is that something that only folks like me that work in the tech side of things talk  about? No, that's kind of the word, right? That's kind of the catchall phrase. You know what it is,  
**[0:12:30-0:12:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:12:30):**  anything that like has to do with a monitor or that type of electrical stuff, it seems to all  get kind of the catchall of ag tech. I mean, I love it. I love messing with that stuff because  it makes you look at your farm in a completely different way than you did say just a few years  ago. I mean, to be able to look at your farm from satellites or to be able to manipulate the way  you're planning with guidance, introducing the variable rate planning, stuff that is just like  
**[0:13:02-0:13:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:13:02):**  completely off the grid just a few years ago. And what you said, it's kind of transformed  things. Is it really changing how you farm or is it more kind of just interesting and  fun or what's been the shift in kind of how you actually run the business based on all this  technology, if any? Oh, it completely makes me anyway look at a farm completely different  from how I'm going to fertilize it to how I'm going to seed it to even how I'm going to tillage  
**[0:13:35-0:13:41](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:13:35):**  it to plant it. Everything is looked at differently because now I don't have to blanket  that field anymore. That field, if I can look at the different soils, the different moisture levels,  I can plant a different variety in that on the go. I mean, I don't have to stop and clean out my  whole plan or all that stuff. The fertilizer you can put right on where the plant's going to go so  it can utilize it the best. All this stuff that we did as farming 20 years ago was all just kind of,  
**[0:14:07-0:14:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:14:07):**  and it worked, right? You just went out there as a field and you looked at it as one piece of ground.  You don't have to do that anymore. You can look at the field and look at it as like 100 different  many fields. Yeah, do you, so what grade would you give yourself on kind of technology? Like,  are you a super pointy end of the curve A plus technology user or are there people out there  that are kind of using this stuff way more than you are? Where do you sit on that spectrum?  
**[0:14:35-0:14:41](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:14:35):**  Well, I give myself a D plus, but I talk to people that have an A plus. So I think that's  a difference. I don't try to understand the ins and outs of it. I just, I know what I want to do,  and I need to find the right person to help me do that. And so how do you do that? Do you find  people like, you know, consultants or people that are paid to do that? Or is it more kind of through  social media and informal ways that you get help? More and more, like with the company,  
**[0:15:04-0:15:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:15:04):**  even if you're talking about tractors, you're talking about your digital imagery, all that,  a lot of these companies put out good products, right? You don't buy a bad tractor or combine  anymore. I mean, there's something good and bad about all of them, but they're all good machines.  So I'm looking more at service now, and I'm looking at what's going to happen when I break  down, who's going to help me utilize that machine in the best way. So I look at service just like  
**[0:15:32-0:15:38](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:15:32):**  it's service just about as much as I look at pricing. And how do you do that? Like, obviously  you don't know until it breaks. So is it try and then see how it goes, or do you get like reviews  or ask them? Like, how do you actually evaluate that? Well, in agriculture, we aren't afraid to  talk. And when a company is not doing something right, it's usually fairly well known, but no,  there's been several times where I've been burnt too, you know, and not every company can have a  
**[0:16:02-0:16:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:16:02):**  good salesman or a good tech in every part of the country. It happens. Sure. Do you have any, uh,  any good stories? You don't have to name any companies, but any good, uh, failure stories?  Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it's, I, yeah, I did buy a, you know, I buy John Deere because I've got a John  Deere dealer with a good service department that's three miles away, but I mean, I had,  was buying a utility tractor and so I went with a different brand because price and there was a  
**[0:16:33-0:16:39](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:16:33):**  little sensor somewhere deep in it that wasn't working. And I mean, it's like, it was like  pulling teeth to get anybody to talk to me because everybody's just saying, well, just bring it in,  just bring it out. I don't want to bring it in because that's going to charge me. It's like 200  bucks just right off the bat for you to look at it. If it's something simple, I want to be able  to do it myself. So, I mean, that was, yeah, that, that kind of annoyed me and yeah, I won't be  
**[0:16:57-0:17:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:16:57):**  buying from them again. Right. It's interesting. So one of the things in the ag tech world, I guess  that, that gets talked about a lot, um, is this idea of, of service and especially for things like,  you know, new sensors and internet of things. And as we think about robots and more digital stuff  and, and like a whole different kind of skillset that you might need to operate these different  technologies on farm, like, is there a new business model or a new kind of company or a new  
**[0:17:26-0:17:31](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:17:26):**  type of offering or training that needs to exist that's more about the technologies and how to get  them to fit and work and, and all that. And the example that I use or hear a lot is around what  Best Buy did with geek squad. Like when you, when we kind of first had consumer electronics and they  had the geek squad going out to fix things. And so there's like a, do we need geek squad for  agriculture? Do you think that that is, is needed at all? Or that's already like, it already exists  
**[0:17:53-0:17:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:17:53):**  and people, you know, figure it out cause you got to figure it out. Like what, what's your view on  that? Well, it, my experience with the geek squad has been less than stellar. So that's probably a  bad example for me. Well, it's like you buy a laptop, right? And okay. Something's in there,  something's not working. You call them and all like, you've got to bring it in. Okay. So you  bring it in and the line is 17 miles long and there's no way just to drop it off. And it's just,  
**[0:18:22-0:18:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:18:22):**  it annoys me. There's yeah. Now see, see what you do on your podcast. You get people mad.  I think that you sort of do the same thing. So it's only fair.  You make a valuable point. Yeah. Anyway, geek squads for agriculture. I think they've kind  of already got them. I mean, they're called different things, but you know, like when I call  for like a guidance system or whatever, I'm not just calling the store. I know the guy to call.  
**[0:18:50-0:18:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:18:50):**  It's the guidance guy. Actually, that's how I got it in my phone is the guidance guy. So I mean,  to a point they've already got their own geek squads kind of in place. Right. So you think  that there's not like the different companies that are selling the different technologies,  it's kind of their responsibility to do their own service and to be there to fix things when  they break. Well, if they want to do business on my farm, yeah, definitely.  
**[0:19:17-0:19:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:19:17):**  Fair enough. I want to ask about something that you mentioned, like right when we started talking  around big ag organizations and getting kicked out and the kind of advocacy. So this is a term that  I think I probably don't fully understand kind of coming from the outside. So can you explain  advocacy and your relationship with it, I guess? Yeah. Okay. The word advocate, right. It's like  an agriculture advocate and they made the word advocate. Yes. Yeah. It's very clever in that  
**[0:19:51-0:20:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:19:51):**  kind of way. It makes me feel like I have something funny in my mouth. I feel like I'm speaking a  different language. I feel awkward every time I say it. Do you know what's bad is I can't say the  word advocate anymore because I've got that stupid word stuck in my brain. It goes the other way too.  There you go. It's just a way of kind of telling your story or promoting agriculture. To me,  it is. It gets a negative term because it's been used, I don't know, kind of as an excuse to tell  
**[0:20:31-0:20:37](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:20:31):**  people how to farm or say that your farm is better than other farms. So like, I don't know, just like  the organic versus conventional, right? So you're an advocate for the conventional. You're going to  bash the organic. I mean, that's not right, but that's why the word advocate gets a bad tone is  because it's been used for things like that. So let me make sure I understand. So it gets used as  like you're talking, you're kind of polarizing the conversation or you're only talking about  
**[0:21:02-0:21:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:21:02):**  your way of doing it as the right way rather than it kind of meaning you're just promoting  agriculture or talking in general about like just having the conversation. It's more that you're  kind of making it one-sided. That's the insult. Well, when social media was really taken off in  agriculture, I mean that word popped up, right? And then you had people labeled as advocates and  there would be people that were kind of standing on top of a mountain saying, I'm better than you,  
**[0:21:29-0:21:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:21:29):**  this is a way to do it, your way is dumb. And that's why that word got associated with being  bad. So it's not even a real word. Yeah, we should end it. You should announce on your podcast that  that's no longer a word. Yeah, I think I could say that. I'm not sure that it would do anything,  but more than happy to say it. You've got some power. I'm not saying you, I mean, you're, man,  look out. Yeah. I mean, you've killed people for a living. Let's see, we haven't talked about that  
**[0:21:58-0:22:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:21:58):**  yet. And I'm not planning on it, thank you very much. What country are you in right now? I am in  the USA right now. I'm in California. Huh, so you say. I mean, when I called, like the caller ID  said like a Ubaca stand or some kind of stand. So I don't believe a word you're saying. Just  got to keep you guessing, Rob. Yeah, you worry me. Yeah. No, I do still live in Australia though,  but I am home in California right now. I got to get out there to Illinois though. So I want to  
**[0:22:37-0:22:41](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:22:37):**  ask, so advocacy, one more question on it. It doesn't have anything to do with policy. Like,  there's no policy, advocacy, any angle there. It's just like a general term. See, that's the  thing. It's a made up word. It could be whatever you want it to be. It could be a house plant. So  there's not a definition for it. To me, I think it is someone that is promoting agriculture,  aggregate. But I guarantee you ask other people, they're going to say different things. So when  
**[0:23:05-0:23:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:23:05):**  you don't have a firm definition of what it is, it can be whatever you want. Got it. Okay,  that's helpful. So I have a bunch of other myths that I need you to help me debunk. And my next  question is a Twitter question. So on Twitter, there's a hashtag no yield tweets. Can you  explain that to me? Well, I don't know. I guess the thought was that it's annoying. That's the  thing is that there'll be a lot of people out there that want to tell other people how to  
**[0:23:42-0:23:47](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:23:42):**  render social media. Yes, there's the same type of people that are making fun of advocates for  doing the same thing on that. But I don't know. The idea was to keep the prices high because there  was so much corn and soybeans out there. I don't really know. I mean, there again, it's one of  those things. It's on social media, you know, private jokes, and then people try to understand  it and interpret it in different ways. I think the best thing is just to you do you. How about  
**[0:24:10-0:24:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:24:10):**  that? Hashtag you do you. I like that one. Yeah, you can use it if you want. Thanks, Rob. I appreciate  that. I'll fully attribute it to you and give you credit. Well, thank you. Right. Okay, so that's  helpful. I got that one. So the other one is that you talk about a lot is Ag Twitter. Is that like  a concept or is it a hashtag? Like how does one use or be on Ag Twitter? Well, I mean, Ag Twitter  is one section of agriculture. And if you do the numbers, it's actually a very, very small section  
**[0:24:43-0:24:49](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:24:43):**  of agriculture. But it can be pretty, it can be pretty powerful. You can learn a lot from it. You  can you can sit and watch the way other people are farming. And if you if you stay positive, and  actually listen, you can actually gain a lot from it. You know, the problem is with all social media,  you get a lot of negativity in there. And I think a lot of people write that off just because they  don't want to deal with it or, you know, kind of be around that negative talk. But, you know, if  
**[0:25:12-0:25:18](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:25:12):**  you use it right, if you go in there with the right attitude, it can be something that is going to be  an asset for your your farm. So is it a thing though? Like it's when you say go there or be  there at the small section or the numbers? Like is it a like how is it defined? Is it is it a,  like, is it a hashtag? Is it a group of people? Like what helped me understand what it is?  Well, okay, I don't know. There again, it's not a defined term. But to me, it's just people on  
**[0:25:41-0:25:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:25:41):**  Twitter that are talking about agriculture. That's what I thought. I always thought it was.  Why? What do you think it is? Well, I guess that's what I thought. But then,  when you started saying the number of people or how big it is, I was thinking like, maybe it's a  list or a hashtag or a, like something that's more defined than I understood. But that's kind  of what I thought. It was like people on Twitter talking about ag. Is there a list? Because I'm  
**[0:26:06-0:26:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:26:06):**  probably left off. I mean, that hurts my feelings when that happens. Well, I wasn't really supposed  to tell you, but you know. See? Ah, okay. No, I don't think so. Rob, did I hear that you're on a  TV show? Well, okay, so Successful Farming TV. And they have it. And then I've got a segment on  there. Like, I don't even know when it's like every other month, every month, every two weeks.  It's on there sporadically. But yes, I get on there and I talk about whatever's on my mind.  
**[0:26:40-0:26:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:26:40):**  It's like four-minute segments. And yeah, I did just recently sign up for the second season of it.  So I haven't ticked them off yet. So you like it? You like being on TV? Well, how could you not like  being on TV? It's, I mean, it's awesome. It's TV. So yeah, and then you get to go in front of a  camera and you talk to TV people and they're TV lingo and I just nod my head like I know what  they're talking about. Somehow I don't believe that. I have to confess though, I didn't grow up  
**[0:27:10-0:27:15](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:27:10):**  with a TV and I don't have a TV. So maybe I'm, maybe you're not really talking to the right  audience here. Are you Amish? Nope. Oh, okay. No TV, huh? I'm like, actually, yeah, I am.  Well, it would make sense then. So you've never had a TV? No, my dad's house never had one.  My mom's house did, but we don't have one now. So my house in Australia doesn't have one.  What do you do? Do you watch the dingos? Just listen to your podcast, Rob.  
**[0:27:46-0:27:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:27:46):**  You know what? You're okay. I'm just going to say that.  No, I do listen to a lot of podcasts, but no, yeah, we shouldn't have a TV. So I've always,  it's interesting. I feel like there's so many shows on TV now that just didn't exist when I  was growing up and we had a TV and I didn't know you were on TV until I was poking around the  internet thinking about what I should talk to you about. And so, yeah, that's pretty cool. Would you  
**[0:28:15-0:28:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:28:15):**  rather like the TV show more than the podcast? Do you have a favorite? You know, actually the  favorite is the XM radio show that I just love doing that. And we're worried about it because  we're doing it every day, Monday through Friday. And I'm like, well, and people that were trying  to get me to do other stuff, they're like, well, you do not want to do that because you're going  to be married to that. And it's going to be such a drag. I can't wait. Like we had, you know,  
**[0:28:40-0:28:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:28:40):**  we prerecorded one today and I was actually all like depressed when we were supposed to be doing  recording because I just, I love doing it. I love talking to people on the radio and making fun of  them. Why do you love it so much? It goes back to, I just, it fascinates me to have people talk  about their lives and, you know, just kind of have that conversation style of, Hey, you know,  what are you doing? What's interesting about you? How can I make fun of you? How can you make fun  
**[0:29:09-0:29:14](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:29:09):**  of me? That type of thing. I love that you go into it with that angle. You're like, all right,  how can I get them? Watch out. Have you, have you heard the story about the scorpion and the frog?  I don't think this is going to end well, but no. Okay. So the scorpion needed to ride across the  pond. He said, Hey frog, give me a ride. And the frog's like, no, you stupid scorpion, you'll sting  me. And the scorpion is like, no, I won't sting you because if I sting you, we're both going to  
**[0:29:37-0:29:41](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:29:37):**  drown. And the frog is like, okay, well that makes sense. So the scorpion gets on the frog and  they're swimming across the pond and the scorpion stings the frog. And as they're both going down,  the frog goes, why would you sting me now? We're both going to die. And the scorpion goes,  it's the scorpion. I am what I am. This is what I do. So yeah, I'm a scorpion.  Got it. Well, I'll just maybe try not to be a frog. Apparently that's the moral of the story.  
**[0:30:07-0:30:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:30:07):**  I figured you'd appreciate that being from Australia.  Yeah. It's funny. Everyone thinks that everything's just going to kill you in Australia and it's  really not true. Like it's, you know, a city and a country like everywhere else and it's not that  bad. But anyways, I think there are scorpions there.  Do you, no, no, you answer this. Is there a thing there that can bite you and kill you?  
**[0:30:30-0:30:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:30:30):**  Is there a thing on your farm that can bite you and kill you?  There is not.  That's not true. There's got to be snakes or spiders or humans.  No, no, no humans. There's no zombies. No, there is no poisonous reptiles or snakes or scorpions  or spiders in my world here. None. Zip zero. Just hunters.  
**[0:30:54-0:30:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:30:54):**  Yes. Well, there you go.  Yeah. This is a, I love this conversation.  So tell me, I love that you get to talk to so many different people. What has been like a favorite  guest or story or moment?  No, no, no, no, no, no. And you know, you know better than to ask this because what if I turn  
**[0:31:16-0:31:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:31:16):**  around and ask you that? That's not fair. It's the worst question you could ask another podcaster  because then yeah, then you're playing favorites. You, you did that on purpose.  I think, okay, fine. I'll ask it a different way. What's going to try again.  What's the, like, what's a thing you've learned in podcasting? Not, not like a technical  podcasting thing, but maybe something about farming or about agriculture, like a cool  
**[0:31:46-0:31:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:31:46):**  thing that you've learned or something that's changed how you think about agriculture.  Oh, that's simple. Well, as far as like podcasting is easy because when I first started, you're like  nervous. And so I'd get like 20 questions, right. And I would make sure I would get those 20  questions answered, no matter if the person was done talking or not. So it's like, and even say,  if they said something like really, I don't know, really interesting that like they dangled this  
**[0:32:10-0:32:14](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:32:10):**  huge fruit out there, but my next question was about something else. I just move on.  Once I stopped doing that, I would just move on. I would just move on.  Once I stopped doing that, it made a huge difference when I actually started, you know,  listening to what they were saying. I mean, yeah, you don't get through your list of questions,  but I mean, the interviews are better. Yeah. How did you figure out how to do that? Like,  
**[0:32:33-0:32:41](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:32:33):**  just practice or did someone give you a tip? No, it was, you would kind of see, right.  So when you have the feedbacks on the podcast, the things that were getting talked about  were generally the things that I didn't have on my list as far as questions. So yeah, it just kind  of learned from that. Yeah. Right. So I want to ask you about your other podcast too, which I  will admit I've listened to less, but the Farmer and the City Girl podcast, what, like, how is that  
**[0:33:04-0:33:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:33:04):**  one going? Why did you decide to start it? I feel like that's, honestly, when I thought about  starting a podcast, that was the kind of thing I wanted to do was like bridge the gap or kind of,  yeah, talk about ag things with ag experts for, maybe for a non-ag audience. And then I realized  that I'd actually much rather talk to an ag audience if I can, but I'm curious, like,  how's that podcast going? Why did you start it? And like, what, yeah, has that evolved at all?  
**[0:33:32-0:33:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:33:32):**  Like, is it kind of working? Do you feel like you're making a difference or have an  impact that you wanted to make when you started it? Oh yeah, it's completely changed. It started  again with Carrie Zoka and we were, she was a City Girl, I was a farmer and we were trying to  bridge the gap. Man, that's so difficult to do. And then Carrie, she does like 9 million different  things. So she moved on and I started doing it with Leslie Kelly from Saskatchewan and we changed  
**[0:33:57-0:34:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:33:57):**  it to What the Farm podcast. Still trying to do the same concept. And again, it just, I don't know,  it just, it was fine. And I guess it's like podcast go, it was, it was doing fine, but I guess I was  used to Shark Farmer, so I wanted more. So we sat down and we had this big long conversation,  Leslie and I did. And we're like, you know, the thing about farmers, when they want to educate  the public with, it's this deal where we just want to tell them how they're wrong and we're right.  
**[0:34:29-0:34:34](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:34:29):**  And we don't do a whole lot of listening if we're honest with ourselves. So that's kind of  a way we've gone now is that we're talking more and more to non-ag people and we're just listening  to their thoughts on things and why they think, you know, so why does a vegan choose to be a vegan?  Why does the mom in the grocery store choose to buy organic? And it's not a deal like we're  out to change their mind in our interview, but we just want people in agriculture to at least  
**[0:35:00-0:35:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:35:00):**  understand why they're thinking what they're thinking. And what kind of feedback have you  gotten? Like, do you get more kind of ag people saying, wow, this helped me to think about it  a different way? Or consumers saying like, so glad you're doing this. Like what kind of feedback do  you get? Yeah, I mean, yes, you get some of that. And that's, that's unbelievable. That's great,  you know. But you kind of pay more attention to the people that said, all right, so this  
**[0:35:26-0:35:31](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:35:26):**  changed my mind on this. And then you kind of want to know more about how you did that.  How you changed an opinion, either on the ag side or the non-ag side. I mean, that's, that's kind of  what's curious to both Leslie and myself. And what are, what are the insights so far?  Yeah, I don't know. It's just all over the place.  It's fun. I think if anything, it just will maybe teach us to listen more. And it's funny,  
**[0:35:55-0:36:01](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:35:55):**  the people that we've interviewed, we don't really, you know, have a bunch of facts to  argue with them. We will say a few things. And it's funny that, you know, like, all of a sudden,  they'll be jumping in conversations on social media about GMOs. And I think that's a really  interesting thing to do. And I think that's also a really important thing to do. And that's just  so that people can get in conversations on social media about GMOs and go on, well, yeah, I used to  
**[0:36:27-0:36:34](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:36:27):**  think this, but you know, I did get looking into it differently. So we have kind of, we haven't  changed minds about what we've made our guests think a different way. And we haven't pushed  anything on them. I think just by listening to them, and maybe throwing a few things out there  that's been my experience, too, is having the conversation. I guess the frustrating part of  that for me is it just feels so unscalable. Like, okay, every person has to have this conversation  
**[0:36:55-0:37:00](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:36:55):**  before we're going to change people's minds. Like, that seems overwhelming to me that it's going to  be so slow. And not that the goal is to change people's minds, but to kind of find common ground,  right? Or find better ways to talk about this and ways to learn and like, kind of start to bring out  the facts and have different opinions and both sides get to listen, all the things we kind of  want to do. It just seems so unscalable. I don't know. Do you ever feel frustrated by that?  
**[0:37:22-0:37:24](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:37:22):**  Hey, you know how to eat an elephant?  One bite at a time?  One bite at a frickin' time.  Yeah, I guess that's true.  It is. It does. It seems very daunting. But it's not like there's a time frame on it, right? I mean,  
**[0:37:38-0:37:43](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:37:38):**  there's been a certain percentage of people that haven't eaten meat for how long? It's not going  to go away. But you know, if there's people out there that are making decisions based on things  that aren't true, I mean, that's, that's where we want to focus. If someone doesn't want to eat meat  because they believe it's wrong to kill an animal, I mean, that's their belief. That's not my place  to try to change that belief. I mean, that's what they believe. But if they want to do it because  
**[0:38:07-0:38:13](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:38:07):**  they think animals are being raised a certain way and they're not, well, that's where I'd like to  step in and say, hey, you know, I think you're wrong in thinking this.  Yeah. Yeah, I think that's, that's true. I guess one, so I was just at a conference the other day  kind of focusing on social license or on kind of right to farm, this kind of conversation and what  consumers think. And one of the, I guess, aspects of conversation that came up was there's so many  
**[0:38:36-0:38:43](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:38:36):**  different farming practices and the gentleman who was speaking was a farmer and was saying that he,  you know, he and most of the kind of farmers around him and the guys that he know and  are the ones that are probably producing 80% of the value, you know, that kind of 20% producing  80% of the value are farming often in a way that is, you know, more in line with consumers and his  best practices and isn't, you know, beating up animals and whatever myths that might be out  
**[0:39:03-0:39:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:39:03):**  there. But there is a whole aspect of the spectrum or whole group of farmers that maybe practices  aren't up to snuff. And so that's like, how do you have that conversation? Have you, like, I don't  know, what's your view on that? Do you think, A, that's true? And B, like, how does that change  the conversation if there are kind of different spectrums of, I guess, quality of practices in  this area? Yeah, there's nothing that makes me cringe more than to see someone in agriculture  
**[0:39:31-0:39:37](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:39:31):**  doing something that's obviously wrong. And, you know, sometimes they just don't know. Sometimes  they're trying to save a buck. Sometimes it is filmed in a different, in a wrong light that makes  it that way. But yes, when something like that comes up in ag, I think that the main thing is  everybody wants to rally around it because we just want ag to be right and everybody else to be wrong.  But when something's being done wrong in ag, I think ag needs to own it. I'm like, okay, the way  
**[0:40:02-0:40:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:40:02):**  he's doing things is not the norm and is not good. It doesn't look good for whatever reason.  That has to be more than just an opinion too. So like if you see someone out there that is  spraying a field in 40 mile an hour wind, yeah, that's the time you speak up. If you see someone  out there that's spraying a 50 mile an hour wind, you generally keep your mouth shut because  that can be okay or it can't be okay. But yeah, so I don't know if I answered your question, but  
**[0:40:39-0:40:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:40:39):**  makes me happy. Yeah, well, I think there's a couple things, right? One is like calling that  person out or defending it or like defending against it, I guess. And the other is the  frustration of kind of like, hey buddy, you're messing this up for the rest of us, which I  imagine is frustrating. I always think like, I mean, it's probably naive in the kind of world  I live in, but it seems like such a potential benefit or opportunity that consumers care so  
**[0:41:08-0:41:13](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:41:08):**  much and want to know where things come from and want to engage. Like I have a lot of friends in  the city that love that I work in agriculture and ask me all the time about like, what are the  farms like and what are the farmers like and is the drought really bad in Australia and what does  that mean and our GMOs, this and that. And I love having those conversations probably like you do,  because you get to tell different stories and help people learn. But there's also this kind of  
**[0:41:32-0:41:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:41:32):**  resistance from the ag side, like, just let us farm and we know best. And I guess I find that  really frustrating is because it seems like such an opportunity to tell the stories and to engage  with consumers and talk about different practices. But yet there's also this kind of maybe  unwillingness or yeah, unwillingness to do that. Well, yeah, and it's because we've been bitten  before, right? As agriculture, I mean, things have been reported badly or people are saying  
**[0:42:04-0:42:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:42:04):**  things differently. So it's not hard to get jaded. It really isn't. But a lot of times when you talk  to people that are outside of agriculture, they find out you're a farmer or whatever. I can't  tell you how many times someone will like, oh, I had an uncle that used to, or whatever. I knew  a farmer and he did this. I mean, they're interested. It's not a deal like where people  aren't interested in where their food comes from. They are. They need to be talked to in the right  
**[0:42:36-0:42:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:42:36):**  way, which is not easy for a farmer because we have our own lingo. We know what we're talking  about. When we say we spray a field, we know it's safe, but they don't. It's just something that we  have to have a lot of patience with and we have to listen. Yeah. Yeah. I guess that's true. I think  the lingo thing, I mean, just in the tech world, it's really hard working with, for example,  entrepreneurs who maybe haven't spent time on farms or haven't, yeah, don't know that lingo  
**[0:43:03-0:43:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:43:03):**  and trying to bridge that gap. It's like the tech people are speaking tech lingo and the farm people  are speaking farm lingo and they aren't talking to each other and you're like, right, no good  solutions are going to be developed here today until we can find common language.  So yeah, I guess it's a bit of the same thing on the consumer side. Do you, like, I don't know how  you get all this done, so I'm hoping you can give me some like productivity advice. Like you have a  
**[0:43:27-0:43:34](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:43:27):**  million businesses and podcasts and a farm and an outfitter. Like, how do you spend your day across  all of these different things? Like, how do you get all this done? Well, the biggest reason is I  have a very good support system around. We start with my wife. My wife has moved into the producer  role of the XM show. She has also stepped up in editing and producing the podcast too.  And I've surrounded myself with people that are smarter than me. You know, I use Rural Gone Urban  
**[0:44:04-0:44:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:44:04):**  is for, is my booking agent for the speeches. It's because I have zero idea how to do that.  I mean, it's, if you try to negotiate a price and I'm just absolutely horrible at it, she knows what  she's doing. So, I mean, it's just, it's simple to me. I try to work with very good people.  Leslie Kelly has been phenomenal to work with and she goes out there and she tries to find the best  guest. And, you know, as far as like on the, you know, the, the, the, the, the, the, the,  
**[0:44:33-0:44:38](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:44:33):**  you know, as far as like on that podcast, that makes the world of difference out there. So  Ag PhD, I've gone with those guys and, you know, Brian and Darren Hefty are the absolute top of  the Ag media game. In my mind, they sit at the very top and they're such outliers by doing it.  I saw no other choice, but then to go with those guys, as far as like teaming up with an Ag media  company. So what do you, I don't, I'm not familiar with them. What do you, what do they do with you?  
**[0:45:03-0:45:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:45:03):**  Or what do you do with them? Well, they, you know, Ag PhD media was basically Brian and Darren Hefty  and they do the, uh, the TV show, they do the radio show, but I mean, they're their own media  company. So I went to them and then I tried to convince them that they needed to take me onto it  and somehow I convinced them someday they're going to wise up and realize that that was a mistake.  But until then, it's going to be a lot of fun. There you go. Ride it while you can. So that  
**[0:45:34-0:45:38](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:45:34):**  wasn't really any, so one tip there was surround yourself with good people, good support system.  How do you, how do you decide like you do speaking and you do a TV show and like when the next thing  comes to you and they're like, Rob, do you want to be on a game show? And do you, do you want to  do this? And you want to do that? Like, how do you decide what you, what you say yes or no to?  Uh, it is not just my decision. You know, it's made, uh, with my family in mind, uh, with my  
**[0:46:01-0:46:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:46:01):**  other obligations in mind, you know, there, you don't want to get so much time to do stuff. So,  uh, yeah, there's a lot of thought into trying to do anything new, but you never know what that new  thing's going to be. So we go into everything with an open mind. I do enjoy this. I enjoy doing  stuff. I mean, I don't enjoy talking to you so much, but I enjoy the rest of this stuff.  So, I mean, it's, it's not like it's a horrible job that I have to sit down at a desk or, you know,  
**[0:46:29-0:46:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:46:29):**  for whatever hours a day. I mean, I, I look forward to it every time I get up. Yeah. That's, um, I  think that's obviously really important. Otherwise definitely, definitely don't do it. Do you have  like an end goal though? Like, do you have, are you like, I, um, most of the things I'm trying to  do are about, you know, making, you know, I'm, I'm optimizing for money and change in ag and,  you know, brand so that we get more customers to do this. Like, is there a either business or  
**[0:46:58-0:47:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:46:58):**  like good for the world or kind of larger strategy at work that you, um, are thinking about with all  these different activities? Well, you know, if I'm honest with myself, I wanted to be on XM. I mean,  to me that, that was kind of an end goal. So getting there is, uh, you know, was a huge deal  for us and we, we couldn't be more proud. Uh, so now we've got to own it. I mean, we've got to be  good at it. And that means, you know, getting good people to talk to, um, learning a lot very,  
**[0:47:28-0:47:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:47:28):**  very quickly, even just the simple things like the timing of the commercials and all that.  It's a, it was just a huge learning curve. So yeah, we are, we are focused solely on making what  we've got the best. Yeah. Yeah. I can imagine it's so different, like the, the idea of having  commercials and timing and, um, but it's a bit faster paced and, um, yeah, like probably a whole  different world and different skillset. Did you guys do any training or like learn about it in  
**[0:47:59-0:48:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:47:59):**  any kind of structured way or it's just been jump all in and no, no, no, no, no, no, no.  Seriously. It was, it was the, the first show was live at the, the hefty brother's field day.  And yeah, it was, uh, we just showed up and did my thing.  So, um, tell me, Rob, this is kind of my last, my last question for you, right? I think in 10 years,  how is the ag industry different and how is your day-to-day different? Are you still doing all  
**[0:48:34-0:48:39](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:48:34):**  this? Um, are you on the radio? Do you have 17 podcasts? Do you like what, what does your life  look like and how's the system different in 10 years? And you can pick a different timeframe if  you want, but can't be like next year. Cause that's too easy.  Uh, it's impossible. Okay. Yeah. It's easy to answer because there's no answer. Two and a half  years ago, I didn't have any of this. So I think the thing that I've learned the most is that you  
**[0:48:57-0:49:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:48:57):**  never box yourself in. I mean, uh, I don't know if maybe I'll be on Mars in 10 years. Right. Well,  that sounds completely stupid, but I'm not going to say I won't because you can't give yourself any  boundaries. I want to do the best I can. And I don't even know what that is. And I think that  was one of my biggest struggles for the longest time is I didn't know what I wanted to do.  And it wasn't until I kind of figured out that was okay. Then I, then I kind of figured out some of  
**[0:49:26-0:49:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:49:26):**  the things I wanted to do as dumb as that sounds, but no, I was very caught up. I was like, Oh,  you know, I got, I want to do something. Uh, lovely puts it very well. I steal this from  her all the time. She said, there's like this desire to create that, that you have, and you  just don't know what to do with it. Well, that's where I was. I wanted to do something. And I  thought, you know, okay, I'm out of the farm groups. And that was like the only thing that  
**[0:49:48-0:49:53](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:49:48):**  I could do to make a difference. Uh, that was the dumbest thing to think, but yet that's the way I  was thinking. I've changed my mind so much on things. It's just such a constant learning  process. It's okay to not know what's next. It's okay to not know what you want to do next. Uh,  but you better not put any boundaries on yourself because that is an easy way of not moving forward.  Yeah, I think that's, um, that's definitely been my experience too, that kind of activity is the  
**[0:50:18-0:50:23](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:50:18):**  most important thing and it matters less, like how strategic it is or in which direction it's  pointed, but like, keep doing stuff and figure out what works and you start to get a feel for  what you like doing and what's resonating with people and like kind of goes from there. Sounds  like that was a bit of your experience too. Yeah, but you're a really smart person. It's  harder for guys like me. It doesn't seem like it was, it was hard for you. And I definitely  
**[0:50:45-0:50:49](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:50:45):**  think that you might beat me in an IQ test. We'll have to put that to the test. No, no, no, no,  no. You're like some, I don't know. It's like Mensa is not even good enough for you. You're like  some like Doogie Howser or something. I do seven Mensa before breakfast. No,  I don't think I've ever done a Mensa. I don't know. Probably because they're below you.  Exactly. When do I get to ask you questions? Go on. You can have one.  
**[0:51:13-0:51:20](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:51:13):**  Okay. Okay. All right. You ready? No. I know. I just say you're ready because that's a trick  because I'm still thinking of the question. All right. If you could, all right, if you could  change one thing as the way people perceive agriculture, what would it be?  That's a good question. I'm not sure. I'm not sure. I'm not sure. I'm not sure.  That's a good question. I think. I know.  
**[0:51:47-0:51:49](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:51:47):**  That's why they pay you the big bucks.  I would change. I think the GMO thing would probably be like, that seems like the gateway  drug, I think. If you go down the GMO rabbit hole and you start to really understand like the,  not so much the technology, but like kind of why GMOs were created, what they do,  how they're being used and then the polarization and what the activist groups. And if you go down  
**[0:52:26-0:52:31](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:52:26):**  that rabbit hole and watch the different movies and different sides, like you can't, at least I  couldn't help but get a really like nuanced and like, it's just so complex. And then from there,  like everything else you're, you kind of look at twice. You're like, Oh, that's probably not  that simple. Like probably whatever source I'm looking at is oversimplifying it. And so  you have a, like that kind of appreciation of it's, there's probably two or three sides to  
**[0:52:54-0:52:59](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:52:54):**  this story. And so I want to learn that. And so I, to me, like understanding the kind of  GMO story and how complex that issue has gotten and how polarized is. Yeah. I think people  understanding that would change things because you might look twice at a bunch of the other complex  issues in ag and start to do more of that listening and have more of those conversations.  So I think that's what I'd change. If I showed up in Australia, could I stay in your guest room?  
**[0:53:22-0:53:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:53:22):**  Yes, you can. Sweet. Yeah. That's a great interview.  Yeah. Well, you're going to have to come speak at various things and, and I might not pay you what  your agent wants me to. All of a sudden I'm finding a hotel.  How would you answer that question, Rob? What would you change?  No, no, no, no, no, no, no. You said I got to answer or ask a question. No,  
**[0:53:47-0:53:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:53:47):**  you don't get to turn that around. Well, I think I just did.  Uh, I would focus on the GMO thing because that seems to be the gateway drug.  No, I think you nailed it. It, yeah. That seems to be a very  entry-level one that can head people down the rabbit hole. No, you didn't see how good you are.  It's tough. Well, I'm going to have you on all the time if you're just going to compliment me.  
**[0:54:12-0:54:13](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:54:12):**  Okay.  Oh, cool. Well, Rob, I really appreciate you talking to me. I always enjoy chatting with you  and I might make you do this more, uh, whether we're recording or not, because I really do like,  um, having these conversations with you. So thank you so much.  You got my number anytime. Careful what you wish for.  
**[0:54:48-0:54:53](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:54:48):**  Thank you for joining us on another episode of Ag Tech So What. You can stay up to date with  the latest episodes and news at agtechsowhat.com. And as always, if you have any feedback or other  guests to recommend, we'd love to hear from you. Just hop on the website and leave us a comment or  send us a message. Finally, if you like what you're hearing and we hope you do, please share  the podcast with a friend or leave us a review on iTunes or wherever you get your podcasts.  
**[0:55:14-0:55:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357330#t=0:55:14):**  Thanks again for listening. Catch you next time.  Bye.  