### Agtech - So What?  (2019-35-14)
**[0:00:00-0:00:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, and welcome to the Ag Tech So What podcast. Emerging technologies are rapidly  changing the global agricultural industry. We believe that this revolution is only getting  started, but there's still too much hype out there and too big of a disconnect between  ag and ag tech. So on this show, we try to bridge that gap. In each episode, we bring  you the story of a different innovator in agriculture and try to find the place where  
**[0:00:31-0:00:44](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:00:31):**  ag and tech meet. I'm your host, Sarah Nolette. Today's episode is number two on the theme  of getting ag tech ready, which we are bringing to you in partnership with Decipher. Our guest  today is Lachlan Sutton. Lachie grew up on a mixed farm and spent 10 years working for  a rural services company, Elders, looking after up to 200 clients at times. Now he looks  after ag tech and new farm developments as an agribusiness manager for corporate farm  
**[0:01:07-0:01:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:01:07):**  here in Australia called Southern Cross Farms. In our chat, Lachie shares tips about some  good and not so good experiences with ag tech. I particularly loved hearing about the differences  between corporate and family farms and their decision making around why and how to adopt  ag tech. And actually, I found it fascinating how much of his advice can apply to farmers  of all different kinds, whether corporate or family. The episode cuts in with Lachie  
**[0:01:34-0:01:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:01:34):**  answering my question about how he defines ag tech. So here's Lachlan Sutton in episode  two of Getting Ag Tech Ready brought to you in partnership with Decipher.  Yeah, well, for me, Sarah, I suppose because I've been across a lot of different commodities,  it probably does in some regards mean the same thing across all of them. If you sit  down and you talk to someone who's managing an almond property or a citrus orchard, a  
**[0:01:59-0:02:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:01:59):**  lot of the challenges are the same as those who are managing a 250,000 hectare sheep property  in the Western Division of New South Wales. We talk a lot about the weather, we talk a  lot about people, and we talk a lot about commodity prices. So to me, ag techs, it's  not necessarily just a new machine or a new bit of software that we put into a tractor  or look at how we analyze our data, how we collect data. It can be a new technique, so  
**[0:02:25-0:02:31](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:02:25):**  how we move our livestock or how we handle them through the yards, or it can be a new  chemical that's coming out just to help break herbicide resistance or something like that.  So to me, it's a really broad topic, which brings with it some challenges, but also some  really good opportunities.  Do you have a list of, here's all the things we wish we had, and I'm going to prioritize  
**[0:02:45-0:02:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:02:45):**  and then I'm going to go look for stuff? Or is it more just generally looking for stuff,  and if it's a fit with a need, then you grab it? How do you think about that triage of,  there's a million things we could go solve, but which ones do we actually start with?  So we probably do a little bit of both, to be honest, Sarah. Particularly, and it differs  compared to something I would do in a family farming setting to now in corporate, we've  
**[0:03:06-0:03:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:03:06):**  got hundreds of people on farm every day. I mean, we always see a lot of problems, but  we also try and see a lot of opportunities to improve things. But on the other hand,  we've got that many ag tech companies now that are looking to come through our door  and with all these new products, we spend a lot of our time really culling those and  funneling them down to what's really going to suit our challenges and opportunities within  
**[0:03:31-0:03:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:03:31):**  our business.  You mentioned the difference between a family farm and a corporate farm. Tell me about that  difference. Maybe what's an example of something that would have either been easier to do on  a family farm or harder or easier on a corporate or harder that illustrates the difference?  I think the decision-making process is quite different, particularly in a corporate farming  
**[0:03:51-0:03:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:03:51):**  sense. A lot of the assets that we manage or have acquired, we haven't had for a really  long time. So we need to try and gain data as quickly as possible and make those decisions  soundly based off good quality data as best as we can get it, which is sometimes a challenge.  Whereas in a family farming setting, a lot of the time, and I don't want to throw a blanket  because it is a diverse industry, but in a family farming setting, we're talking sort  
**[0:04:15-0:04:20](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:04:15):**  of third, fourth, fifth generation that have really got a good feel for their land. So  we're trying to make that up in a short period of time, which is incredibly challenging to  do. So that's the main difference that I sort of see all the time. I don't see a lot of  difference in the passion between the two. I think both generally want to, in most circumstances,  want to make their businesses better. So it's just that timeframe and of course at times  
**[0:04:40-0:04:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:04:40):**  scale as well. So the more people we have running around on corporate larger farmers,  the more opportunities there are for things to go wrong. But also the more opportunities  there are for new ideas and new ways of thinking as well.  It's so interesting the lack of historical data or context on a place. In some ways,  that can be such a good thing because you need to use data to make decisions. In other  
**[0:05:04-0:05:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:05:04):**  ways, it can be, like you said, such a disadvantage because you don't have that intuition or history  or context. Do you kind of see that trade off? Like are there reasons why coming in  with new data could actually be a better thing or is it just really important to have that  context that you would have over generations?  It's probably how you use the data to be honest, Sarah. I mean, it's sort of how we make decisions  
**[0:05:26-0:05:31](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:05:26):**  in a corporate sense a lot of the time is benefit cost is same as any other business  would and being able to justify that to our investors and everything is where we see that  ag tech side, being able to get that data quicker if we can get it. But also the expertise  of our people is a really strong focus trying to just from their previous mistakes in the  past and previous successes in the past to be able to make those decisions a lot sounder  
**[0:05:52-0:05:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:05:52):**  when we acquire an asset and get up and running as quick as possible.  So maybe take me through an example of technology that you guys have decided to buy at Southern  Cross recently. Like how did you come across it and then how did you decide to buy it?  Did you have to justify it or do some kind of calculation like who else on the team you  needed their expertise or their input? Like kind of take me through maybe an example of  
**[0:06:15-0:06:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:06:15):**  how that worked.  Yeah, so probably the first one that comes to mind that we've just completed today, I  think we're probably up to a couple of months trial now, a month or two trial, which is  going really well and is a GPS tracking system called Trackmat. So it's a New Zealand based  company but with offices in Australia as well. And they're one of the few sort of really  
**[0:06:36-0:06:43](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:06:36):**  horticultural focused GPS based companies. So it was a long process to get to implementing  it and to where we are now and actually having good data. But now we're to the point that  if we got a new property, we'd probably be quite happy to look at taking it on if the  investor was happy. But that process was sort of instigated by a lot of these things at  field days and their sales representatives coming through our door and discussing the  
**[0:07:05-0:07:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:07:05):**  product with us. It was done on a number of different levels as well. So the business  I work for has actually got an innovation committee, which is a mixture of people from  in the offices out in the field right through from farmhands to managers to senior managers  within the business. And each one has a different opinion and a different sort of ideas around  how we can use things. And we settled on this product because firstly, it was simple. Anyone  
**[0:07:31-0:07:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:07:31):**  could use it pretty well as soon as the tractors turns on, it starts logging data. And then  but right through we could make it as complex as we wanted to. So it had the ability to  suit what an accountant would want in the office, but it also had the ability to tell  a farmhand where he was out in the field and let us know if he was back home safely at  the end of the day as well for those working in isolated areas. So it's a really, within  
**[0:07:55-0:07:59](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:07:55):**  our business is a lot of different opinions from different areas, which helps us shape  our decisions and although it may take more time to get there, I think we find that we  tend to get a really, really well rounded product when we do finally take something  on.  So there's a couple of things you said there that I want to hit on. One, that you met them  
**[0:08:12-0:08:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:08:12):**  at a field day, like was it important to meet them at a field day? Were they doing some  kind of demo or could it just as easily been like a conference in a city or online? Like  did it matter that they were somehow in the field or in the paddock?  Well, it was the person who was selling, Sarah, and it was sort of the demonstration of how  it was really targeted. So it was something that if you were a farmhand who had just hopped  
**[0:08:34-0:08:38](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:08:34):**  on a tractor for the first time that day to go and get something out of and vice versa,  someone who is a trained accountant in our office could have gone and still gotten something  out of. So those sorts of things were really important to us. And then similarly, once  more presentations occurred with our business, it was a similar thing all the way through,  which I found that some ag tech companies come through and they're really targeted at  
**[0:08:56-0:09:01](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:08:56):**  a high level. So it might be targeted in the office, whereas others might be sort of too  far down the alleyways. So for us in our business, we need something that might not suit everyone  100%, but it's going to get a majority of our staff across the line and then get some  really accurate data. And that was the less room for errors and more important to us than  everything else, to be honest.  
**[0:09:17-0:09:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:09:17):**  You mentioned a trial. So did you, somewhere in the process they offered to do some kind  of free or paid trial? Is that how that happened?  We actually took it on. We actually said we'll trial it for a little while, which we're sort  of getting towards the end of now on one of our farms in particular. But we took it on  and we said, we'll give it a trial where we're comfortable with the value proposition of  
**[0:09:38-0:09:43](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:09:38):**  the product. We're really happy with the support. We know that if we need someone to help us  online or in person, those people are there. And we're prepared to come up with the money  to do that immediately on a short contract. Some other sort of tech that we've done has  been on a trial basis because we probably weren't quite sold on the attributes of it  at all. We were trying to balance it against something that was quite similar. But in products  
**[0:10:08-0:10:13](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:10:08):**  that are overall farm management systems, we'd like to be a little bit more confident  in them before we choose to take them on. Because it's work involved in educating farm  staff, farm managers, people in the office as to how to use these products, because a  lot of them are quite complex. So we don't want to be chopping and changing every week.  If that makes sense.  
**[0:10:27-0:10:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:10:27):**  Yeah. So I really want to jump into that, kind of getting the team ready. But before  I do, just tell me, so having an innovation committee, would you say that's pretty normal?  And does it have to have some kind of consensus view? Or tell me more about how the innovation  committee works to decide on a product.  Yeah. It was sort of instigated by our operations manager, who is my boss within Southern Cross  
**[0:10:49-0:10:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:10:49):**  and the executive officer. And it was just that we had, I think it stemmed from a number  of different reasons. One, we were going through a large time of growth within the business,  but also coincided with a lot of new ideas coming into the business as well. So all these  new people were getting on board, had new ideas from previous employment, from sort  of things they had read about to whatever. And we needed some way of streamlining that,  
**[0:11:14-0:11:20](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:11:14):**  but we didn't want to kill the movement and say, no, we wanted to have some really good  constructive discussions around them. And at times it's a pretty dynamic discussion,  but there's everyone, again, from accountants to farm staff to farm managers to operations  managers involved in it. So it's really, I'm not sure if many other businesses have it,  but I know so far we've tried some other things that we've been quite happy with as well so  
**[0:11:40-0:11:41](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:11:40):**  far.  And so does something have to, like is the point of the innovation committee then to,  it sounds like streamlined ideas, capture the energy, like get all the different ideas  from different views on the business, which I love. Is it more about sharing those ideas  or is it more about making decisions? Like it's more of a kind of investment decision  
**[0:11:58-0:12:03](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:11:58):**  process or is it more about sharing ideas and looking at the business from different  perspectives or maybe it's both?  It's a bit of both here actually. I mean, we've got an answer to our investors and be  able to justify why we want to do some of these things at times. And to do that, we  want to be sure that we're doing the right thing and sort of it probably helps streamline  
**[0:12:19-0:12:23](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:12:19):**  these processes because I mean, it's the same as if you ask someone what sort of tractor  they'd like, they'd give you four or five different answers if you had five different  people. And it's the same with a lot of the stuff that we've got going on on farm. I mean,  there's this, as I said, there's so much more coming out now and all of those things probably  work quite well, but we've got to find something that fits well for ourselves, our farmers,  
**[0:12:38-0:12:42](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:12:38):**  and our investors. So that's sort of how we try and grab that king grass and it's a strategic  fit as we go through it. And I think that process really helps it. It helps sort of  provide the discussion that needs to be had rather than just jumping on the bandwagon  and running with something that we're probably never going to be happy with at the start.  And then we can find something that, yeah, not everyone might be 100% happy with it,  
**[0:13:00-0:13:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:13:00):**  but the majority, it will work and our investors will be happy with their decision.  Yeah, interesting. And do you, so you mentioned the getting the team ready part, like kind  of once you've decided to adopt something, making sure that it does add value and that  everyone is kind of ready and able to get use out of it, depending where they sit in  the business, how does that work? Is it like everyone comes into a meeting and then you  
**[0:13:22-0:13:26](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:13:22):**  brief them on the product or is it kind of goes over time or you divide and conquer?  Like how do you actually make sure that people are aware of what you're doing and that they  find it useful and actually use it?  Communication is a big thing, of course, and actually it's to be able to sort of really  sort of talk about what the product is and what the features are. So if I'm going to,  
**[0:13:42-0:13:48](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:13:42):**  say for example, take a TrackMap sort of example, I really try and understand the product. I  try and understand it a lot and just look at all of its features. And then once we made  that decision, we can sort of go and we discuss with some of the senior managers, some of  the farm managers, et cetera. And then we bring it right back to, okay, how are we going  to start this thing? How are we going to launch it on farm? We're happy with what it is, but  
**[0:14:02-0:14:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:14:02):**  we can't just go and do every single feature immediately. So we try and do a soft launch  with our products, how we're doing them. So we will start off on whatever the simplest  thing is. So if it's something that starts collecting data when the tractor goes on or  the flow rate controller goes on the sprayer, then that's where we start. If it's something  like a moisture monitoring sort of device, it's sort of cloud-based or whatever, then  
**[0:14:29-0:14:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:14:29):**  the farm manager will just, I mean, it's quite simple, put in there. We won't discuss fuel  points or anything at the time. We'll just put it on and we'll just look at it and then  we'll build it from there. So we usually try and go for a softly, softly approach at the  start. And then that also allows us sort of input from farm staff and farm managers as  to where the direction the product can go. So we have that really good buy-in across  
**[0:14:53-0:15:00](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:14:53):**  the group. But finally as well, we need to be consistent with how it's being built on  a farm and how we're using it. So if we can't have one farm doing it one way, one farm doing  it another, one farm being step five when another farm's at step one. So we try and  really keep that consistency. And it's something we're really focusing on at the moment is  just that consistent launch to make sure our data, I suppose I would prefer to be consistently  
**[0:15:22-0:15:26](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:15:22):**  incorrect than inconsistently correct, if that makes sense.  Yeah, what's an example of that? Like tell me, that makes sense at a high level, but  is there an example, it doesn't have to be that, that product can be another one, about  like an inconsistency or maybe even how you actually go about getting that consistency  and why it's so important?  
**[0:15:40-0:15:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:15:40):**  I mean, there was another product we used and we had, it was when it was launched, it  was sort of, it wasn't launched simultaneously across each farm. It was launched, it was  a staged launch. And we had a lot of challenges with once it got out of control and people  were using it in different ways that we had to almost relaunch the whole product. And  that was things like chemical lists were being put in different ways. We had people recording  
**[0:16:05-0:16:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:16:05):**  their hours in different ways. We had all these other things that just seemed to sort  of mutate and grow without us even focusing on it too much and just got really out of  hand and really, really messy. So we had to bring that right back to point A, relaunch  it and then almost rebuild it from there. So which took a lot of time and time is something  we don't have a lot of.  
**[0:16:29-0:16:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:16:29):**  So what did you learn from that? Like how would you do it differently or what have you  guys changed as a result of that experience?  It's the same as a lot of things, Sarah. We just standardise and standardise and standardise  and it's, but we know how to do that in a way that kills new ideas as well. So we really  need to make sure that the process for new ideas is really clear, that things don't just  
**[0:16:51-0:16:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:16:51):**  happen for the sake of it happening. So they come back through a clear channel and then  they continue to be implemented or they get put to one side for future time. So rather  than initially when a new idea, which credit to the Ag company, the tech company, they  were really quite good and then they take all these new ideas on and they say, yeah,  we can do that. In effect, they sort of build a rod for their own back and really probably  
**[0:17:16-0:17:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:17:16):**  do some detriment to the product. As I said, everyone's got some really good ideas right  through the farm and it's just important to really streamline those ideas.  Yeah, right. So that would be the kind of capturing new ideas would be both additions  to like new features or changes of how you'd use the product as well as fully new products.  Yeah, definitely Sarah. I mean, it's definitely how we look at it. Cause most of the Ag tech  
**[0:17:41-0:17:47](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:17:41):**  companies to their credit are really, really receptive to new ideas and always more than  happy to, I mean, it might take some, maybe something like integration with an accounting  system or integration with some sort of approval system, whatever. And they're always really  happy to take that on board and say, yeah, we'll try to do it. And again, sometimes that  could be to their own detriment where it might be simpler just to leave it as it is for now  
**[0:18:01-0:18:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:18:01):**  and worry about it later. So there might be some more low hanging fruit that we can take  that will make the product work better or prevent it from not working more poorly, if  that makes sense.  Yeah, right. That's interesting. Do you, you mentioned two things that kind of go together  for me. One is cutting through the noise. And I imagine that a lot of the marketing  
**[0:18:21-0:18:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:18:21):**  language for some of these products is pretty similar, like helps you save time, helps you  cut costs, whatever it might be. And so how do you kind of cut through the noise? And  maybe you have an example of something that you, that you didn't buy, like something you  thought looked good on the surface. And then once you kind of dug into it, it, it didn't  make sense. Like how did you kind of figure that out?  
**[0:18:40-0:18:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:18:40):**  Yeah, I suppose as everyone that comes through has always got and nothing against any product  that every product I think I've seen has been really quite interesting and you can see some,  some potential for, for where it would fit within it, within a farm, but just not necessarily  our farm. I suppose our big thing is just support. It's the same. I look at it now more  as if I was buying a tractor, if I had five different tractors to buy from a local district  
**[0:19:05-0:19:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:19:05):**  or a way, first thing I look at is after sales service as well as what the functionality  of the product is. So if there's no one here to help us, I can't get to Griffith, I can't  get to Hillstone tomorrow to go and fix a product. We need to have someone that can  do that.  So when you test for that, do you just ask the company how that works or do you actually  
**[0:19:23-0:19:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:19:23):**  mean that the, they would need to have an example of a farm using it nearby that you  could call and ask like what happened when, when it broke, did they come support you?  Like how do you actually assess whether the support will be good?  It's actually building relationships there. A lot with the ones that will really launch  quite well, had good relationships with, that's what it takes. We may not make a decision  
**[0:19:40-0:19:44](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:19:40):**  really quickly, but we make a decision after we're counseled that the people that we're  dealing with, we know, I mean, we've met the CEOs of a lot of these companies and, and  we're accountable and their strategic direction is going to fit our strategic direction as  well. So that's, that's one of the big things. It's just that relationship building. So even  though we might be down with a bit of software or a bit of machinery, there's still that  
**[0:20:01-0:20:03](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:20:01):**  people factor is really, really important.  Yeah. So it's so interesting that looking at their strategic vision, like it's such  a important thing to know and the concern, like what if this company goes out of business  or what if they decide to provide a blue thing instead of a red thing, whatever it might  be, you really want to know that it sounds like we really want to know that where they're  
**[0:20:23-0:20:26](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:20:23):**  headed is consistent with where you want to go and it's not going to get dropped both  from a support perspective, but also just from a, like a company perspective because  this space is changing so much. You want to know that they're going to be in it with you,  you know, for awhile.  Yeah, exactly right Sarah. And I think the, um, it said that everyone's got so many big,  
**[0:20:41-0:20:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:20:41):**  big ideas and it's, which is fantastic. It's such a good thing, but sometimes got to, I  mean the last common denominator on a sheep farm is someone shutting a gate at the right  time or checking a water. So we can do all these different things and we can really push  it quite hard, but we're just going to bring it and make sure that the direction is really  sound and really well set.  
**[0:20:59-0:21:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:20:59):**  Does your experience working for a corporate and kind of having more of these processes  around how you'd make decisions, how you'd collect ideas, how you'd get ready, has that  changed how you think about buying or adopting technology for the family farm?  It has a little bit. Yeah, I suppose now I think more in benefit costs rather than just  something I like. I suppose once upon a time you would, I went and bought a tractor, I  
**[0:21:23-0:21:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:21:23):**  bought John Deere just because that was what my family always bought or I'd buy Case New  Holland because that's what my family always thought. So I think, um, I think now I look  more at the features and how it's actually going to help me or is there something else  out there that's going to be able to help me more? So I think, yeah, it definitely has.  And, but I suppose a lot of the scale that we talk about in corporate farming compared  
**[0:21:48-0:21:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:21:48):**  to what I would in the family farm is completely different. But still the challenges remain  the same. They're people, weather and commodity prices predominantly.  Interesting when you say evaluate, um, like the features more and have a look deeper,  like where would you go to do that? Like if you saw a product you liked and maybe have  an example of this, um, product you like, and then you thought, well, you know, this,  
**[0:22:11-0:22:14](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:22:11):**  instead of just buying the one we've always bought, I want to actually understand, you  know, is there something better out there or what should we compare it to? How do you  go about that? Like, are you looking on websites or are you going to conferences or kind of  how do you think about looking for stuff you might not already know about?  I'd probably use my network a lot. So going to boarding schools and colleges and everything  
**[0:22:30-0:22:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:22:30):**  and working around Australia, actually seeing what's, what substance there are to some of  the products that are out there and some new ways that people have been using them from,  from people that I respect. Um, I'd sort of also, I've sort of been a lot of field days  and then things that sort of as well, but I try and cut through the cell a little bit,  I suppose, Sarah, if that makes sense. I don't, I mean, just because the product can do all  
**[0:22:54-0:22:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:22:54):**  this doesn't mean that's necessarily what I want it to be able to do. So being able  to get one-on-one with the person that's selling it and actually go through the products are  incredibly important to me. So, um, and continually that's where it backs up that people factor.  So there's people I know whose opinions and successes and values with the product and,  and their failures might be my success with it. So I'm actually really getting that one-on-one  
**[0:23:14-0:23:19](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:23:14):**  and really gaining understanding of what the business is and what the product is, is really  important to me. What advice would you have for someone else in a, in a similar role to  you, or maybe who wants to be in your role in the future, who wants to kind of lead ag  tech for their company and be looking at this kind of stuff? Like what, what advice would  you have around being ready and getting the most value out of, out of the ag tech that,  
**[0:23:36-0:23:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:23:36):**  that you're looking at? Um, and what kind of lessons have you learned and mistakes that  you've made that maybe someone else could, could avoid to make sure that this stuff really  is adding value? Yeah, I think, I think for me, this is initially  you've got to have a really sound strategy for, for what you're trying to achieve within  the business. I mean, everyone says, yeah, profitability and, and using as much fruit  
**[0:23:56-0:24:01](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:23:56):**  or whatever, but actually sort of drumming it down and sort of, these are our most limiting  factors, but, but really overall just, just keeping the questions really, really open  to try and understand everything about it and not just the product, but how people interact  with it. So asking a farmhand who's been on the tractor all day, how he feels, how he  or she feels about the product, how a manager sees the product, how an accountant sees the  
**[0:24:19-0:24:23](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:24:19):**  product. And to me, that's the best way to work out what the fit's going to be, particularly  in a business like this. Um, probably if you're at home on the family farm, it's probably  a similar thing asking yourself, well, what am I, how am I getting value and, and where,  where can this product go? What can I do with it? And those things. So I think just continually  questioning and making sure that you're getting value out of, out of the product is incredibly  
**[0:24:43-0:24:44](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:24:43):**  important.  Awesome. Well, Lachie, thank you so much for these great insights. Um, some really good  ones there and appreciate you taking the time to share them with me.  Thanks very much, Sarah.  Thank you for joining us on another episode of Ag Tech. So what you can stay up to date  
**[0:25:06-0:25:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=371909#t=0:25:06):**  with the latest episodes and news at agtechsowhat.com. And as always, if you have any feedback or  other guests to recommend, we'd love to hear from you just hop on the website and leave  us a comment or send us a message. Finally, if you like what you're hearing and we hope  you do, please share the podcast with a friend or leave us a review on iTunes or wherever  you get your podcasts. Thanks again for listening. Catch you next time.  