### Agtech - So What?  (2019-57-18)
**[0:00:00-0:00:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, and welcome to the AgTech So What podcast. Emerging technologies are rapidly changing  the global agricultural industry. We believe that this revolution is only getting started.  But there's still too much hype out there and too big of a disconnect between ag and  ag tech. So on this show, we try to bridge that gap. In each episode, we bring you the  story of a different innovator in agriculture and try to find the place where ag and tech  
**[0:00:44-0:00:59](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:00:44):**  meet. I'm your host, Sarah Nolet. Welcome back to the AgTech So What podcast.  My name is Sarah Nolet from Agthentic. Today's chat is with Anthony Rudd. He works for a  company called iAg out in the Griffith area of New South Wales, where I was fortunate  enough to visit a couple weeks ago. This conversation, I had a bit of an experiment. I just called  Anthony and then hit record and we just started chatting. So we then did a bit of editing  
**[0:01:23-0:01:28](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:01:23):**  over to kind of cut out some parts and help shave it into something for you guys, the  listeners. So a bit different than the kind of normal, straightforward question and answer  format just that a bit more of a chat. But hopefully it's really valuable. I loved hearing  from Anthony's experience. He's worked in the Precision Ag space for a long time and  really understands both the technology side and how hard it is to build technology, but  
**[0:01:47-0:01:53](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:01:47):**  also the grower side and some of the challenges around adoption and just getting started with  how to make use out of data in this space, which is not an easy thing yet, unfortunately.  So I hope you enjoy this conversation with Anthony as much as I did.  Hello.  G'day. How are you?  
**[0:02:12-0:02:15](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:02:12):**  Hey, I'm well. How are you?  I'm good.  Super casual in the home office, which is good.  I do it every day.  Yes. Oh, every day you work from home.  
**[0:02:23-0:02:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:02:23):**  Yeah. Yeah. And I hate this time of year because I spent a lot of time in the office and I'm  sick of being here.  Oh, so you want to get out and do stuff?  I do. Yes. I only got a couple of weeks to go and you won't see me. So once we start  getting close into cotton pick and lots of stuff will be a lot more hectic.  
**[0:02:44-0:02:49](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:02:44):**  Yeah, right. Tell me about that. What do you do during cotton pick?  So generally we've got, last year we managed about 40 different pickers, contractors and  just growers. And so we ensure that they've got some data standardization happening and  we import a lot of field boundaries into My John Deere. And then normally what we do is  a master file. So we create a master file that goes into either their picker or their  
**[0:03:19-0:03:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:03:19):**  contractors picker, which has all their field names and field boundaries, hectares and so  forth. So it just makes it a lot easier for everybody to manage their own data. Yeah.  Right.  It's just a funny setup with John Deere. So I don't know whether you know much about cotton  and the gin, but the pickers generate a module, so to speak. That's those big round yellow  
**[0:03:47-0:03:48](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:03:47):**  bales.  Yep.  And they're all individually RFID tagged. So the picker actually generates just a normal  text file that has a list of all the fields and all the modules that were picked in that  field. So when the modules go back across the way bridge at the gin, they've actually  
**[0:04:13-0:04:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:04:13):**  already got those farms and fields in their system. So the RFID reader just recognizes  where that module came from. So which grower it was, which farm it came from, and which  field it came from. And then that data then is once everything's picked and it's available  in its text form, it'll go to the gin just for some cross-referencing. And then they  can actually, what they can do then is it'll work out how many bales came from each module.  
**[0:04:52-0:04:58](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:04:52):**  And then we can see where each module was picked in a field. And you combine that with  your yield map, you get a pretty good picture of how the field performed once you combine  that obviously with your gin data and your turnout and so forth.  Right. And when you say this whole system, is this a combination of different providers  and need someone like you to set it all up or is this one kind of thing?  
**[0:05:20-0:05:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:05:20):**  It's one thing, but it's a combination of different users.  Yeah, sure.  So from grower, contractor to gins. So over the last few years, especially with three  new gins here, we spent a lot of time training gin staff. So the My John Deere website allows  for a lot of data sharing. So what's actually happening is data has been created in real  
**[0:05:50-0:06:00](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:05:50):**  time and the gin's receiving that data wirelessly, practically instantaneously. So data they've  got there before modules turn up makes it easier.  So I want to back up and ask some one-on-one stuff just about you and Nyagan. And then  I imagine, I mean, I could ask about that stuff all day, but probably help start at  the beginning. No, I mean, I literally could just go down a rabbit hole of questions and  
**[0:06:24-0:06:31](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:06:24):**  that's maybe not a good idea. So yeah, I might just ask, I mean, some of this stuff's basic,  but just have you tell us a little bit about who you are and how you got involved in this  and kind of your background or origin story.  Yeah. So back in 2008, I started with the local or the Griffith John Deere dealership  as the very first integrated solutions manager in Australia, which was interesting.  
**[0:07:00-0:07:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:07:00):**  Were there ones in other countries, but just not Australia?  Yeah. The concept was extremely new and it had been tested extensively, I think in the  States from what I recollect. I think there was an appointment of me and probably half  a dozen other positions across the country in specific dealerships. So integrated solutions  was really the joining of tech to the dealership and to the grower. So John Deere obviously  
**[0:07:36-0:07:44](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:07:36):**  had a fairly extensive business model that focused around integrated solutions or tech  solutions for growers. And we, I suppose they needed to move beyond just pure guidance,  GPS guidance and moving into machine automation and into data collection and data generation.  So technology sort of changed extremely rapidly for those first two or three years within  the dealership, they needed somebody to, or a department to join all those different departments  
**[0:08:20-0:08:28](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:08:20):**  together. So joining sales and service and parts back into that integrated solutions  scenario. So training was available for the staff members on new product, new tech, new  software. And that was across the board. And obviously when there's new software, there's  new hardware. And so parts came into play there and also service and sales of who are  obviously selling the new product.  
**[0:08:55-0:09:00](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:08:55):**  When you were doing that, sorry to interrupt you, in that role, was that for one dealer  or were you working across those?  No, that was purely for ANG machinery in Griffith. Because what had happened is John Deere had  just changed their business model, their structure a little, and they introduced some tech phasing  or some dealership phasing. So you had to actually achieve some certain levels of knowledge  
**[0:09:26-0:09:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:09:26):**  before you were actually allowed to sell certain types of products. Some of those products  were implement guidance and iGrave, which is some land forming software. So that was  sort of the beginning. And then I spent sort of five or six years there until the new owners  took over. And when I had developed a heap of really good relationships with a lot of  growers and I didn't want to lose them. And so I sort of thought, well, gee, what have  
**[0:10:06-0:10:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:10:06):**  we... And we also noticed that there were some massive gaps in that space at that time  anyway. And I also saw a lot of growers struggle, get frustrated, just keeping up with tech  and ideas and battling with social media and other sort of media outlets telling them you  should be doing this and lots of other new players coming into the market as well. So  it was really, really... And still is a really difficult sort of space to navigate for the  
**[0:10:40-0:10:47](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:10:40):**  poor old growers. So we thought we might've been able to help in that space and probably  try and actually develop a little bit of software that might help along the way. So that was  sort of the beginning of a company we called Etad Data. Then I got tied up with a Chinese  company building a transfer station just out at Wumblegal near Griffith. They were the  first people in the world to actually export cotton in its raw form, so un-ginned. And  
**[0:11:22-0:11:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:11:22):**  that was quite challenging for sort of 12 or 18 months trying to get things done through  government departments and like all. So I learned a lot more about cotton itself during  that time. And we developed some software to track their modules through the transfer  station and obviously in the containers and across to China.  So this was all as that second business, this is outside of the John Deere world.  
**[0:11:52-0:12:00](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:11:52):**  Yeah, this is just me as myself. Yeah. I actually became a government authorized inspection  officer for cotton for export as well. So that was just part of something we had to  do, a gap we had to fill.  I feel like there's a number of leaps here from you just casually say, and then I started  a company and then we built software and then I exported to China.  
**[0:12:17-0:12:26](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:12:17):**  It sort of was a bit like that. It was an interesting time. There was a changeover of  obviously the ownership of that John Deere business, which is quite large in the region.  But I also had all these growers ringing me saying, what can I do here? How am I going  to fix this? Can you give me some advice here? And it really just snowballed a little bit  from there.  
**[0:12:51-0:12:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:12:51):**  What was the common, sorry, I keep interrupting you, but what was the common question? Was  it like a specific, I can't get this thing to talk to this thing or was it like, I'm  hearing all about this stuff. Where do I start? Or what were they asking?  It was a quite a large range. But the common theme mainly was I've bought this piece of  equipment. The dealer and the salesman told me it would do this and it doesn't. We can't  
**[0:13:20-0:13:28](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:13:20):**  get it to work. And so there's a lot of investigation goes into those sorts of scenarios and it  becomes a trial and error. And because a lot of the tech was really new, it couldn't get  much help from the dealer or the reseller. And there was lots of attempts to try and  uptake some tech, but also generate some data and create some usage for it that failed miserably.  Just due purely to the lack of knowledge and lack of knowledge on both parts. So lack of  
**[0:13:58-0:14:03](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:13:58):**  knowledge from the grower and also lack of knowledge from the reseller. So the grower  really didn't, once again, we just go in blind and we believe what our salesman tells us.  And he obviously believes what he's telling you, but he might not be fully aware of what's  going on. And I had a really good insight into this when I worked with A&G machinery  with John Deere and that was a massive issue. So it really made it.  
**[0:14:24-0:14:29](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:14:24):**  Tell me about that. It's funny, right? At some point someone knows and then it gets  passed down the chain and someone doesn't know anymore. How does that actually... Is  it an organizational thing or a tech thing or...  It's definitely... It's an organizational thing and it's a cultural thing. So probably  if you look at the model of the modern salesman, machinery salesman who gets paid to sell big  
**[0:14:51-0:14:59](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:14:51):**  ticket items in machinery and gets paid a commission to do that. But when you're looking  at the backend tech stuff, so if you're looking at application controllers and just screens  and GPS gear, there's not a huge amount of money in it. So if I'm a sales person and  I'm looking at a commission from a sale of this big tractor of being so many thousands  of dollars and commission from the sale of this little bit of AMS hardware and software,  
**[0:15:27-0:15:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:15:27):**  I'm probably going to focus on the tractor sale rather than on the software sale. And  plus look, I take my hat off to machinery sales people to do that job and to know the  product that's coming out even just from machinery side of things is extremely, extremely difficult.  There's a lot of product and machinery is so technical and so precise these days. It's  really difficult for these guys to know everything. And I suppose in a way the integrated solutions  
**[0:16:02-0:16:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:16:02):**  department was put there to remedy that in a way. So it was a reference point for sales  people and their clients to get the information that they needed. So as we went along in that  journey, we actually started to reduce the number of issues and the number of calls and  time it took up for the service or tech department to try and fix. So it's an interesting scenario.  There's no real blame. The growers really got to take responsibility for what they're  
**[0:16:37-0:16:38](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:16:37):**  looking at.  It's such an interesting incentive question. It's a classic buyer beware, seller beware  dynamic, but it's also where does the responsibility shifts. I know in the software world, it was  an interesting change where it used to be that the seller had all the information around  a car or a piece of software or whatever. And then with the internet, you can just research  
**[0:17:02-0:17:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:17:02):**  everything. And so the buyer has more information. But it's interesting because when it gets  super complicated, you kind of need information to exist on both sides and then who has the  incentive to get and give really good information.  Yeah. And the other issue is really the language that's used in tech and it's extremely foreign  for your normal everyday grower. And for them to just understand what the terms mean, it's  
**[0:17:35-0:17:42](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:17:35):**  difficult and it takes some time to learn those things. And if you're not tech savvy  and you're not really, I suppose in that generation that is extremely tech savvy, you really struggle  just with the language.  Yeah. I mean, I sort of think about when I go to my mechanic to get my car fixed and  I'm like, I don't know what you're saying and I don't know how these parts fit together.  
**[0:18:00-0:18:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:18:00):**  I feel like I'm a smart person and I can get how systems work. But I don't know what you're  saying and I'm frustrated that I want to trust you, but I don't trust you and I don't speak  your language. It's the same kind of thing I imagine.  Yeah, it is. It's very similar. And it will change. That sort of situation will change  over time as we move through generations. And obviously the next generation of farm  
**[0:18:29-0:18:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:18:29):**  or a grower will be much more tech savvy. But the issue that we're having at the moment  is we're falling behind and we're missing so much in a situation where there's some  solutions there that can really help.  When you say we're missing stuff, you mean like there's good stuff out there, but we're  not getting into the hands of growers?  
**[0:18:53-0:18:58](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:18:53):**  No, not so much from that point of view. We're just missing data. The growers are missing  data. So really, if you look at the so-called data value proposition, don't get me started  on that.  Yeah, you're going into buzzword land.  Yes. There's two types of value here. You've got your short term and obviously your long  
**[0:19:22-0:19:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:19:22):**  term. So data history, it's undervalued. It's really, really, really important. And as we  move forward, as we keep moving along, the more of that we miss, that we don't record  and we don't keep, the harder it is to catch up. And really precision ag is more about  getting into a situation where you can actually start being proactive and start modelling  maybe, looking at conditions and what's going to happen and being able to remedy those issues  
**[0:20:00-0:20:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:20:00):**  before they come, before you find them, because you know the history of that field or with  that crop and in these type of conditions. And while we're not capturing that, you get  put back and put back and put back and put back. And it worries me because I know in  other parts of the world, the data capture is extremely, extremely important. And I think  as we move forward and what's going to happen in the next 20 years, as far as the population  
**[0:20:35-0:20:42](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:20:35):**  is concerned, and food and pressure on everybody to do more with less, the key really is in  PA and data. And we've done as much as we possibly can at this stage with plant research.  So we're looking for other places to find those gains.  You said there were two aspects, so that's the long-term one. And I think it's fascinating  because you get into questions of, is the government going to mandate that that data  
**[0:21:04-0:21:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:21:04):**  get collected for the benefit of food security and some really interesting broader issues  that get brought into play, but what's the short-term side of that?  The short-term is purely just being able to make some decisions in a timely manner and  being able to collaboratively make decisions with your agronomy partners. I think that's  really important, being able to exchange information or data quickly, knowing that the data that's  
**[0:21:40-0:21:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:21:40):**  been generated has got some integrity, obviously. But yeah, it's being able to make those everyday  on-farm practical decisions that make it easier and give people more confidence to know that,  yeah, I can see this is the pattern, this is what I need to do. And also from an agronomy  point of view, gee, good quality data sets that are timely really helps those guys help  the growers back. But it needs to have some integrity, it needs to be collected and it  
**[0:22:24-0:22:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:22:24):**  needs to be shared. Whereas technology now, we can do all that. Those things are easy,  but you'll find a large percentage of growers just don't know where to start.  So this gets into some of the work that you've been doing around how to get started and some  of the case studies, which is how we met. But I want to connect the dots. So I totally  interrupted you on your story about starting to build some software, which is not easy  
**[0:22:50-0:22:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:22:50):**  to do. Did you figure out how to write software? Did you hire a company to write software?  How did you even do that?  We hired somebody, a developer and nothing against developers, but gee, what a nightmare.  The issue that I've had all along with that part of development, especially just purely  software development is, I mean, it's a lot open with web-based applications and so forth.  
**[0:23:25-0:23:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:23:25):**  It's more open than what it ever has been. But where we're going to go to in the next  10, 15 years is really when we're looking at machine or automation and IoT. It's very,  very hard to plan when you're building software in that regard to plan for say things like  IoT. And that sensor data is really going to be a big part of the process.  I think I know what you mean, but for myself and if we put this out there for listeners,  
**[0:24:07-0:24:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:24:07):**  explain what you mean by that.  So Internet of Things. The way we collect data right now is really brand-orientated.  Everything's fitted in the machine. You purchase your modem or whatever, it's all brand-orientated.  And the sensor data that we collect actually comes through the machine. So when we look  at other things that aren't machine-based, like take soil moisture data for an example,  
**[0:24:46-0:24:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:24:46):**  we really want to be able to integrate that data straight into whatever we're doing, whatever  software we're using. And it'll take some Internet of Things hardware and some machine  learning software to actually get the full benefit of that. So it's really important  that when we look down the track, we're really thinking, forward thinking and thinking, okay,  what's the next thing that's going to come up? And when we start talking about the Internet  
**[0:25:18-0:25:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:25:18):**  and signal and so forth, and we know that's an issue everywhere, there are some simple  solutions for that now, but they involve that type of hardware and software. So it really  needs to be considered. So if you build a closed website that can generate a map and  whatever you need it to do, you find it very difficult on the back end to try and integrate  some of that new tech and some of that new sense of data. So we want to keep it open  
**[0:25:58-0:26:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:25:58):**  as we possibly can. So going back to your first question, yeah, we definitely went down  the track of a developer, but we actually changed track and we're actually using some  web services now. So the software that we have will ingest any data type. So it doesn't  matter what type of file it is, it's colourblind. So it doesn't matter if it's coming from red  or green or whatever. And we can then, instead of a grower having to buy a full software  
**[0:26:37-0:26:44](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:26:37):**  package that you pay thousands of dollars a year for that you use probably 5% of, you  can actually pull in modules, a little blockchain-ish, where you can pull in a module that will generate  a map for you for that instance, or you can pull in a module that will generate a report  for you. So I suppose it's really more tailor made to suit the growers needs rather than  here's a big bunch of data in this software package. You're probably not going to use  
**[0:27:09-0:27:18](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:27:09):**  the backend financial part of things, you use something else for that. So that's been  a real issue. That's why it's been really difficult for growers to find a software package  that really suits them because most of them just want to be able to open up a yield map  and read it and create some zones and maybe do a prescription type scenario and send it  back to the machine.  
**[0:27:37-0:27:43](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:27:37):**  One thing that's, I guess the other side of that is if as a developer, as a company building  these tools, if you don't sell all of the tool but you had to build all of the tool,  then how do you make money?  That's right.  So what's the kind of business model side of this? Because there's definitely a trade  
**[0:27:55-0:27:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:27:55):**  off there.  There always is. And I think the business model is probably more rather than less. So  because we can develop this in a much cheaper way, it's obviously much more affordable for  the end user. And because the end user can then pick and choose which modules he wants  to put together to suit himself, he then gets a better benefit.  
**[0:28:33-0:28:37](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:28:33):**  Can you, let's go through an example because I think it's easy to talk about at the high  level but walk me through, I pick how to use a module and then what do I do? Is there an  agronomist involved? Just a simple kind of use case.  All those options are available. So data sharing, and I use that term really extremely broadly,  but for a grower, he's mainly sharing his data with his agronomist. So having a normal  
**[0:29:05-0:29:18](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:29:05):**  username, password access scenario with access levels to that specific site for that specific  grower is really important. And then obviously, if I'm just like most growers where my data  really does, I don't really see it, my agronomist comes and collects it for me, but he takes  it away, I'll never see it, those sorts of scenarios. So if we can start with say just  a pure storage module, so growers can actually just use it just for storage and they're willing  
**[0:29:53-0:29:58](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:29:53):**  to give you that option. But then if I want to say, okay, I want to be able to share,  we can bring that case model in and then we can add users to that site. Then if we want  to, and I think that's the most important thing. There's been a lot of focus on being  able to ingest this data, have a look at the map, generate zones and so forth, but that's  not happening very much. The grower's agronomists are doing those sorts of things for them and  
**[0:30:26-0:30:31](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:30:26):**  being able to share between each other really quickly and easily is really important. And  also being able to keep a original raw file of your data is really important because say  a comparison now, if you use other software, say you've got a file off your machine and  you put it in module or you go to SST or you go to Trimble, as soon as the data has gone  into that software and it's been aggregated, it's changed forever. And effectively, you  
**[0:30:56-0:31:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:30:56):**  don't keep that raw data somewhere, it's lost. So it tends to start to answer a couple of  those little questions about data ownership and data sharing as well. So I digress here,  sorry.  No, no, no, no, it's good. It's interesting. I guess I'm trying to get my head around how  much of this is theoretical and how much of it is like, this is software we've built or  
**[0:31:26-0:31:31](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:31:26):**  this is software that you guys advise that others can use. So how much of this, because  I'm trying to connect it back to your story, which I'm now in.  That's fine. So we're at a stage we've built the base software. So we can, it'll ingest  data from anywhere and any type. You can store it safely and you can also share it with whoever  you want to share it with at the moment. In a few weeks, we'll have the map generation  
**[0:31:59-0:32:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:31:59):**  module available. So you can either choose to have that map generation module with you  all the time. So that's just another set of software, just another bunch of software that  will take that file, no matter what it is, and ingest it and create a map out of it.  So say a yield map, then you could, or you can also choose to have that data aggregated  offsite so you can send it back to the server and have it aggregated in the server and sent  
**[0:32:34-0:32:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:32:34):**  back to you. So there's a couple of different choices there. That's available now.  And when you say we and available, which company is bringing you this?  I can't say.  Okay. This is a secret company that you're working with.  Yes. They're not very secret. They're quite large.  
**[0:32:55-0:32:58](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:32:55):**  But they'll remain endless.  Well, exactly. They have to at the moment. So I don't want to get anybody into trouble.  Fair enough.  And that was a bit of a fluke relationship us coming across that as well, which I'll  tell you about off there at some stage.  
**[0:33:16-0:33:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:33:16):**  So you've been involved in this space a while. I'm curious, actually, some of the timeframes  here, because when you were talking about your work back in John Deere land with integrated  solutions, when was that? What was the timeframe there?  So that was 2008 to 2013.  Okay. And I imagine the, well, I'm curious, has the conversation evolved since then? Are  
**[0:33:46-0:33:48](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:33:46):**  you still getting the same kind of phone calls or is it-  Same phone calls. Same phone calls, mate. Yeah.  And what needs to change? How do we fix this problem?  So if you look at... So part of this case study with IRAC was we really needed to have  a deeper look at this and not so much the tech side of things, but the motivation and  
**[0:34:08-0:34:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:34:08):**  the attitudes that growers had.  And just before you get into that, tell us who IRAC is.  So Irrigation Research and Extension Committee in our region, who are a grower membership  committee headed by Rob Houghton and Eva Carissa. You guys went and had a look at the trial  site. So they've been responsible for a lot of plant research and crop research over the  
**[0:34:35-0:34:49](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:34:35):**  last number of years. Worked very closely with CRDC and Comp Australia and a few other  government-born agencies.  So you guys were setting out to solve the kind of, where do we get started problem or  how do we fix it?  Yeah, exactly. And it was more the let's have a look at why there hasn't been an adoption.  
**[0:35:06-0:35:15](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:35:06):**  We know there's an adoption problem and let's really have a look at why. And so we were  a little bit lucky mid last year. I ran some cotton picker or some data management training  for cotton and a heap of growers from IRAC came along. It was for IRAC. And after that,  the conversation started and everybody said, so we should do this and we should do that.  And then I had a good chat to Rob and Eva and we all knew that there was this elephant  
**[0:35:40-0:35:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:35:40):**  in the room. And even when I was running the cotton picker data management training, you  can really see some blank faces. And it's as basic as basic the training. And I'm thinking,  oh, there's something else that's underlying here. There's no motivation. And so when we  started to, we created the My Data Management Case Study Project and we put together eight  growers from across the region with different levels of adoption and also a few different  
**[0:36:17-0:36:26](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:36:17):**  types of crops and also growers that had some history in the region. But also growers that  we knew didn't have a data value proposition issue. The growers that might have thought  they were mad at the time that were still keen and eager to push on with their precision  ag quest, even though they'd been browbeaten over the last 10 or 15 years, but still had  the drive to move forward with it. That was a little difficult. But we put together these  
**[0:36:57-0:37:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:36:57):**  growers who are fantastic guys and we put together a set of baseline questions for them  and their agronomy partners. And we filmed all the actual interviews just to get an idea  of exactly where people were at. And it was all confronting.  Sorry, I didn't interrupt you again. What kinds of things did you ask them? Give me  a couple of example questions.  
**[0:37:30-0:37:39](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:37:30):**  A lot of it was based around their attitudes towards data and data collection. Simple questions  like where do you see data in your business and data management in your business in the  future? Do you see a future for it? And lots of other things like what are you using now?  Are you sharing and are you collecting and sharing data now? Who's your agronomist? Are  they collecting and sharing data for you? Just all those really baseline questions.  
**[0:38:07-0:38:13](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:38:07):**  And a lot of them were, I suppose, angled to get a reaction from the experience that  they'd already had in the past. Not so much what their expectation was, but what their  experience was in the past. Because we already knew that their expectation was high for PA  and data management in the future. But we wanted to know why they hadn't moved towards  it now.  
**[0:38:34-0:38:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:38:34):**  And what did you find? What were some of the reasons?  The major reason, the major driver was just purely poor previous experience. So all the  guys, we made sure that they'd all spent money, spent large sums of money upgrading their  machinery and upgrading their data generation and collection, hardware and software, the  machine automation, hardware and software, only to have a bad experience on the back  
**[0:39:11-0:39:19](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:39:11):**  end of that. And there were varying degrees or reasons why some were their own fault,  some were reseller or dealership born. But a lot of it was because no one could get any  support and there was no, there was so much, such a large knowledge gap in all areas, not  just from one party. And then obviously frustration sets in. But also, I think everybody went  off a little half-cocked and we started in the middle of the race. We didn't start at  
**[0:39:48-0:39:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:39:48):**  the start. So there was no really preparation for the business in the first place to become  more digital. Right. And tell me about that. Like, what would that look like in the ideal  case and what does it look like in reality? So in reality, people are still using, some  of our girls are still using Windows 7 as operating software for their computers. A  lot of guys can't link an email account to their phone. Although the internet scenario  
**[0:40:23-0:40:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:40:23):**  has gotten better, we must admit over the last five or six years. The actual knowledge  about just basic computer skills 101 is really, there's a really big gap there. Setting up  updates, all those normal things that probably you and I do more often because we're on our  computers so much. It was quite startling. And do you think it's just a kind of technical  thing? Or is there like an emotional, like is it going back to my kind of mechanic example?  
**[0:41:01-0:41:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:41:01):**  Like I get almost ashamed that I don't know this stuff and so I don't want to deal with  it. I'm just like, I can't, it's too painful. Is there any of that kind of like, it's so  miserable and I wish I knew and I don't know. And so I just don't want to deal with it.  Definitely. Look, that's definitely part of it. The other part of it is a time scenario.  So every grower that you have sitting behind a desk looking at a computer is tapping his  
**[0:41:26-0:41:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:41:26):**  foot going, I should be outside doing something else. So there's more of the acceptance that  this is now part of your business. And you need to take notice of this part of your business  because if you don't fix this, this start here. So if you keep coming in here and your  laptop takes 30 minutes to load and every time you go into the internet, it drops out.  You know, every time you get a, send an email, you can't get it to send.  
**[0:41:59-0:42:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:41:59):**  Yeah, no, I, yeah, it's, it's miserable. You want to just get on with better things to  do and you know, it's like the third time something goes wrong, you're like, all right,  I'm done.  I'm out of here. Yeah. And you know, you and I both know that it's very easy. There are,  there's some really simple solutions to those issues and it may involve the,  
**[0:42:18-0:42:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:42:18):**  what do you do then? Do you kind of, how do you go about creating those solutions and  getting them in the hands of the people that need them?  Yeah. So the delivery is interesting because there are so many different scenarios, but  I think the main thing we need to bear in mind is the, the, the number one, the first,  the start of what we do is we really need to get the best out of what we've already  
**[0:42:41-0:42:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:42:41):**  got. So we don't want, we don't want to go, be going to grow a sign. You've got to spend  here, you've got to spend there. You know, you've got to do this, you've got to do that.  So let's, let's take stock. So what we did as part as, as the first part of the case  study was we also did a machine hardware and software audit. So we recorded every piece  of machinery hardware and software that growers have. We recorded their, their serial numbers,  
**[0:43:12-0:43:20](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:43:12):**  their, their software versions. So we could get a better picture of exactly what each  grower had to offer at their, at their disposal at this moment right now. And, and let's work  with that to start with before we go looking too far into the future. You know, the guys,  once I said before, the guys, a lot of people have spent money and bought hardware and software,  but aren't getting them, aren't getting the full benefit out of it. Right. And so let's  
**[0:43:46-0:43:53](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:43:46):**  work with that first. And it honestly, so it will be a step by step by step by step  process that will event in a, in a, in a much, much easier, much more user-friendly way to,  to, to start to generate, store, share and use, use, use good data. So, you know, if  you start to talk to one of the growers about data standardization, they look at you and  go, what are you talking about? Right. And so you've really got to use, once again, you've  
**[0:44:22-0:44:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:44:22):**  got to use language that, you know, that people understand. Which, which, you know, it sounds  a little bit harsh in a way, but we really need to go back to that, to that. No, I mean,  I think it's the same. Like if, you know, I get this experience all the time, actually,  when I talk to growers where we got to find that kind of common ground, cause I could  go off and talk about technology or venture capital or all that, and it would be totally,  
**[0:44:48-0:44:52](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:44:48):**  you know, foreign. And in the same way, they could talk about the nuances of, of cotton  agronomy and I would be totally lost. So where do we find that kind of common ground where  we can actually speak the same language and how do you create good tools that, that help,  even if you don't have a human there? Cause I think we need humans there in lots of cases,  but there's a bunch of stuff that I think we need to be able to fix ourselves and kind  
**[0:45:13-0:45:18](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:45:13):**  of get started before we get to the complex stuff where we might need humans or help.  Because otherwise it's just expensive. Yeah, definitely, definitely correct there.  Look at, and while we need, while we need, that, that won't change, Sarah. It'll be the  same way for a long time. That human intervention has to be there. One of the other biggest,  I suppose the biggest, biggest issue is the issue of support. And you know, the problem  
**[0:45:48-0:45:58](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:45:48):**  is when you, when you sell hardware, software you need to, you need to provide support and,  and it's a cost. And, and I think a lot of the, a lot of the software development companies,  especially in Ag are really struggling to get their head around, you know, I need to,  I need to provide a really, really strong support service here. Otherwise, yeah, it's  really interesting. Like a lot of the startups, especially that don't have an Ag background,  
**[0:46:22-0:46:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:46:22):**  you know, get to the point of, okay, I realized that I'm not going to sell all this on the  internet, so I should probably go through a channel and probably, you know, connect  with someone who has boots on the ground near my customers. And then the next kind of iteration  we've seen is, well, those guys that have boots on the ground, even if they have some  kind of incentive to sell my product, they don't probably have an incentive to service  
**[0:46:43-0:46:48](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:46:43):**  it, which goes back to your point of, of incentives before where, you know, it's like who's going  to be there when it breaks and how do you make sure that there's support throughout  the life cycle? Not just when you sell it. And I think no one's really figured out how  to crack that nut in the kind of digital tech data space and take money out of it.  You're a hundred percent right. And it's interesting too, it's, it's sort of, I suppose it's exaggerated  
**[0:47:09-0:47:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:47:09):**  by the fact that the farmers work 24 seven. So if I have an issue, a tech issue at 11  o'clock at night in my machine, I want to get it fixed. And who's going to answer my  call 11 o'clock at night? And so it really, it makes it even harder because it's not a  fire scenario. And obviously there's a, there's a massive, I think there's a large skills  shortage there and knowledge gap. So I think it's these sorts of resellers and developers  
**[0:47:43-0:47:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:47:43):**  and on sellers are really struggling to find people that fit that space.  I was just at a conference this weekend. One of the big topics that came up was around  education and kind of how do we get the next generation of people who can help solve this  problem because yes, it's technology, but it's also people in regional areas that have  these skills and want to work in these jobs. And that's not a, it's not like we have this  
**[0:48:10-0:48:13](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:48:10):**  ready set of talent and we're not using them. It's like that doesn't exist.  Yeah, look, it's interesting, you know, cause I've got a daughter in year 12 at school now  and she's a daughter that's two years into university, but even the ag subject at school  is extremely outdated. There's no, there's a lot of focus on animal and plant health,  but there's no focus at all on tech or on data and management. And maybe that needs  
**[0:48:48-0:49:01](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:48:48):**  to change as well. I don't know, but it, yeah, there's definitely a gap there at the moment.  Do you see this, you know, you're talking before about the new kinds of data collection,  so whether it's IOT or satellites or you know, kind of fully changing how that information  collection analysis, decision making, supply chain works. Do you think that will help?  Cause I'm, I'm, people talk about a world where you can remove some of the pain points  
**[0:49:23-0:49:28](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:49:23):**  here through technology and you know, it can get set up faster. It can collect faster,  analyze faster and get to a automated implementation of a decision, right? You can just kind of  close the loop. Do you think that is, is going to happen? Is it coming soon? Are the same  adoption challenges going to exist in that world?  I don't think the same adoption challenges will exist in that world. I think, I think  
**[0:49:45-0:49:53](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:49:45):**  that is definitely coming. The timeframe wise, you know, probably depending on what sort  of execution or what sort of penetration you have with it, but probably, you know, maybe  four to eight years. I think, I think things will change rapidly. Again, we sort of had  a little bit of a lull. There's been a lot of focus on backend software and map generation  software and farm management software. I think once growers realise that the brand, big brand  
**[0:50:32-0:50:43](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:50:32):**  development really hinges on market share and that the development of software through  those brand companies is for the purpose of controlling market share, not for the betterment  of the grower. So I think once there's that realisation takes a hold, things like IOT  and other ways of collecting data and different sensors will, and obviously just normal general  technology advancements will change rapidly. But I think, I think, you know, I think there's  
**[0:51:14-0:51:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:51:14):**  a lot there now that, that we could use that other sectors just haven't been game to sort  of move into that agricultural part because of the fear.  That's an example of that.  So if you look at certainly some machine learning stuff and machine automation application controllers  that have come from different non-brand developers that are probably more efficient, especially  
**[0:51:55-0:52:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:51:55):**  when you're talking about yield monitoring, so yield sensing. So the yield sensing capabilities  or monitoring capabilities of say your modern day cotton picker is still really hit and  miss. But there's technology there now that, because we're still using microwave sensors,  so mass flow sensors, have been around for quite some time now. But I don't think, you  know, there's hardware and software there now that can sense yield much more mass flow,  
**[0:52:38-0:52:47](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:52:38):**  much more sensitively, much more, I suppose, taking into consideration all the other variables  like moisture and stopping and starting and trash and leaf and so forth. But sort of there  hasn't been a movement towards ag with that tech. And I think as far as the adoption of  satellite technology, we've really, really, we've really taken that and run with it. And  obviously it's getting better and better all the time. But I think I was hearing somewhere  
**[0:53:19-0:53:28](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:53:19):**  on the news recently with some new tech coming out in that space as well. So there's technology  in the marketplace now that just I don't think we've, there's certainly untapped from the  ag sector, that's for sure. Because we've really relied on these big brands to develop  tech through their machinery. And they've done a good job with that. Don't get me wrong.  But I'd like to see two more players, that's for sure.  
**[0:53:58-0:54:03](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:53:58):**  One of my kind of last questions, I guess, are areas to explore is that, and you mentioned  it before, the need for a human in the loop and the really close relationship with an  agronomist and even the role of agronomy. How do you see the kind of grower to agronomist  relationship changing in the future?  Yeah, well, I think it will. Data definitely provides or brings with it responsibility.  
**[0:54:27-0:54:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:54:27):**  And I think what it will do, I think the positive thing it will do is it will create a much  more collaborative relationship between grower and agronomy. And I think it will also, I  suppose, without trying to be too hard, it'll create some responsibility. So the decisions  that we're making, we'll be able to be tracked and we'll be able to tell whether they're  right or wrong. So that may change a little bit as far as that relationship is with agronomy.  
**[0:55:11-0:55:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:55:11):**  But I think, look, out here, all the growers have really, really strong relationships with  agronomists. And I must say that we're very lucky we've got some very, very smart guys  in agronomy here. But in saying that, what's, real quickly, what's been happening is, because  of the growers have been so reluctant to really get in and start pushing his PA quest, and  he's had so many issues with machinery and data collection and so forth. What's been  
**[0:55:46-0:55:52](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:55:46):**  happening is the agronomy sector. So agronomists have now been, have started to take that over  so that they know how important that data is. And so they've been actually going, setting  up machines, setting up software, collecting data for the grower, which is not really sustainable  for agronomy. They spend a lot of time, a lot of their own time, doing, managing those  sorts of things, where really when we spoke to all the agronomists, they all just said,  
**[0:56:20-0:56:24](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:56:20):**  we just want the data, just give me the data. I don't care what it is, just give me something  that I can just log onto and pull something off and go, okay, I can do something with  that. So it's a little bit of frustration there from the poor old agronomy part.  I think there's no shortage of frustration in this space, so it's quite a bit of that.  There definitely is. And quite rightfully so, from what I've seen over the last long  
**[0:56:47-0:56:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:56:47):**  period of time. It's a little criminal what's happened to our growers. And I know we're  at the beginning of this precision ag journey, which could go anywhere over the next 10 or  20 years, but in the rush and the pushing and shovelling and jostling for position,  the growers have been pretty much left out in the cold. And look, don't get me wrong,  there's plenty of precision ag courses you can go to and sit. And I've been and also  
**[0:57:33-0:57:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:57:33):**  presented at and facilitated many courses over the years and looked at a lot of blank  faces because a grower doesn't really know.  Do you think that's because it's not done in an engaging way? It's not hitting the mark?  It seems like that, if done well, would help, is a solution?  Look, really, the last one I went to was fantastic, absolutely fantastic for me. And it jolted  
**[0:58:03-0:58:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:58:03):**  my memory on quite a few things. But before a grower can really understand what data density  is or data standardisation, he really needs to know how to get himself ready on his farm.  So he needs to know, guys talking about importing this layer and importing that layer and most  growers are going, I can't even generate one. So it tends to miss that mark, but nobody  wants to go back and say, okay, this is what we're going to do. We're going to all hold  
**[0:58:41-0:58:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:58:41):**  hands here and sing kumbaya and we're going to go right back to the start. We're going  to walk through these steps and we're going to make sure that everything from when you  walk into your office in the morning, that everything is as easy as it possibly can be.  What's one piece of advice you'd have for a grower in this space to kind of get started,  like a practical thing they could do? And I guess same thing on the kind of startup  
**[0:59:07-0:59:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:59:07):**  or technology side, what's one piece of advice you'd have for that audience?  Know what you've got and know what your capabilities are right now before you decide to go any  further. So by that, I mean, know what you've got in your office space, know what the machinery  that you have is capable of, know what it will integrate with and what it won't integrate  with, know what software you have, learn how to manage, put a data standardization strategy  
**[0:59:47-0:59:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=0:59:47):**  in place and then work from there and build slowly on what you're doing. Don't expect  that you're going to be able to move from where you are to a precision ag operation  from one day to the next. It's quite a long journey.  Yep. And for the startup side or kind of tech developer side, what advice would you have  for them? Keep your mind open and don't be influenced  
**[1:00:21-1:00:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=1:00:21):**  by developers and software builders. Stick to what you know and explore all your options  because there are many, many, many options, but educate yourself, know what you're talking  about when you talk to a software developer so you know what he's saying and he's not  your doctor so you don't have to do exactly what he tells you.  Sounds like you've learned some great lessons on the product management side.  
**[1:00:53-1:00:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=1:00:53):**  Expensive lessons, Sarah. Expensive. Yes.  I've heard that and felt that pain before as well. Actually, promised my last question  for you, Anthony. How would you even introduce yourself? How would you describe your current  role because you're clearly wearing a number of hats and involved in quite a few projects  and initiatives? Yeah. We do cover quite a little bit. Look  
**[1:01:14-1:01:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=1:01:14):**  at my favourite role and the number one role that I hope that we will always have is boots  on the ground. Really, really working closely with growers and helping them get started  and then obviously mentoring them and helping them, providing that support that they haven't  had through their precision Ag quest. That's my favourite part of things. We also cover  software development and some research and a number of other little umbrellas there.  
**[1:01:54-1:02:01](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=1:01:54):**  I think where we are, where we want to be at this stage is really at the start, at the  coalface with the growers and sitting with them in the office and bashing our heads against  the table together. Hopefully not for too long or too hard. So  you and that we in that sense, is that IAG or is that wearing a different hat?  That's IAG. Yeah. So that's where IAG. We haven't moved from that space. That was our  
**[1:02:23-1:02:28](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=1:02:23):**  idea to start with. That's where we knew we had to be. I don't think there's anybody else  really in that space. I think the fact that I've had both the dealership experience and  the software development experience puts me in a fairly good place there. I truly can  understand where growers are coming from when they vent their frustration. Especially in  those interviews that we record, they're quite entertaining.  
**[1:02:59-1:03:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=1:02:59):**  I bet. I bet. I bet there's some funny insights there and some social media worthy frustrations.  We have some characters. There's no doubt about that. Sarah?  Cool. Thank you for talking to me. I know we went all over the place there. But I learned  a few things and definitely interesting to hear your perspective. Clearly have tons of  experience in this space. Appreciate you sharing the insights.  
**[1:03:27-1:03:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=1:03:27):**  No, look, thanks for having me. I've enjoyed it immensely. I could talk about it for another  two hours. It wouldn't worry me in the least. Thank you for joining us on another episode  of Ag Tech So What. You can stay up to date with the latest episodes and news at agtechsowhat.com.  And as always, if you have any feedback or other guests to recommend, we'd love to hear  from you. Just hop on the website and leave us a comment or send us a message. Finally,  
**[1:03:59-1:04:03](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357323#t=1:03:59):**  if you like what you're hearing and we hope you do, please share the podcast with a friend  or leave us a review on iTunes or wherever you get your podcasts. Thanks again for listening.  Catch you next time.  Bye.  