### Agtech - So What?  (2018-30-18)
**[0:00:00-0:00:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:00:00):**  Hi everyone, you're listening to BushTech, an agtech podcast that gets to the so what  of agtech. We'll bring you interesting things from interesting people and I'm one of your  co-hosts Simon Mathewson. And I'm your other co-host Sarah Nolette. On this podcast we  will bring in leading speakers in technology, entrepreneurship, investment, agriculture,  science and anything else you can think of and we can find in the world of agtech. We'll  
**[0:00:24-0:00:28](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:00:24):**  look to demystify it so that we're getting to the so what. What does it really mean for  farmers and for the broader agricultural industry?  So Jackie Brown, welcome to the BushTech podcast. Thanks so much for joining me.  Thank you. Always love a chance to talk about the weather.  Yes, and we will be talking about that today. I will just give our listeners a caveat. We  
**[0:00:52-0:00:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:00:52):**  are sitting outside the Australian Farm Institute Conference and so we've tried to find the  quietest space possible but apologies in advance for any interruptions or loud noises. So please  forgive this but I wanted to catch Jackie while she's in town because she is such an  expert on this space and has recently had some pretty interesting interactions with  the agtech and startup community that I wanted to talk about today. But first, Jackie, you  
**[0:01:16-0:01:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:01:16):**  are a senior research scientist and the team leader for weather and climate decisions team  and the co-coordinator of digital ag at CSIRO. Hopefully I got that right. But tell me a  bit about your background and how you ended up in the role you are in today.  Sure. So I loved mathematics as a kid. Maths was just the most beautiful thing in the world  to me. It just worked perfectly and I knew that that's what I wanted a career in. So  
**[0:01:41-0:01:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:01:41):**  I went off to university to just study maths and hope for the best really and I stumbled  across climate and oceanography and couldn't believe that I could do something I loved  and actually make a difference to the world. So I was really passionate. I went on to do  a PhD with the CSIRO and became a climate scientist studying things like El Nino Southern  Oscillation and drought in Australia. And then a couple of years ago, instead of just  
**[0:02:06-0:02:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:02:06):**  being a theoretical climate scientist, which was fun for a while, I wanted to move more  into agriculture and start to make a difference and deliver some of this research where it  would really matter and change the way people can make decisions and become more productive.  So did you have a background in ag at all or you just saw ag as an impact area and wanted  to dig into it more? It's been a huge learning curve for me when it comes to agriculture.  
**[0:02:30-0:02:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:02:30):**  I know lots about climate, so I feel like I'm useful. But figuring out what that means  is really challenging, whether that's for wheat, for cattle, for cherries, for cauliflowers,  they all need climate in a slightly different way. And I need to get my head across all  those different spaces. Yep, that is definitely one of the things I found about ag that even  if you think you're an expert in one thing, there's so many different sectors and you  
**[0:02:53-0:02:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:02:53):**  can't possibly be an expert in all of them, maybe in a particular area, like you can be  a weather expert in all of them. So I think that's an interesting thing about agriculture  that people often miss. I think that's why I find it so much fun because I can't be the  expert in everything. I really love teamwork and collaboration. So I'll be in the room  with a team of experts in so many different other things, whether that's wheat or soil  
**[0:03:15-0:03:20](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:03:15):**  or the technology. And we work together to build something, but I have a contribution  to make. Yes, awesome. I saw you in action doing that a bit a few weeks ago when we were  in a room and some of your team was there and you were like number one hustler, like  bringing your team around and saying, guys, we got to do this, guys, we got to go do that  and meet these people. So that was awesome to see. I always get overexcited about everything.  
**[0:03:36-0:03:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:03:36):**  I want to do everything all at once. That's my biggest flaw. No, or your biggest asset  maybe. So one of the things that gets talked about and it was touched on at the conference  here today is around commercialization of research and how CSIRO has the ON program  and other initiatives to think more about end users and think more about how this deep  science and research can be used in the real world. So I'm curious what your experience  
**[0:03:58-0:04:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:03:58):**  has been with that and how you think about your research and how it can be used or is  being used in agriculture. So in years past when I was a more traditional scientist, my  goal was to write a paper, to find some research money, write a paper, maybe 10 people in the  world would read it and that's a hit for me. And now I've learned to think a lot more differently.  So who needs this and figuring out whether it's worth studying something before you do  
**[0:04:26-0:04:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:04:26):**  it has been a big lesson. So my team went off to look at horticulture apps for a while.  We thought this is the next best thing. We'd love to make this app for people growing cauliflowers  or lettuce, whatever. We can solve their problems. So instead of going off and finding half a  million dollars and spending two years building this, we thought we'll spend two days in like  a little incubator, really looking at the customer, throwing around some ideas, got  
**[0:04:51-0:04:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:04:51):**  a diverse group of people to talk with us from different fields. And at the end of the  two days we decided this is a really bad idea. This is not the way to go. It's not our expertise.  We shouldn't be in this space. And that was the best two days ever. And we used the learnings  from that in so many other ways to figure out how to operate.  And so how did you know to do that? Because like you said, that's not the traditional  
**[0:05:16-0:05:19](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:05:16):**  research approach to go in an incubator and get diverse perspectives and think about,  I mean, maybe it is, but how did you even know that that was a process that you should  try to do?  One of the new CSIRO initiatives over the last few years has been the ON program. So  they do launch camps, which is the two day version and the longer acceleration programs.  
**[0:05:36-0:05:41](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:05:36):**  And they've been changing the way scientists are thinking, challenging us to think about  business and commercialization and users and actually pick up the phone and talk to the  customer. And that's a really bizarre thing to do as a scientist. Often, you know, you're  the expert and you sit there and you study something and you're a bit intimidated to  just pick up the phone until you've got it perfect. We obsess about things being perfect.  
**[0:06:00-0:06:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:06:00):**  So I can't talk to you till I know everything about my topic and all the information. And  then when I've got it polished, I'll ask you about it. Instead, I pick it up, you know,  I've just got this idea and I was wondering what your problems were and how I can help.  And rather than coming to you with a solution, come to you and ask questions. And that's  opened up so many opportunities of problems I didn't know were out there.  
**[0:06:25-0:06:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:06:25):**  And so how does that in practice actually work? Like has CSIRO and have your team been  open to, right, okay, we're going to go visit a bunch of farms or do you have like networks  of farmers that you call and is CSIRO happy for you to go on a road trip and talk to them  like kind of in practice? What does that actually look like?  We love road trips. I can't get enough of road trips. I love going out there. And, you  
**[0:06:44-0:06:48](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:06:44):**  know, if you sit down with a farmer and say, tell me about the weather, they love to talk  to you. We went to Burchep and they helped us organize, the Burchep cropping group helped  us organize a series of interviews. I think we spent two days, eight hours nonstop for  the two days talking to farmers at the kitchen table for an hour long each. We just sat down  and say, tell us what you're thinking. Tell us what last year was like. Tell us if you  
**[0:07:10-0:07:13](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:07:10):**  could have a crystal ball to know anything about the weather, what would it be? Because  often they don't think about things because they don't think we can do it. So finding  out what they would like if they could have anything in the world is really interesting  and some things we can't do, but some we can start to do. And some of it's just about repackaging  the way we have the information in the way they want it and learning how they think.  
**[0:07:32-0:07:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:07:32):**  And so is there, from that trip or others, is there an example of something that was  like counterintuitive or something that you thought they'd want this but they actually  wanted that or they wanted it this way and you actually needed to, you know, figure out  how to get it to them in a different way than you thought?  Oh, so many. And you laugh at yourself as a scientist because it's always obvious after  
**[0:07:49-0:07:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:07:49):**  the fact. You go in there with such a set idea of how things work. So I knew that farmers  had maybe four or five weather apps on their phone and I thought, oh, this must be a real  problem for them. They've got to look at five different places to know what the weather  is and I'd like to make the best app. So if I can go and talk to them and find out which  bit of each they're looking at and put that all into one place, that will save them a  
**[0:08:12-0:08:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:08:12):**  lot of time and they'll have the superior product. So that's what we went out to talk  to and we asked them to tell us about their apps. And what was really surprising was it  wasn't that they all had something different. The way they had confidence in the weather  forecast was each of those four apps agreed, then they knew what was going to happen. And  if they disagreed, then they were uncertain about what the weather would do. Now that  
**[0:08:36-0:08:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:08:36):**  was interesting because to my mind, that's not how it works because often those all apps  all source a very similar model. And when the forecast is in that app, it actually comes  with a confidence rating anyway. So I didn't understand why you'd need to look elsewhere,  but that's the way I think, not the way the users are thinking. So the challenge now is  not to make the app to end all apps, but to think better about how we can communicate  
**[0:09:02-0:09:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:09:02):**  uncertainty in the weather forecast in a way people can actually use it and understand  it.  And that's really interesting. There's a whole field around user centered design and user  interfaces and communicating information. Is that now a skill set that you or your team  have to go learn about or is that something that you partner with others to do? It's a  
**[0:09:22-0:09:26](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:09:22):**  whole different discipline or is it something that you guys can figure out and build capacity  for doing that internally and working with users? How do you solve that problem?  For us, it's been a lot of fun learning how to do these sort of approaches and interview  people and understand, but we don't do it all ourselves. One of the advantages of being  somewhere like CSIRO is a huge number of disciplines that we can draw on. We've got social scientists  
**[0:09:45-0:09:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:09:45):**  and user experience people, but we also draw from outside. We use Square V Design when  we go and work with a birch of cropping group and they bring us along a journey and say,  come on scientists, look at this. And we also help them, I think, because we've got that  deep domain knowledge. So sitting at the kitchen table with the farmer, they want to talk to  the scientists. They like the scientists. They're really enjoying having a chat with  
**[0:10:09-0:10:14](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:10:09):**  us and discussing us, but we've also got that user experience or social scientists looking  at how we communicate and how to interpret what's being said and what we can take away  from that discussion. Yeah, interesting. And so even more like cross  sector across skill collaborations needed, I think that's one of the insights that I've  had in ag is that there's all these other skills that exist in other industries, whether  
**[0:10:31-0:10:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:10:31):**  it's user experience design or science or whatever need to kind of come into ag. And  there often needs to be these translators, like people who can sort of speak different  languages that can understand and empathize with what the farmer's going through, but  maybe also knows science or also knows how to build technology. You need these kind of  translator functions. But I imagine that's not like you sound like you have fun doing  
**[0:10:53-0:10:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:10:53):**  this. I imagine it's not super comfortable for lots of researchers or is it something  that everyone likes to go do? Do some people want to just stay and do the science and not  worry about that? I think we all love getting out and realizing  that what we do might be important. I don't think anyone says, I just want to stay in  my little box. There's a lot of value in seeing how you make a difference. And I've talked  
**[0:11:14-0:11:19](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:11:14):**  to other researchers that were almost in tears realizing, wow, you're that thing I write  that I don't think much about. That's someone's livelihood. And it makes a real difference  to the way you go to work each day. Yeah, I think that's something that is special  also about agriculture. Absolutely. Because these things just matter so much to people's  livelihoods and regional communities. And yeah, it's actually so tangible.  
**[0:11:38-0:11:43](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:11:38):**  Even when I do interviews, I've been warned to be very careful if I'm getting on there  being all excited because the hugest El Nino might happen. For me in a scientific perspective,  wow, that's great. I can write lots of great papers about this massive El Nino, but that's  had huge impacts on drought and livelihood of Australia.  Yeah. So I wanted to ask about, I guess the other piece of this. So one is the end users  
**[0:12:01-0:12:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:12:01):**  if researchers are working with end users, farmers directly, but there's also startups  and ag tech coming into this world and the event where we were working together a few  weeks ago at the greenhouse event that CSIRO ran and we had 40 researchers and your team  was there and 14 ag tech startups. I'm curious what your experience was at that event and  just generally working with startups. Do you see that as a potential collaboration partner  
**[0:12:26-0:12:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:12:26):**  or pathway for your group and for CSIRO? Yes, because both have a different set of  skills to bring to the table. So we might have the time and patience to sit there and  look at things deeply and the startups have got that ability to go out there and talk  to the end users and be quick and agile and trial things. So together I think we can be  really powerful. There is a challenge because those things don't always match together.  
**[0:12:51-0:12:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:12:51):**  So we need to learn how to talk to each other and not worry about setting up contracts and  spending months fighting over IP or figuring out all the details, but let's just have a  go at it. And I think the new challenge is to figure out that play space together.  So recently we were approached by a startup company to just get some advice on how to  access some weather and climate information to make some graphics. And I said, you know  
**[0:13:14-0:13:18](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:13:14):**  what, I could just make those for you if you like. And they said, brilliant. We can get  a feed from you of those graphics month by month would be fantastic. I said, sure. When  do you need them by? Thinking, you know, it'll take a couple of months to write up the contract,  figure out the IP, the processes. And he said, can you have a prototype by next week? I was  like, really? Actually I kept that to myself. I just said, sure I can do that. No problem.  
**[0:13:39-0:13:44](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:13:39):**  And I went back to my team and said, drop everything we need to deliver on this prototype,  which is not something we usually do. Everything's usually structured for the whole next 12 months  ahead. So we did that and we started making up these prototypes and some of the people  in my team were like, Oh, but this data is not accurate. It's not the right data. We're  using them on one. We have to go get this. We'll never have it done in time. So do you  
**[0:14:01-0:14:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:14:01):**  know what? It doesn't matter what the data is. They just want to see the picture. They  won't know that it's a different town. It doesn't even matter. What we're selling is  the concept of what we can do. Don't worry about the decimal places. So let's just get  it looking right. So we made up a PowerPoint demonstrating our capability and right at  the start of it, we thought we'll just throw in some really simple graphics just to set  
**[0:14:24-0:14:29](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:14:24):**  the scene of what we can do. Some nice background pictures. So we started showing them this  PowerPoint and we got to the first slide and they said, we love it. We want that. And we  just all looked at each other. It's like, you know, that that's not even what we're  offering. That was just the pretty picture. And I think as scientists we forget, we're  so far immersed into it that some of the basic stuff is still really important to deliver  
**[0:14:48-0:14:53](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:14:48):**  first. So most of the rest of our talk wasn't used because it was way too complex because  we just were not thinking where the consumer was thinking. That's so interesting. And it's  actually a parallel to something we heard today and yesterday around startups thinking  sometimes they have to build a whole solution for farmers. But sometimes there's like a  really simple problem that if they just solve some simple thing first, that can be really  
**[0:15:11-0:15:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:15:11):**  helpful. So again, it's all this kind of know your user, know your customer. I'm curious  why you were able to even like think like that, like that you said yes to that project.  Cause I can imagine a lot of other researchers would say like once they said next week, it  was just like a no, right? Like we, it'll take us six months and a contract. So what  was it that let you say yes to that or why did you think you could just have a go? I  
**[0:15:35-0:15:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:15:35):**  think CSIRO, like I was saying the last few years has done a lot of work to enable its  staff to be more innovative, to be more agile, to think a bit outside the box. Not everything's  the old school science now that has to be written into a paper. Before you might count  up the number of papers you'd written in a year to see if you are up for promotion. That's  not the only metric anymore. It's about how innovative and agile and different you can  
**[0:15:59-0:16:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:15:59):**  be and what impact you can make. A lot of it's about impact. So now I feel like, Oh,  there's so much I can do. Yeah. Has that been a quick change? Cause I guess from the outside  it seems like, you know, the on-programme started and now like the culture shifting,  but I think I imagine from the inside it seems like a much more gradual, slow and probably  sometimes painful change. Yeah, because it involves some trust that I can stop focusing  
**[0:16:24-0:16:29](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:16:24):**  on writing papers and they do actually value this new way of thinking and that it's okay  to fail and it's okay to change. So recently I had a project funded that's about to start  in a few weeks and I had a very clear idea of what that project was and it's all been  approved and we're going to build an app to do this, this and this. Fabulous. And then  we went to the workshop you spoke of a couple of weeks ago where we met with a whole lot  
**[0:16:48-0:16:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:16:48):**  of startups for two days. In that two days I completely changed that project. We scrapped  that idea and we've got a whole new plan because I realised what I was first designing was  not what they were ready for. They actually want something else. But Syro gives me that  freedom to be agile and change things. You know, it's not a freedom to do whatever I  want within certain bounds, but that flexibility to respond to the market as it changes. Yeah,  
**[0:17:14-0:17:18](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:17:14):**  I think that's really valuable. We certainly heard from the startups coming out of that  that they were excited and it was interesting. There was a bit of a, wow, there's all these  capabilities that CSIRO actually can do way more than maybe they even need. Like you said,  need some of the pretty pictures or basic modelling, maybe not all of the super statistically  significant depth versions. So it's a bit of a, I wonder if that feels like, have we  
**[0:17:38-0:17:43](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:17:38):**  done hard work for nothing or is that fine? You're happy to give just the top layer and  hope that you get to go deeper later? Yeah, because there's so many ways we deliver.  Startups is one way to deliver, but we do very deep impact studies and developing the  science that has bigger implications and impacts on a global scale. I think as a scientist  in this era, it's about being able to deliver on all those different levels. I mean, ideally  
**[0:18:04-0:18:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:18:04):**  if you can situate yourself where you're doing some underpinning fundamental research and  then also engaging with users and also delivering and doing some impact, then you're best placed.  And I think that's the most fun way to work. It sounds like you're having fun. Like you  can just hear the passion in your voice. And I know like, again, at that event, when you  got up to pitch what you were doing, it was like you were selling it. Like you were really  
**[0:18:26-0:18:31](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:18:26):**  selling the vision and passion for the data you have and the science you've done. And  I think that's really cool to see that it isn't just numbers. Like you are living this,  like it really matters to you. Yeah. I love weather and climate and often particularly  my family fall into the trap of just saying some off the cuff comment about the weather  to me. I go, well, actually, by the way, no, Jackie, we didn't really want to know. We  
**[0:18:50-0:18:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:18:50):**  were just commenting that the sunshine was nice. That's hilarious. So I do want to ask  about weather. So we do have a few quite a few farmer listeners to the podcast. So what  do you want them to know about sort of what you do with the weather? Maybe what is the  future of science around weather and climate? Where are things headed? Well, obviously I  think it's quite an exciting time to be weather and climate. There's quite a change in technology  
**[0:19:17-0:19:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:19:17):**  at the moment. So back in the 80s, you didn't really look at the weather forecast for more  than a few days ahead, because that's the only skill we have. But now we look at it  seven days ahead and we look at it hourly. And now we're getting technologies to look  at what's going to happen for the rest of the year and possibly even next year. And  it's starting to get skillful enough that we can use it. So on the farm, you might at  
**[0:19:40-0:19:44](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:19:40):**  the moment look at past years and what sort of patterns they've been and what an El Nino  might typically look like to understand what's going to happen this year. But now with this  forecasting technology, we can narrow that down and give you a better idea of how things  will eventuate and different patterns. And that becomes even more important under climate  change. So as the climate changes, it's no longer relevant to look at the past as the  
**[0:20:04-0:20:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:20:04):**  perfect indicator of what the future might be, because we know we're moving into a hotter  regime, possibly drier in some regions. So it's more and more important to get this forecasting  technology out there and being used.  One of the stories I heard the other day was about a farmer in WA, I think, who had done  a ton of work to have a data scientist come in and do a bunch of analysis of previous  
**[0:20:27-0:20:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:20:27):**  weather on his property and what was happening and what did that mean. And I don't know how  rigorous it was around predictive modeling or what technologies he used, but one of the  benefits that he talked about was just the bit of confidence in having done something,  like in having gotten a bit of control over this thing that's so uncertain, was almost  as much more important than the actual this or that, that it was just taking a little  
**[0:20:52-0:20:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:20:52):**  bit of control back of something that's so uncertain. I just thought that was really  interesting about weather and how much it matters, but then it's not about precision.  It's kind of a feeling thing too.  Yeah, I think with any sort of relationship, whether it's on farm or your marriage or your  children, when it's uncertain, the more control you can have and the more understanding of  
**[0:21:13-0:21:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:21:13):**  what you're dealing with, the better prepared you can be, the better you can respond. If  you know you get three good years out of 10, then you can plan for that. And if you know  those years are dropping off because of climate change, you can plan for that. The more you  can understand and the more you can understand how that information helps you control different  levers about crop types or nitrogen application, the better off you can be.  
**[0:21:38-0:21:42](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:21:38):**  I agree. And I think it's super exciting. I mean, we heard that today at the conference,  like how much data is coming and how the ability to collect more data is just giving us like  all of these different possibilities in the future that we didn't have before. So I think  it's really exciting. There's so many more technologies now and data we can collect and  analyses we can do. I'm curious what you think the future of climate science and weather  
**[0:22:00-0:22:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:22:00):**  is and kind of what that means for farmers. Like what can they be looking for and looking  forward to?  I think it's a really exciting time right now, obviously. If you remember 20 years ago,  we all watched the evening news to find out the weather forecast for the next few days.  And we'd only believe it a couple of days out. Whereas now we're on our phones looking  
**[0:22:18-0:22:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:22:18):**  at the forecast for the next seven days and it's actually quite accurate. We're now getting  the skills to look not just at the next seven days, but the next six months and having skill  at understanding different patterns in rainfall looking forward. So I think that's going to  be the future expanding into that space. So CSIRO is working closely with the Bureau of  Meteorology to partner on how to deliver these new technologies and the new model coming  
**[0:22:43-0:22:48](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:22:43):**  out of the Bureau of Meteorology, shaping that for the needs of agriculture to deliver  actually on the questions that you need to ask and also incorporating all the data. So  weather doesn't exist just by itself. Weather and climate information is best if it's partnered  into yield forecasts and nitrogen application decisions or stocking rates or irrigation  decisions. So putting all that big data together, I think is going to be the future and I can't  
**[0:23:08-0:23:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:23:08):**  wait to see how it unfolds.  Awesome. Well, if you had anything for our listeners to look up about you or read any  papers or look at any flashy PowerPoints, what should they look at or where should they  find you if you have anything you want to share?  My favorite app that we've made is YieldProfit Lite, which you can get off the App Store  
**[0:23:26-0:23:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:23:26):**  and that gives you a seasonal climate forecast. So you can have a look at that one or you  can email me, Jackie, jaki.brown at csiro.au.  Awesome. Jackie, thank you so much for joining me today.  No worries.  Thank you for listening to the Bush Tech podcast. We'd love to hear what you think. If you have  
**[0:23:45-0:23:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357337#t=0:23:45):**  feedback, suggestions for future guests or technologies or topics you want us to cover,  you can find us at bushtechpodcast.com.au.  I hope you found it enjoyable. Until next time, see ya.  See ya.  