### Agtech - So What?  (2018-13-17)
**[0:00:00-0:00:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, and welcome to the AgTech So What podcast. Emerging technologies are rapidly changing  the global agricultural industry. We believe that this revolution is only getting started.  But there's still too much hype out there and too big of a disconnect between ag and  ag tech. So on this show, we try to bridge that gap. In each episode, we bring you the  story of a different innovator in agriculture and try to find the place where ag and tech  
**[0:00:44-0:01:00](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:00:44):**  meet. I'm your host, Sarah Nolet. Welcome back to the AgTech So What podcast.  Today's guest is Marc Mortimer. I love this episode with Marc because we talk about something  that's really kind of near and dear to my heart around technology development and the  role that producers can play in creating new technologies and in ensuring that the tech  products that get built really do have a value proposition and really do solve problems on  
**[0:01:22-0:01:29](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:01:22):**  farm. So we talk about Marc going from not interested at all in computers to a self-proclaimed  sheep geek. And we compare farming to open source. So how is information shared and what's  that like in the tech world versus in the farming world? We talk a little bit about  why the sheep industry is behind in terms of adoption of technology and Marc's views  on that. And then Marc has some great examples of how he has worked with both researchers  
**[0:01:51-0:01:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:01:51):**  and startups to help commercialize technologies and bring them to market and what role he  played and what roles he didn't play as a farmer in helping to bring those solutions  to market. So without further ado, here is Marc Mortimer. Marc Mortimer, welcome to the  podcast. Thanks so much for joining me today. It's a pleasure, Sarah. Happy to be here.  Whereabouts are you calling from today? So I'm calling from a place called Albert in  
**[0:02:27-0:02:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:02:27):**  central New South Wales, Australia. So, you know, the back of nowhere for some people,  but we call it civilization. I'm sure. Is that home or are you traveling today? I know  that's home. So I'm sitting in my office looking out down the paddock. I could probably see  about 5 k's in a flat landscape, lightly timbered. Can't see any sheep at the moment, but they're  normally out there somewhere. Yep. I'm sure hopefully they're somewhere else you got a  
**[0:02:54-0:03:01](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:02:54):**  different problem. Yeah, absolutely. So Marc, tell me a little bit about the farm and the  business and your kind of background. Take me through what has brought you to sitting  in the office there today. Yeah. So it's a typical family farming operation. So we operate  as a partnership. So my father and my brother and our families are involved in it. The end  of the partnership that I'm involved in is, I guess, heavily involved in sheep and the  
**[0:03:24-0:03:31](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:03:24):**  seed stock industry. So we breed sheep for genetics and semen and embryos for clients.  So I guess that's the main aspect of what I do. And obviously all the technologies that  go into helping us breed those sheep and to stay at the cutting edge of the industry genetically.  As for my background, I guess, like all kids that grew up out here where I am, went away  to boarding school because there weren't many local schooling options when I was younger.  
**[0:03:53-0:03:59](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:03:53):**  So I went to boarding school, was back home on the farm at 16, worked for five years and  then went away to uni. So I do have a degree in management on farm business, but I don't  let too many people know that. So I essentially am trained to be doing what I'm doing. Whereas  most farmers absolutely learn on the job and there's still a very large aspect of what  I do that is, you learn on the job and you pick up things as you go along. Do you feel  
**[0:04:21-0:04:26](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:04:21):**  like what you learned in that degree was useful? Like, are there things you use on a day to  day basis? Yeah. So, you know, apart from university being on a fantastic holiday for  somebody that had spent five years in the workforce, the most important thing was the  ability to learn. I mean, that's what they taught you. So, you know, we're taught to  question things, we're taught how to find information, how to get answers. The actual  
**[0:04:50-0:04:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:04:50):**  technical side of what they learned back then, you know, it's sad to say it's probably over  20 years ago. So, you know, it's not very relevant anymore, but that ability to learn  and to question and to seek information, you know, that's invaluable. Right. And you definitely  use that in, it seems on the tech side for sure, in kind of learning how to build new  solutions and use new different kinds of technologies to solve problems on the farm. I'm sure you  
**[0:05:19-0:05:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:05:19):**  use that in lots of other ways as well, but that's definitely the one that I have seen  you doing and want to talk a little bit about today. Have you always been interested and  keen on technology or is that something that came about later? I think it's something that  came back later. So, I know, you know, my mum tells me that when I was a young fellow  that, you know, I was very happy to point out to people that I didn't notice need to  
**[0:05:42-0:05:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:05:42):**  go to school, I was just going to be a farmer. So, you know, I didn't need to learn to read  or write or know anything about. I just needed to know how to whistle up the dog and drive  a bike and a ute and walk out the door every morning. And, you know, that was a young fellow,  that was quite appealing. I love being out on the farm and that's what I wanted to do.  So, and I did leave school early, I wasn't very successful at school. So, you know, those,  
**[0:06:07-0:06:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:06:07):**  you know, the ability, you know, going back to uni as a mature age student and those things  certainly came much later. You know, as a young fellow, you know, computers were useless  to me, you know, I couldn't spell or write well enough to drive them, you know, Windows  didn't exist back then, everything was text based. Whereas now they're a tool that I use  every day. I walk out the door every morning with a computer bag over my shoulder and go  
**[0:06:32-0:06:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:06:32):**  to work on a sheep farm. So, you know, that's a big change, you know, don't go anywhere  without them. That's a huge change. So, how did that change come about? Like, what was  the switcher moment when you went from these things are not useful to me to I'm going to  dig in a little more and figure out how to use them?  Yeah, so I guess it was probably a gradual process. Like most people that on the farm  
**[0:06:54-0:06:58](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:06:54):**  that have to keep some sheep data, it probably started with Excel, which is, you know, it's  a great program, but it's, you know, it's not a database and it is fraught with danger.  So, you know, I used to tinker there and write my formulas and, you know, decided this wasn't  the space that was beneficial to us. So, a friend of mine prompted me to learn how to  write computer code. So, I read a few help manuals and got some software and that's,  
**[0:07:19-0:07:23](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:07:19):**  you know, that's where it sort of started, I guess, learning to write computer programs  and then being able to design databases and software that was tailor made for what we  needed to do on the farm with the sheep. So, you know, historically, you know, people would  gather your data, either pen or paper or into some kind of indicator and all the assessment  and work would be done later on in the office. And, you know, I wanted to move to doing that  
**[0:07:47-0:07:52](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:07:47):**  work, you know, live at the race side. And that's where that came from. There wasn't  software available when we wanted to do that. So, you know, that's where I started in building  my own tools.  Yeah, it's really interesting. I think probably a lot of people, especially young people nowadays  get the suggestion, you know, you should learn to write some computer code and I bet, you  
**[0:08:09-0:08:14](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:08:09):**  know, less than 1% decide to go buy a help manual and dig into it and start actually  learning how to do it. So, what do you think it is about you or was it maybe the problem  was so great that actually took you from these things are useless and I don't even want to  learn to write to I'm going to go read a whole manual and learn a new language and do this.  Like, what was that decision like?  
**[0:08:33-0:08:37](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:08:33):**  I guess I, you know, I can only look at it in hindsight. I don't think it was a, you  know, was was something I was obviously interested in. I have read a bit about computer science  and the types of people and personalities that are drawn to it and, you know, and it  appeals to them. And I fit squarely into that in that personality type. So, I know, so computer  science is one of those rare courses that when they look at all the students results,  
**[0:08:59-0:09:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:08:59):**  it has a double bell curve. So, you have those students that have some innate ability to  write code in the top bell curve and then you have other people who are equally as intelligent  that just find it difficult. So, obviously, it's something that I found easy. Yeah. So,  obviously, when I was learning, you know, you actually bought a help manual because  you didn't go online. That just wasn't a thing. And yeah, yeah, that's, you know, it's a pretty  
**[0:09:27-0:09:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:09:27):**  dry old experience reading a help manual front to back and then learning to code. But, you  know, I guess part of that would have been the isolation on the farm. So, I needed, you  know, I needed something that challenged me. I really enjoy learning new things, making  new stuff, discovering something that hasn't been discovered before. You know, it's a really  quite an exciting thing. So, I guess one, the isolation on the farm, no social media,  
**[0:09:53-0:09:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:09:53):**  no connection to the outside world, you need something that stops you from going crazy.  And obviously, for me, you know, it was those technology types of things that I was drawn  to that I used to occupy my brain. It's really interesting about the double bell curve. I  didn't know that. I know my experience studying software engineering was really frustrating  because I felt like there was this whole group of people who had done it as kind of tinkerers  
**[0:10:21-0:10:26](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:10:21):**  and hackers and I was learning it from a more theoretical academic standpoint. And so, I  really liked and still really like the architecture and kind of problem solving and how do the  pieces fit together and what are the functions need to do. But I get tripped up and definitely  in learning it got tripped up on the kind of like, where do I put the code? Like, how  do I make a script? What are the short hands? And just felt like there was, you know, there  
**[0:10:47-0:10:52](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:10:47):**  are people who spent hours and hours learning the shorthand and the hacking and the kind  of quick kind of practical aspects of programming and I was really excited about the theoretical  problem solving systems. And so, I saw that at least in my cohort of people studying it  and then later working of people who kind of got it at a different level than I did  and appreciated a very different aspect of writing software than I did, which I always  
**[0:11:13-0:11:15](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:11:13):**  found really interesting.  Yeah, so that's probably, I mean, you know, that's the opposite experience to me. So,  you know, I was that tinker and hacker. So, writing the code was the easy bit. I'd love  to have had the education that taught me that large, you know, the underlying architecture  for problem solving and some of the really modern and cool mathematical formulas and  
**[0:11:37-0:11:41](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:11:37):**  those kind of things. So, you know, I have no trouble writing code, but when it comes  to solving those problems, you know, I'm solving them in isolation. So, I guess there's some  advantages. Nobody's told me what you can't do. So, you know, there are no boundaries  when I set out to solve a problem, I guess, which can be an advantage and a disadvantage  because I fall into every trap that all beginners have taught not to do.  
**[0:12:01-0:12:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:12:01):**  Do you have any good stories of mistakes or big things you've messed up?  Yeah, so I know, so there's some software called Total Genetic Resource Management that  does mate allocations for breeders. So, it takes all your rams and you use and optimizes  the way to put them together. And when we first started to use that, it was, you know,  it was a lot of money to have somebody run the software for you. So, $800 to $1,000.  
**[0:12:32-0:12:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:12:32):**  And I thought, it can't be that hard. I'll make my own. And I only had 52 ewes and two  rams that I needed to mate together. And I just wrote a script that ran through every  conceivable combination and assessed the result of that mating and it was just logged the  best outcome that I'd chosen. And I set my computer running and I came back in an hour's  time and it had been through 2 million combinations and I thought, no time. And I knew the number  
**[0:13:06-0:13:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:13:06):**  of combinations that it had to go through was a 16 digit number that started with nine.  And I divided it by 2 million, which was an hour. And the number of hours it was going  to take was a number that I couldn't read. So, I divided that by 24 and that was still  a very big number. So, I divided that by 365 and my computer was going to run for a little  over 500,000 years to make them 52 ewes and two rams. And that's when I realised, you  
**[0:13:34-0:13:37](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:13:34):**  know, the guys that put this other software together, it just wasn't how they were doing  it. And it wasn't long after that, I read a paper on genetic algorithms. And that opened  up a whole new area for me and writing code and, you know, it's just something in my mind  very poetic about using a genetic algorithm to find a solution for a real world genetic  outcome. So, essentially, you know, we're using genetics and evolution in the real world  
**[0:14:04-0:14:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:14:04):**  to change the attributes of our sheep and one of the tools we use is a genetic algorithm  in our software to achieve that. So, you know, there's something nice and poetic about that.  Yeah, of course. Do you get a lot of people, either other studs or commercial guys, asking  to use the software? Like, do they want to benefit from the tools that you've built as  well or mostly from the results in terms of the sheep and those outcomes?  
**[0:14:31-0:14:37](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:14:31):**  So, mostly from the sheep and their outcomes. Certainly, I get lots of questions about what  I use and then, you know, I just sort of have to mumble that I made it myself. And then,  because I know the next question is, can I have a copy? And, you know, the answer has  always been no. So, for those guys that work in the software industry, you know, building  a prototype is one thing. Building a product that you can put out into the real world for,  
**[0:14:58-0:15:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:14:58):**  you know, anyone to use and have it work successfully are two very different things. So, you know,  I'm after a solution to a problem and I'll write code and I'll make a tool that works  for me, given that I'm the guy that wrote the code, I know what not to do. And once  it sort of works for me, I'll move on to the next project. So, I've not been interested  in, you know, making a finished product. Selling it to people, you know, the idea of service  
**[0:15:25-0:15:31](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:15:25):**  and backup and distribution chains and, you know, they're all the kind of things that  would give me cold sweats at night.  So it is more of an aspect of interest then. Like, you're just not interested in doing  the other things. You're interested in having built and solved the problem and then moving  on, I guess I'm curious, would, if someone came along and said, you know, let's partner  
**[0:15:46-0:15:51](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:15:46):**  and commercialize this together and you can keep doing what you're doing and all commercialize  it and give you some benefit, ideally commercial, would you be interested in that kind of relationship?  I would certainly be interested in discussing that, you know, how that would work. I mean,  to me that seems ideal, you know, I just keep having ideas and somebody else, if they think  they're valuable, you know, if they wanted to turn those ideas into better products,  
**[0:16:11-0:16:18](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:16:11):**  you know, well and good. And I guess you would have seen on Twitter that I've built my own  auto drafter. I guess that sort of fits into that category because I know other breeders  come here, they see it working and they say, oh, you know, I'd love one that does that,  but you can't buy one. So, you know, I guess the way I see it is, you know, I have the  idea, I tinker away in the workshop, I make it work, I put a video on Twitter and hopefully  
**[0:16:40-0:16:44](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:16:40):**  the guys that retail these products see it. And if they think it's a good idea, they build  it into their own products.  Has that ever happened? Do you have an example of you building something and then it actually  getting commercialized in one way or another or still waiting for them to take you up on  that?  
**[0:16:56-0:17:00](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:16:56):**  Yeah. So, I mean, I know there's things that I've built here and displayed publicly that  turn up, you know, just small ideas and, you know, certainly with the auto drafter and  the back door and the way it works, I've now seen commercial ones that do a very similar  thing. But that's, you know, I can't guarantee they got the idea from me. You know, if people  are working on the same problem, it's not always unsurprising when different people  
**[0:17:18-0:17:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:17:18):**  come up with the same solution to the same problem.  Yeah. It's interesting. One of the things that gets talked about a lot in the tech world  and research world is around IP. And, you know, this is, you know, I invented this thing.  It's my intellectual property. And so I don't want anyone to know about it. And you've really  taken the opposite approach of I've in building it, I've solved my own problem. And so, like,  
**[0:17:41-0:17:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:17:41):**  do whatever you want with it. Because I've already benefited. And so it's just a, I guess,  to me, an interesting kind of opposite end of the spectrum of, like, the benefit to you  is it solving the problem on the farm, not you building a massive business to do it.  And so if it can help other people, great. But you're just not interested in that part  of it. So the IP is, yeah, more in the operation than in the business of that technology, for  
**[0:18:05-0:18:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:18:05):**  example.  Yeah. So, you know, that is, you know, I guess it's probably that hacker mentality of, you  know, growing up when I did where, you know, all software was pirated, not bought. You  know, you got stuff for nothing. But the proviso is then you shared all your ideas, you know.  So I guess it's that open source mentality, which I really like the idea of. You know,  
**[0:18:29-0:18:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:18:29):**  if you're going to tuck yourself away and develop a product, it's much harder to do  it in isolation. You know, I know if we go back to looking at developing civilisations,  you know, throughout history, archaeologists have been able to work out that most civilisations  invent about 1% of their own technology and borrow 99%. So our ideas evolve from other  people's ideas, you know, which, you know, each person is only putting a small part of  
**[0:19:01-0:19:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:19:01):**  their idea on technology that somebody else has already developed. So if you want that  to work effectively, you know, as a species, we're going to be open and share ideas. And,  you know, I guess that the tech world is getting there, you know, for guys that like to tinker  in their workshop, you know, their computer chips and technology now that, you know, even  at just a school level and educational levels, you know, for very small amounts of money,  
**[0:19:27-0:19:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:19:27):**  I can go out and, you know, buy hardware and turn it into real products in my workshop,  you know, the world is changing so fast in that space. And I find it very exciting.  Yeah, it's totally exciting. It's funny, I talk about that a lot in different kind of  presentations I give around how fundamental of a revolution it is that we have access  to these technologies anywhere in the world. And, you know, yours was a great example,  
**[0:19:54-0:19:59](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:19:54):**  like the computing power that you have now through access to Amazon Web Services and  everything else, not to mention machine learning toolkits. And, you know, there's so many tools  available for really, really cheap that not that long ago just didn't exist. And so we  can much more easily build off of the foundation that other people have created.  Yeah, absolutely. Like if you look at machine learning, so that's, you know, I wanted to  
**[0:20:21-0:20:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:20:21):**  know what this machine learning was. So, you know, I read a few articles, you know, tinkered  with some code, made some very tiny machine learning type algorithms, so that I could  get a picture of them in my head. But if you wanted to use it seriously, there are just  tools you can get access to and you put your inputs in and allow serious experts to have  built the algorithms and you get your answers out. You know, it's, you know, we don't have  
**[0:20:47-0:20:51](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:20:47):**  to reinvent the wheel every time, you know, we've all got access to others' ideas and  that's a very powerful thing.  Do you think that farming works the same way? Like outside of technology, is there this  sense of, you know, I share this idea and you build off of it and we all kind of benefit  from learning from each other? Or is it different somehow in the farming practices versus the  
**[0:21:08-0:21:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:21:08):**  tech products?  At a fundamental level, I don't think it is. So I know, you know, if we're part of groups,  you know, I'm part of a lifetime new management group and there's only six participants and  it runs over two years and, you know, every quarter we get together and we drive around  all six farms and we're looking at our sheep. But essentially, you know, we all look through  
**[0:21:31-0:21:37](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:21:31):**  everyone's shed, we all look at their ideas and solutions to different things. And, you  know, half the benefit of the course isn't just what we're being taught, but it's the  fact that we're going around and sharing and swapping ideas with other farmers. And, you  know, that can be as simple as how somebody swung a gate that no one else has thought  of and next you know, we're all doing it. So we do share those ideas. But, you know,  
**[0:21:55-0:22:00](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:21:55):**  I guess I'm squarely, you know, I'm in the sheep game, you know, the sheep breeding in  Australia really probably has a very bad image for the adoption of tech. So, you know, I  think we're certainly a long way behind say cropping and other agricultural industries,  certainly behind dairy and your more intensive livestock industries for technology. I guess  I do have a few theories on why that is, you know, but they can only be theories. I can't  
**[0:22:22-0:22:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:22:22):**  say, you know, categorically, this is why we're lagging behind. If we are...  Let's hear them. What are your theories?  So I guess, you know, what makes people adopt a new technology? So for me, a new technology  has got to make it easier for people to do what they already do. Like, I guess if we  got an example, if we, you know, like Uber as a ride sharing app has been adopted around  
**[0:22:48-0:22:53](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:22:48):**  the world massively. But Uber didn't suddenly make people want to have other people drive  them around cities, you know, taxis and those services already existed. What Uber does is  make it very easy to do. So, you know, there's a need that people already have. And, you  know, for tech comes in and makes that desire very simple and easy. People will adopt it.  Whereas I see in the sheep or the livestock game, most of the technology revolves around  
**[0:23:20-0:23:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:23:20):**  electronic tags. So most commercial farms at the, you know, at that base commercial  level don't operate under individual animal management. They don't have electronic tags.  Somebody comes to them with this new technology and say, look, if you put these tags in and  take these measurements, you can make better decisions. But all the pharmacies is extra  work. All I see is, well, I've got to put an extra tag in and, you know, oh, I've got,  
**[0:23:43-0:23:47](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:23:43):**  you know, I've got to take seven extra measurements and I've got to have my sheep in the yard  seven extra times that I never had to do before. So at the moment, the tech that the livestock  industry's been given from the producer level is just extra work. And even though farmers  are displayed a value proposition for that extra work, not all of them are willing to  adopt it. You know, they're happy with their work levels or, you know, at the moment, or  
**[0:24:13-0:24:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:24:13):**  they don't want them to get heavier. So I think, you know, if we look at the cropping  industry, a lot of technologies make it easier for them to do what they already want to do.  And they're just part of management. So, you know, we've got to attract us that steer themselves  now. You know, farmers always had to steer their tractors, a technology that makes that  incredibly easy. You know, people are happy to adopt and once they've used it, they never  
**[0:24:39-0:24:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:24:39):**  want to go back. So that, you know, the technologies in the sheep space aren't at that point. You  know, I think for technology to be adopted wholesale at livestock level, those technologies,  the benefits need to come as a byproduct of management. So all that extra data and decision  making and power like that needs to come as a byproduct of management. So it just needs  to be tied into their daily activities, not new and extra activities.  
**[0:25:08-0:25:14](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:25:08):**  Yeah. I think that's correct. And we actually just wrote a report on kind of the, some of  the issues behind why the tech products haven't had a value proposition. And, you know, part  of a value proposition is that it really solves a problem and that it's easy to use and that  it fits into the existing workflow. And one of the interesting things we found in kind  of digging into this space was that yes, a lot of the tech in the cropping space has  
**[0:25:32-0:25:39](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:25:32):**  been kind of adoption is higher, but satisfaction and utilization isn't that high. So just because  your tractor comes with all this fancy digital stuff, you know, whatever it might be, you'll  monitor or data management or whatever it might be. That doesn't mean that that tech  is getting used. And it doesn't mean that that tech is getting, that farmers are attributing  any value to it. So I think it's interesting when we talk about adoption, there's some  
**[0:25:58-0:25:59](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:25:58):**  nuances there.  Yeah, absolutely. I mean, that's, you know, every header for the last however long comes  with a yield monitor and yield maps and the end of each harvest, I get to look at pretty  much, but we don't really do much with it. So that's, you know, I'm happy to admit that  my croppings are a lot lower tech than my sheep. But that's just, you know, that's where  
**[0:26:19-0:26:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:26:19):**  I haven't concentrated in. So happy to adopt new technologies in my sheep, but I don't  want my whole farm business to be cutting edge new adoption, because then you know,  that's lifts the risk profile a lot, I guess. So there's some things I always say yes to.  And there are some things that I wanted to be well proven on. I want other people to  have taken all the risks.  
**[0:26:41-0:26:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:26:41):**  Yeah, I'm really curious about that. How do you decide? Like, like, what are those things?  Is it I imagine it's not as simple as sheep side versus cropping side. So what are the  like what, what kinds of things are you willing to take a punt on or some risk on and have  it be new, whether that's you're building a new thing or working with a startup or a  tech company versus an area where like this needs to be proven and I'm not going to be  
**[0:27:04-0:27:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:27:04):**  on the early adopter side, like this needs to work and I'll wait for it.  Yeah, I, it may be as simple as cropping versus sheep. So I guess it's a, you know, I've tried  to make it, I guess, like a philosophy, I suppose. I know we've sort of developed a  bit of a reputation amongst the researchers and scientists that, you know, have this lovely  data set that's well structured and people can have access to. And I'm happy to share  
**[0:27:33-0:27:39](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:27:33):**  it for people that want to do research. So I get a lot of offers. And, you know, if I  stop accepting those offers, you know, I'm working on the principle that they'll slowly  dry up and they'll stop coming. So, you know, I know, you know, there's currently several  projects underway through different organisations involved in my sheep. And I guess, you know,  the imposters, I've got my sheep in, I've let them do some work. The advantages if they  
**[0:28:02-0:28:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:28:02):**  actually come up with, you know, a real product and kick some goals, I will have seen the  development. Hopefully, I'll be in a better position to adopt it earlier than others.  And you know, some at some point in the future, I'll be able to make an advantage of that,  I guess. But you know, it's also, you know, a love of the data in what we're doing and  having access to data. So, you know, I, you know, happy to participate with people so  
**[0:28:28-0:28:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:28:28):**  long as I have access to the data that we're gathering as well. So, I'd be less interested  in somebody coming in and saying, look, we've got this new idea, we want to gather all this  data. But then they go away and we have no interaction and then they just come back with  the finished product. I guess it's not as appealing to me as being part of that process  and learning experience.  
**[0:28:46-0:28:52](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:28:46):**  Yeah, sure. That makes total sense. So, do you have examples of kind of some of the collaborations  that you're involved in, either on the research side or more commercial side? Any good stories  that stand out of examples?  Yeah, I guess if we go back a while, I guess it started with the Sheep's Air Sea, which  is, you know, a cooperative research center and an organization that gets government funding  
**[0:29:09-0:29:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:29:09):**  to do research. It was in the early days of radio frequency tags on livestock and somebody  at the Sheep's Air Sea was unsure whether we were using the right technology. So, that's  our current RFID tags. And they were wondering whether we might be better off using a different  frequency that had much larger read ranges. So, their idea is that as you drive a truck  into the sale yards, you could drive through a reader and it would read every sheep in  
**[0:29:37-0:29:42](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:29:37):**  the truck all at once without taking them on and off. And they came to me with this  idea, you know, we've got these tags, can you use them to sniff their work? And I guess,  you know, I had to think about it for a while and went back to them and said, you know,  the other technologies in place, people are using it. The only way people would ever switch  to the new technology is if it did something the other one can't. And the idea I pitched  
**[0:30:01-0:30:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:30:01):**  to them was a pedigree matchmaker system. My idea being that you would have an RFID  reader at a water point and you would track using lambs in and out of water and you would  be able to work out the pedigree, which lambs belong to which ewes. And, you know, everything  seemed good, except, you know, during that process, the company that was going to supply  us with the tags pulled out, we didn't hear anything from them. We were left with an idea,  
**[0:30:27-0:30:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:30:27):**  we had funding, we went ahead with it with the old technology, and it turns out it worked  really well. So, which was, you know, good for me, I had a means of getting pedigree  on lambs that I wasn't able to before. The sheepshoe ARC was excited because they'd actually  gone from an idea through research to an actual usable saleable product. We actually ended  up on a TV program in Australia called the ABC New Inventors, which we won an episode  
**[0:30:58-0:31:03](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:30:58):**  of with the invention. So, you know, it was an exciting time. So that's, I guess, an example  of where we went from an idea through to a product research and out the other end to  a saleable product. And obviously that's because I partnered with the sheepshoe ARC, they owned  all the IP. So there was no, you know, there wasn't any IP available to me. But because  it was industry, it's industry IP, and that's still a product that industry has and uses  
**[0:31:25-0:31:31](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:31:25):**  today. So, you know, that's a story from start to finish, I guess, of a successful idea through  to a successful product.  Interesting. Did you, what did you, it's such a good story, I love that. What did you learn  from that experience? I'm interested that it didn't give you the itch at all to want  to be on that commercial side. Like, it seems like you were happy to be part of it, obviously  
**[0:31:51-0:31:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:31:51):**  a bit of fun and lots of success. And that's really exciting. But there was no sense of  like, oh, I want to, I want to build this company or be part of it or get more benefit  than just using it on the, on the farm or for the operation. You didn't get that kind  of entrepreneurial itch to go commercialize it in some way.  No, and I guess it's like, I get that comment a lot from people that aren't farmers. So  
**[0:32:17-0:32:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:32:17):**  rarely do I get that comment from people that are farmers, because I guess they understand.  So, you know, I'm still farming on the farm that I grew up on, you know, I still work  past the trees that I built tree houses in as a child. So, you know, growing up, you  know, you can either see that as a wonderful advantage and you're very centered in where  your home is, or you can see that as a trap that you can't get out of and people see it  
**[0:32:45-0:32:51](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:32:45):**  as both. I guess I see it as something wonderful that I walk out the door and I'm in this environment  and landscape that I've known my whole life. And the desire, you know, to pursue that product  and develop it, you know, essentially my farming would have to be the best, you know, it would  have to be the thing that I just organized other people to do on the side. And I guess  that's not what I'm after, you know, I actually like being the farmer and been involved in  
**[0:33:16-0:33:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:33:16):**  this tech and getting these tools helps me to do more things with my sheep and my farm.  And I guess that's my drive, you know, I wanted those solutions. Whereas I don't, you know,  I don't need to turn that thing into a product.  Yeah. It's really interesting. I mean, it's so important in the work that we do with startups  around like, what do you want out of this? Cause there is a lot of pressure in the startup  
**[0:33:41-0:33:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:33:41):**  world, especially to, you know, build this business and take it international and raise  venture capital and do all these things. And there's no like playbook that says you have  to do that. Like your role in the venture can be very different. It doesn't have to  be as the CEO, it doesn't have to be even a continuing role. It can be part of the idea  in the early stages. And so that process of figuring out what, where do you want to be?  
**[0:34:07-0:34:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:34:07):**  Like what do you want out of this is so important because otherwise you end up doing something  that there's this arbitrary pressure to do and that doesn't make you happy and doesn't  solve the problem. And so I think, I think that's really cool and really important and  you got a great solution. Industry gets a great solution and you get to do what you  want on a day to day basis instead of ending up unhappy doing something else.  
**[0:34:26-0:34:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:34:26):**  Yeah, absolutely. I think that's, you know, you gotta be able to do something that you're  happy with. And I'll be looking at a part of it could be a fear of change, you know,  you know, reasonably successful at being a farmer and a sheep breeder. And I know it,  I don't have to think too hard each day to make it work. You know, we're stepping out  and developing a product, you know, there's a high level of risk, high levels of stress.  
**[0:34:53-0:34:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:34:53):**  You know, there could be that kind of resistance could be as simple as resistance to change,  you know, even though I'm happy to accept change on my farm on a regular basis. So,  I know people have been down the other route. I guess, you know, you're familiar with the  Auto Med product. And, you know, I've had involvement with that. But, you know, Dave  Edwards, the guy that's developed that product, you know, we grew up not far apart, you know,  
**[0:35:17-0:35:23](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:35:17):**  so he had the same upbringing on the family farm that I did. And, you know, he's gone  the other route, you know, he's had off farm jobs. And he's, you know, now CEO of his own  company developing his own product, you know, moved to the States to pursue markets and,  you know, the complete and utter opposite path if you like through a new product and  tech and startup.  
**[0:35:42-0:35:48](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:35:42):**  Yeah, you've had to do with that. Oh, sorry to interrupt Mark. You've had to do with the  Auto Med product. Tell me about your involvement with Dave and with that product.  Yeah, so, you know, always chatted tech with Dave. I know he had a crack at writing software  in the early days to develop, you know, software as a product. You know, he's another self-taught  kind of guy in the computer code kind of game. But I guess his real forte has been able to,  
**[0:36:12-0:36:18](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:36:12):**  you know, develop products, sit down with computers and design programs and make stuff.  So, you know, he made this automated medication delivery system that, you know, uses all the  modern I guess ag tech cloud sourcing, you know, the device works off your smartphone  sends all the data into the cloud. And, you know, over the, you know, essentially every  Christmas when you come back to the farm and his family, we'd have a bit of a chat, and  
**[0:36:40-0:36:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:36:40):**  you'd talk about where things are up to and you'd follow the development. And, you know,  one year when he came back, he said, I've got this product. And he showed me what do  you think, would you like to trial and test it for me? So, you know, happy to say yes.  So we had this, you know, wonderful product on the farm that we're trialing and testing  and you know, in the early days, that's essentially all we were doing. You know, we just, you  
**[0:37:03-0:37:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:37:03):**  know, to start with, we couldn't use it for real work, we just have to test it and take  notes on errors and those kinds of things. But now, you know, it's a tool on the farm  that when we're vaccinating or medicating the animals, you know, the staff just pick  it up, you know, punch in a few settings and away they go. So it's, you know, it's gone  from complete startup product to, you know, an integral part of the farm, if you like,  
**[0:37:30-0:37:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:37:30):**  for doing jobs. And being part of that process all the way through has been fascinating.  Yeah, I was gonna ask about your role in that process. So it sounds like at first year role  was kind of give it a go, give some feedback, try it, you know, test it, see what's working.  And then like, how did that evolve? Did they compensate you? You know, kind of tell me  about the journey of your involvement?  
**[0:37:53-0:37:58](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:37:53):**  Yeah, so I guess, you know, the compensation was, you know, here's this really expensive  product, you can have it. So you had the product, you had the potential that it was going to  be really cool and helpful. And you didn't have to pay for it. So I guess that was a  hook on my side. But also, it was something new. So you know, that's, I think Dave also  came to me because, you know, I had that software background. So you know, he was able to loosely  
**[0:38:16-0:38:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:38:16):**  explain the software inside the device, I can start using it and then saying, you know,  enabled me to write a more detailed report on what was potentially not working, what  was working. You know, so I guess it made it those communication aspects a lot easier  between us. You know, in the early days, David actually send his software guy out to the  farm, you know, so he's writing code for this device. He'd never been on a farm in his life.  
**[0:38:42-0:38:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:38:42):**  So we were able to get him out and giving the product and say, look, here's some sheep,  you know, here's a medication away you go start using the product. You know, so it's  certainly valuable to get the guys building the products and making the work to make sure  that they've all used it in the field. You know, I think the thing that Dave really got  right, so the product I'm using now is still the original piece of hardware that we turned  
**[0:39:08-0:39:14](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:39:08):**  up with several years ago. So that original piece of hardware hasn't had to change. All  the testing and all the adapting, they're all been software issues. So to go from the  product that didn't quite work to an awesome product, you know, it's all been the code  inside the device. So it tells me that, you know, obviously it wouldn't have been his  first go round, but the first time he's released a physical product, you know, it was a cracker.  
**[0:39:35-0:39:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:39:35):**  Yeah. And so you're still involved with the company as an advisor, is that right?  Yeah. So I guess they've just recently made that position somewhat official. So every  month they just have an advisory group that they sit down with and bounce ideas around  and have discussions. And I guess the idea is to just to make sure that they have that  outside input all the time. You know, I guess a bit of guidance. I know when I'm, you know,  
**[0:40:02-0:40:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:40:02):**  when you're building a product, you know, a hundred percent of your thought process  is about the actual building and solving problems with your product. Not necessarily concentrating  on the problems that your product actually has to solve. And obviously they're separate  things. So, you know, when obviously your product needs to work, but it needs to solve  a problem for somebody in the real world. And if it doesn't do that, nobody will want  
**[0:40:25-0:40:26](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:40:25):**  to buy it.  Right. And so having that kind of real ground truth feedback from someone using it makes  a huge difference. Are there other farmers on the advisory group or does he have a kind  of mixed set of perspectives there?  Yeah. So my understanding is they have a very mixed background of people in the little advisory  
**[0:40:45-0:40:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:40:45):**  group. So I guess I'm, I'm not, you know, fill the spot of the farmer. So I guess, you  know, it's about seeking a skill set that, you know, you don't have in one person.  Yeah. A lot of pressure. You have to represent all of the farmers.  You do. I, and it is pressure. I know I'm on a few industry committees at a national  level with genetics and you are there to represent an aspect of the industry. And then, you know,  
**[0:41:11-0:41:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:41:11):**  there is a lot of pressure that goes with that. You need, you need to keep open lines  of communication back to your industry. You need to be willing to sit down and argue points  that you don't personally believe in, but a vast majority of your industry does. And  if you're there to represent them, that's what you need to be doing.  That must be pretty hard.  
**[0:41:32-0:41:39](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:41:32):**  It can be. It doesn't always happen. Obviously, most of the time, you know, being in part  of the industry, we all have common goals and aspirations, but it doesn't always work  that way. And, you know, if you're in that position, it's not your job simply to put  your own views forward. You, you know, you're there to make, you know, decisions and help  direct R&D for your own industry. So, you know, you've got to fill all aspects of that.  
**[0:41:59-0:42:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:41:59):**  Yeah. No, that makes sense. I wanted to ask you about social media. I, we obviously met  at a workshop, but then I've since kind of kept tabs on you and the various things you're  doing and hilarious videos among them on social media. How did you decide to get involved  on Twitter and what has that been like?  So, yeah, the decision to get, you know, I was dragged kicking and screaming. So, you  
**[0:42:26-0:42:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:42:26):**  know, as we just in the last point about keeping lines of communication open to industry, you  know, it's actually been really good. So, you know, I am in contact with lots of farmers.  I can pose questions before I go off to meetings and I actually, you know, normally they're  really good and they give me lots of feedback. Although you have to keep in mind that Twitter  is a very small subset of the population. So, how did we get to it? So, because of our  
**[0:42:50-0:42:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:42:50):**  on-farm genetics business, we were updating our webpage and the company that were doing  the webpage, you know, started to look now we can link this webpage into your Facebook  page, your Twitter page, your Instagram. And, you know, we all looked at each other blankly  and said, well, we don't have any of those. You're off the hook. You don't have to link  them in. And they sternly recommended that we should have them, that a webpage standing  
**[0:43:18-0:43:23](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:43:18):**  on its own without being connected to all these other aspects wasn't that valuable.  So, I guess in the group or the family partnership, we had discussions and it was decided that  we needed Facebook and Twitter and Instagram. And I said, I don't want to do any of them.  And then became worried that if I was not making a decision, everyone else had choose  which one they wanted and I'd be left doing the one that no one wanted. So, I chose Twitter  
**[0:43:49-0:43:53](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:43:49):**  because it only had 140 characters.  Are you happy with that choice?  Yes, I am. It's like most things that involve tech and stuff like that. Maybe it can be  a little bit obsessive and that possibly may not be good for me. But it's, yeah, it's been  interesting. I've now been on Twitter for just over 12 months. So, you know, I still  
**[0:44:17-0:44:23](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:44:17):**  don't think I fully understand social media. I know I don't use the hashtags and all those  kind of things properly. Like most things I do, I did read up on how to use Twitter  and found what information I could before I joined.  That's quite a rabbit hole. You could have gone down with help and how to use Twitter,  I'm sure.  
**[0:44:38-0:44:43](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:44:38):**  Yeah, I suppose so. There was a lot of information out there. I found one that sort of a little  bit resonated. But stuff like, yes, fill in your photos, have your picture, put in some  descriptive information. If it's for a business, stick to a tight guideline of topics. So,  it's a business one. Obviously, I've called myself sheep geek CP. And if you want to see  tweets about sheep, that's what you'll see. So, try and keep most of the personal stuff  
**[0:45:10-0:45:14](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:45:10):**  out unless it's happened in some kind of relationship to the sheep.  Like your kids as testers for your products.  Yes. Yeah, that's it. They are my workers' kids. My kids weren't volunteering at the  time. But yeah, unless they're testing something or doing something with the sheep, they don't  get in.  
**[0:45:31-0:45:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:45:31):**  Yeah, fair enough. Well, your website looks great. I had a look at it. It's up to snuff  in terms of all the modern digital marketing and social media stuff. Do you find that your  website and that social media presence has had a return for the business? Do you feel  like it was a worthwhile investment?  Look, absolutely, website. Obviously, we've had a website for quite some time. But you  
**[0:46:00-0:46:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:46:00):**  put it up, you put your product on there that you sell. And one day, you get an email requesting  an order from somebody that you've never had to speak to, never had any dealings with.  They found the information they need on your website, made a decision, chosen a product,  and they've put in an order. It's pretty strong validation of what it can offer for you. In  our modern world, if you've got something to sell, I guess it's a must-have.  
**[0:46:32-0:46:37](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:46:32):**  That feeling of, I got this inquiry from this person, I don't know, but they're interested  in what I'm doing. I remember the first time that happened through our website, which is  a really cool feeling of like, oh, this stuff actually kind of works.  Yeah, absolutely. You get a little endorphin rush. You get motivated for a day or two.  And look, this time, I know the very first website we had, I made myself. But I'm happy  
**[0:46:58-0:47:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:46:58):**  to outsource all of that work now. So we pay somebody else to do it. So our website, it's  got a database component to it. It accesses an industry API for all the data on our sheep.  So we never have to update it anymore. It's all done automatically. It's given us quite  a lot of flexibility that way. So it's been a really valuable tool for us.  Yeah. Well, that's a perfect segue, Mark, to my last question here, which is how can  
**[0:47:28-0:47:34](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:47:28):**  people find you if they want to learn more about you, about the tech stuff you're doing,  about the stud, where can they find you?  So obviously, the website, if they just Google Santa Plus Merinos, they'll find us. And obviously,  I'll just mention my Twitter handle, sheepkeekcp. So between those two things, it's pretty hard  not to find us.  
**[0:47:52-0:47:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:47:52):**  Cool. Well, thanks so much for coming on the podcast, Mark. Really appreciate it. Really  interesting insights. And looking forward to definitely following you on Twitter and  seeing what comes out next.  Yeah. No, I'm happy to have had a chat, Sarah. It's been good and interesting. Thank you  very much.  
**[0:48:13-0:48:24](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:48:13):**  Thank you for joining us on another episode of Ag Tech So What. You can stay up to date  with the latest episodes and news at agtechsowhat.com. And as always, if you have any feedback or  other guests to recommend, we'd love to hear from you. Just hop on the website and leave  us a comment or send us a message. Finally, if you like what you're hearing, and we hope  you do, please share the podcast with a friend or leave us a review on iTunes or wherever  
**[0:48:43-0:49:00](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357332#t=0:48:43):**  you get your podcasts. Thanks again for listening. Catch you next time.  