### Agtech - So What?  (2019-29-08)
**[0:00:00-0:00:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357501#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome back to Ag Tech So What. My name is Sarah Nolette, your host and the  founder of AgTentic, a boutique strategy advisory firm working to help bring more practical,  useful technologies and new business models to agriculture. This episode is a bit different  and I promise I'll keep it short. We don't have a guest today, just some reflections  from me and an update on where Ag Tech So What is headed over the coming episodes. Over  
**[0:00:25-0:00:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357501#t=0:00:25):**  the past about 10 episodes and what we called season two, we featured more guests on the  Ag side rather than the Ag Tech side. So farmers, agronomists, consultants, and a few researchers.  I love these episodes because I got to learn a ton. I don't come from an Ag background  and it's really important to talk to folks with expertise in the Ag side as much as on  the Ag Tech side. Hopefully there was a lot for you all to learn as well, whether you  
**[0:00:49-0:00:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357501#t=0:00:49):**  do come from Ag or Ag Tech. In listening back, we've noticed that some themes are emerging.  For example, adoption of technology and agriculture is a big one that we've covered. We covered  this both from the research side and from the farmer side and a bit from consultants  and agronomists as well. Another one is farmers getting involved in creating technologies  or even creating Ag Tech startups. So we heard from several guests like Will McSmith, Chris  
**[0:01:13-0:01:18](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357501#t=0:01:13):**  McVauklin and Chris and Carl Lippert, sorry, on their journey from Ag into Ag Tech. This  is a big area that we're passionate about at AgTentic is harnessing and unlocking the  power of producers and Ag experts to actually create or be part of creating Ag Tech companies  or technologies for practical use in agriculture. And I'm sure we'll cover more of that in the  future. Moving forward, rather than have these themes just kind of emerge as they did and  
**[0:01:39-0:01:43](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357501#t=0:01:39):**  as I follow different lines of questioning, we want to be much more intentional and focused  in what we're covering with each guest. So we're going to be doing four episodes segments  on a specific theme. Four episodes where we cover one theme from a couple of different  angles, whether that's from investors and farmers and agronomists or depending on who  the guests are, really looking at a particular theme from a couple of different angles over  
**[0:02:02-0:02:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357501#t=0:02:02):**  four episodes. And we're really thrilled to have on board some partners to make this possible.  Themes that we'll cover include social license and the role of technology, new value chains  and premium products, novel farming systems and many more that we have thought of and  some I'm sure we haven't thought of yet. Our first theme will be getting Ag Tech ready,  which will be brought to you in partnership with Decipher. We're really excited to have  
**[0:02:26-0:02:31](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357501#t=0:02:26):**  content partners like Decipher so we can focus in on specific themes and create helpful,  practical blog posts for each episode. We'll also be summarizing each theme. So what we've  learned over those four episodes, both what was recorded and what you might not have heard  on the podcast into an ebook that will be available for download. Other improvements  that we'll be making over the coming episodes are things like shorter episodes. We've heard  
**[0:02:50-0:02:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357501#t=0:02:50):**  from you that they're a bit long and maybe I talk too much, so we'll be cutting them  down and keeping them to less than 30 minutes, really hoping to hit that commute time and  keeping it right on target. We'll also be going back to a mix of guests, so we'll definitely  still be featuring farmers and ag experts, but we'll also be including ag tech experts  like investors and startups as well as agribusinesses. Our guests will be Australian, but also over  
**[0:03:16-0:03:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357501#t=0:03:16):**  seas experts and innovators as well. And finally, we'll be experimenting with a range of formats  like events, conference talks and panels, reflections from the authentic team, and of  course the traditional interview format. And last one, we're also going to create a new  logo or a real logo at all, which I'm personally really excited about. So many exciting times  ahead and a couple of changes. Thank you as always for your support as a listener or supporter  
**[0:03:41-0:03:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357501#t=0:03:41):**  of Ag Tech So What. If you do like what you're hearing, please subscribe and please also  share your favorite episode with friends or colleagues or on social media. Until then,  catch you next time on Ag Tech So What. Our next episode will be out in just a couple  of weeks.  