### Agtech - So What?  (2019-15-22)
**[0:00:00-0:00:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, and welcome to the AgTech So What podcast. Emerging technologies are rapidly changing  the global agricultural industry. We believe that this revolution is only getting started.  But there's still too much hype out there and too big of a disconnect between ag and  ag tech. So on this show, we try to bridge that gap. In each episode, we bring you the  story of a different innovator in agriculture and try to find the place where ag and tech  
**[0:00:44-0:01:03](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:00:44):**  meet. I'm your host, Sarah Nolet. Welcome back to the AgTech So What podcast.  Today's episode is a bit of a trial. I featured two guests today, two amazing women, Viv McCollum  and Margaret Ayer. Viv is an agricultural consultant who has been working in the precision  ag industry for about 20 years. And she shares her insights on how the space has changed  and more importantly, kind of where it's headed in the future. What's the role of young people?  
**[0:01:27-0:01:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:01:27):**  What are advisors and consultants struggling with and working on in terms of technology  adoption? Where are they finding value and what tools can be used in helping farmers  to adopt and get value out of more technologies? And Margaret is a senior research fellow at  the University of Melbourne and she's been working in the rural innovation space. One  of the things I found fascinating about what both Margaret and Viv said was just how important  
**[0:01:54-0:02:01](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:01:54):**  the qualitative emotional side of these technology questions can be. So things like trust and  confidence are just as if not more important than things like the technology and connectivity  and other things that get cited as barriers to tech adoption in agriculture. So I love  this podcast to really have a great chat with some amazing women pushing the boundaries  in extension and helping me to understand how the extension landscape works and what  
**[0:02:22-0:02:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:02:22):**  some of the nuances are around how we research technology and how that technology ends up  making it in the hands of the farmers that matter. I hope you enjoy this episode with  Margaret and Viv.  So Vivian McCollum and Margaret Eyre, welcome to the AgTechSoWhat podcast. Thanks so much  for joining me.  
**[0:02:43-0:02:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:02:43):**  Thanks very much Sarah.  So this is a bit of an experiment today with three people here on the podcast at once,  but hopefully it will go really well. We'll have to see. I might start Margaret with you  just giving us a little bit of your background and then Viv will have you do the same.  Sure. Thanks Sarah. Well, I am a social scientist. I work at the University of Melbourne in the  
**[0:03:10-0:03:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:03:10):**  Faculty of Veterinary and Agricultural Sciences in a social science research group called  the Rural Innovation Research Group. I actually started my career as a, I guess, biophysical  scientist. I did forest science quite a long time ago and found after a few years in the  workforce that my interest, I guess, had really shifted to the way that people interact with  the environment and the sort of interrelationship, I guess, between people and their environments,  
**[0:03:47-0:03:53](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:03:47):**  both in the context of natural resource management, but also more recently in the context of agriculture.  Yeah, so it's me.  Fantastic. What other kinds of projects does the Rural Innovation Research Group, like  what's the kind of mandate of that group?  Yeah, so we do work on a lot of different things. Anything from water management, so  
**[0:04:16-0:04:24](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:04:16):**  looking at the challenges around the irrigation modernization in Northern Victoria, for example.  We work on projects looking at climate change adaptation. We've done quite a lot of work  historically in the dairy industry, but over there, or with the dairy industry, sorry,  all of our projects are collaborative in nature. But over, say, probably the last five years  or so, our collaborators, I guess, have bought them. So we work with both agricultural industry  
**[0:04:48-0:04:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:04:48):**  stakeholders, but also with governments and community as well. Colleagues of mine work  on other kinds of issues like workforce developments. Let me think, there's more so over the last  couple of years, we've had an interest and opportunity to work in precision agriculture.  One of my colleagues works on a project looking at virtual herding. And I guess in the context  of this project that we're talking about today, really our group's interest in supporting  
**[0:05:22-0:05:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:05:22):**  and understanding the agricultural innovation system more broadly in Australia, but specifically  the agricultural extension system is a real focus of our work.  Great. Yes, I definitely want to get into extension. I'm curious how, and then Vivian,  I'll give you a chance to give your background, but how do you guys define innovation in that  sense? Is it sort of new? Does it have a tech focus or can it be practice change or how  
**[0:05:50-0:05:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:05:50):**  do you guys think about innovation and whether something is innovative and would be relevant?  Yeah, sure. Well, I guess we have a particular conceptual framework that we use when thinking  about innovation in the context of agriculture, which has, I guess, well established in the  sort of international literature. And what that framework suggests is that innovation  involves, of course, new technologies, but that technology is not in itself in and of  
**[0:06:27-0:06:34](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:06:27):**  itself the innovation. So yes, it is about the practice change. So the interaction between  people, their skills, knowledge, the technical devices that might enable some kind of new  value to be realised, as well as the institutions that embed the rules and arrangements that  support people to be able to do things in certain ways. So it's a conceptual framework  that actually has three fairly catchy components to it, which are called software, orgware  
**[0:07:02-0:07:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:07:02):**  and hardware. So with the emphasis being on that orgware, having the organisation and  networks in place, because without them, any new technology is unlikely to realise its  full value.  Fascinating. I mean, very much agree with that. I'm really curious, but I'm going to  stop myself from going down this rabbit hole too far, because I do want to give a chance  
**[0:07:28-0:07:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:07:28):**  as well to speak. But just maybe last question on this, how different is the framework that  you guys are using and kind of thinking about rural innovation from innovation more broadly?  Like is there anything specific about rural or specific about agriculture that wouldn't  apply or that would be really different than in other spaces or industries?  Yeah, that's a really interesting question. It's one we do think about a lot. I think  
**[0:07:57-0:08:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:07:57):**  it is different in some dimensions. I think one of those is related to, I guess, the structural  sort of makeup, I suppose, of the agricultural sector in Australia anyway, where we have  really a big pool of small to medium enterprises. I mean, we're all aware that there are some  bigger farms sort of becoming established and there is a corporate element to the sector  now. But in essence, it's still really a family-based sort of enterprise. And that means that people  
**[0:08:43-0:08:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:08:43):**  are, I guess that heightens perhaps the importance of networks and knowledge exchange, where  people are working in their own small to medium enterprises, of course have enormous sort  of social capital within those. But having the complexity of farming means that you're  constantly challenged to deal with new external factors and adapt your farm practice in ways  that are going to not only maintain your resilience but enable you to make a profit. So, yeah,  
**[0:09:21-0:09:28](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:09:21):**  I think that means that in that context, innovation is about having access to new knowledge via  networks, be they peer-to-peer ones in farming communities or with industry bodies and others,  and particularly, I guess, the R&D sector. So that's one of the things that we're keen  to support and one of our research interests is looking at how those networks function  and how they can be strengthened, how the goals of different players with various roles  
**[0:09:54-0:09:59](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:09:54):**  to play in innovation can be better aligned, I guess, for mutual outcomes.  Yes. And I want to come back to those networks and some of those findings because I'm really  interested in that work you guys have been doing. But before I do that, Vivian, tell  us a little bit about yourself and your background.  Yeah, thanks, Sarah. So I'm an owner-operator, individual private consultant with a business  
**[0:10:19-0:10:26](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:10:19):**  called AGK Services. I've been running this business now for about 18 years with many  different styles of things that I've done over those 18 years. But I suppose my background  is in agriculture. I started my career as an agronomist and quickly got onto the Precision  Ag bandwagon in its infancy about 20 years ago, working for a company that was looking  to innovate. And from there, I went out on my own and built this individual consultancy  
**[0:10:52-0:10:58](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:10:52):**  business and morphed it in. I've done natural resource management and in probably the last  10 years, I've more been dominant in working in this people space, running networks for  young farmers. And now it's kind of tying back together with this extension project  with Melbourne Uni looking at Precision Ag and the extension of that. So in a nutshell,  that's my background.  
**[0:11:19-0:11:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:11:19):**  So what does AGK stand for?  It actually is AGKnowledge.  Oh, I like it. Very cool.  So originally I had a company with another person called AGKnowledge and then I went  on my own when I had children and we just morphed it to AGK services.  
**[0:11:39-0:11:44](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:11:39):**  Nice. And you've nicely avoided the falling into the trap that we with Ag that they could  fall into where everything starts with Ag. You've avoided it by calling it AG.  Yes, exactly.  Well done. So I'm really curious that you've been working in PA for so long and I'm sure  Precision Ag has changed. Well, my imagination is that it's changed a ton, but perhaps it  
**[0:12:06-0:12:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:12:06):**  hasn't. Perhaps some of the conversations we're still having today around imagery is  useful but it doesn't help make decisions and connectivity is a problem. Are those the  same conversations that you've been having at every conference for the last 20 years  or has the space really changed as I imagine it has with the pace of technology?  Well, that's a really, really interesting conversation to start with, Sarah, because  
**[0:12:34-0:12:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:12:34):**  having been in Precision Ag 20 years ago, we didn't have this. It was all pre smartphones.  Internet technology was still just really coming out of the dial-up phase. So a lot  of the technology was a little bit behind, but the actual understanding of what Precision  Ag could do or potentially could do, the potential of it, I still don't think 20 years down the  track we really understood how to make the reality out of it. So the actual context of  
**[0:13:06-0:13:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:13:06):**  Precision Ag, while all the tools and the bells and whistles are a lot better and we're  moving in the right direction, I think we fundamentally still don't have an understanding  of how to harness, mine the data and actually make good interpretation out of that data  for practice change on farm.  And what do you think the limitation is there? Is it a people thing? Is it a tech thing?  
**[0:13:27-0:13:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:13:27):**  Is it a systems thing? What's preventing that?  Well, it's probably a combination of a lot of things, but I think fundamentally it probably  is a people thing in our ability, in our evolution to be able to understand loads and loads of  data and what's good data and what's bad data. And just getting our mindsets around, traditionally  we've always managed paddocks nearly one dimensionally. Now we've got to look at them spatially and  
**[0:13:57-0:14:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:13:57):**  that just opens up so many possibilities. We're working with a biological system, which  is highly dynamic and having a really, I mean, research is only done little portions of that  traditionally. Now this is like a full blown research project on every little square inch  of your farm. So I think that's a big challenge is how to deal with the data, but not only  get the data into format that we can understand, but then interpreting it. So what does it  
**[0:14:25-0:14:31](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:14:25):**  actually mean? Because, give you an example, I could 20 years ago write a variable rate  map of one year's worth of yield data that came out of a picker or a header, but agronomically  I knew that what that map was, was not, it was, can I use the word crap?  Sure.  It wasn't really, you know, agronomically sound. So that's a really simple example of  
**[0:14:54-0:14:58](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:14:54):**  where I think we've got lots of data, we've got lots of attention, we've got great machine,  we've got all that stuff, but I think agronomically we're still grappling with the ability to  interpret it and make decisions. I think we're moving in the right direction now though with  that. And getting system software in place that can handle big volumes of data into platforms  that talk to each other. So for the last 20 years, there's been bits of data everywhere.  
**[0:15:24-0:15:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:15:24):**  And if we want to utilize it correctly, it needs to be, you know, be able to go into  one big mixing bowl. Otherwise you can't bake the cake properly, can you?  Love the metaphor. You mentioned that you do a lot of work with young farmers and part  of young farmer networks. Do you see big differences in this conversation or those capabilities  or how things are being set up in that younger generation of farmers?  
**[0:15:46-0:15:51](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:15:46):**  Yeah, look, one, one really basic thing I've noticed in the 10 years that I've been working  with young farmers is, you know, once upon a time I'd just send emails or make phone  calls. Now, if I want to engage with young farmers, I get on Facebook messenger. If you  try any other medium, you're not getting, you don't get any reply from them at all.  I think though them coming, the younger generation coming through are much better at being able  
**[0:16:12-0:16:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:16:12):**  to assimilate the vast amount of information that has been thrown at them on a day to day  basis. So I'm wondering if it's a generational thing and you know, the generation coming  through now have a much better ability to be able to mine data quickly or mine information  quickly to make decisions.  Yeah, it'll be really interesting to see. I mean, they kind of outside of Ag gets talked  
**[0:16:34-0:16:38](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:16:34):**  about all, you know, digital natives and social media growing up with social media and all  the information that kids especially, but, but teenagers and young people are consuming  these days and whether that's a good thing or a bad thing. Like I imagine our brains  are evolving to process information differently and we're seeing that with, you know, higher  prevalence of attention deficit disorder and some downsides of that. But you're perhaps  
**[0:16:57-0:17:00](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:16:57):**  right that maybe there's some really good things coming out of that, that we're more  used to this volume and using it to make decisions in our everyday lives.  That's right. And I think anyone in, you know, 40 or 50 and above, you know, I still grappling  with actually how to use the technology. Whereas an 18 year old just nearly intrinsically knows  what to do. So they're not having to sit there worrying about, Oh, how do I send that email?  
**[0:17:21-0:17:24](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:17:21):**  They just know how to do all of that stuff. So they can get onto, you know, looking at  the actual information and hopefully mining that and making decisions out of it.  Yes. So I'm really curious how this has impacted the sort of study of extension and how extension  works today. And that's really what you guys have been looking at, as I understand it in  not just young people, but extension more broadly in context of this project. So Margaret,  
**[0:17:44-0:17:48](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:17:44):**  tell me maybe a little bit about the origin story of this extension project you've been  working on and where it's up to at this point.  Sure. So Viv and I were involved in one part of quite a large project that was funded through  the Australian government through R&D for profit scheme. It was led by Dairy Australia  and has several other of the RDCs as key collaborators, including Sugar Australia and the Cotton CRDC  
**[0:18:19-0:18:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:18:19):**  who were the key stakeholders, I guess, and collaborators in the part of the project that  we worked on. Overall, the project was about looking at the role of the private sector  in extension in Australia and what could be done collectively, I guess, to support and  sort of enhance the contribution of the sector to rural innovation across the board. However,  we weren't able to address all aspects of innovation in the project. So we had four  
**[0:18:56-0:19:03](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:18:56):**  what we call trials that were focused on particular key issues that were identified by stakeholders  in a series of regional meetings that we had early in the project. And those four topics  were mentoring of young advisors entering the private sector. The one that we worked  on, which was about precision agriculture. One was about knowledge management in the  context of big, complex sustainability issues like the Great Barrier Reef and water quality.  
**[0:19:33-0:19:41](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:19:33):**  And the last one was about the role of processes, so those meat and milk processes in extension.  A lot of them employed field officers who have very daily contact with farmers and they  were interested in looking how that role could be enhanced and really, I guess, better understanding  the value of that role. So in our trial, precision agriculture trial, we worked having identified  broadly that precision agriculture was something that private advisors were keen to understand  
**[0:20:08-0:20:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:20:08):**  more about and look at possibilities for their businesses and of course their clients' businesses.  We nevertheless started with a pretty clean slate and brought together about just over  20 people at a workshop in Toowoomba in early 2018 to ask them, well, what is your key issue  about or key top issues in terms of precision agriculture? And the one that came out on  top by a long way was better understanding the value proposition of digital tools and  
**[0:20:47-0:20:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:20:47):**  services to advisors' businesses. And so I can go on and explain a bit more about that.  Yeah, yeah. I would really love to hear more on that. I just wanted to ask, what do you  think made it that dairy, cotton and sugar were keen to, those industries were keen to  support this project? Was it just kind of happenstance or those were people you knew  or is there something about those sectors that made them more interested in kind of  
**[0:21:16-0:21:19](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:21:16):**  thinking about extension through these different lenses?  Yeah, that's a good question. I think it was a bit of both, again, to sort of follow what  Viv said. Certainly it's about the networks, I guess, that the university had, firstly  with Dairy Australia, which had been a longstanding relationship. It was then about, I guess,  a lot of work to just discuss the interest, the level of interest that these other industries  
**[0:21:53-0:22:00](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:21:53):**  might have in looking at the role and sort of capability of the private sector. I guess  with the sort of change in extension at a national level and what we call the pluralistic  nature of it now, it was fairly evident that most sectors were experiencing a big shift  in where information flows and sources are now located or flow to and from and that government  has certainly got a different role in extension than it used to have whereby the real training  
**[0:22:33-0:22:41](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:22:33):**  ground for most advisors was in government. So it was really just about opening up conversations,  I guess, to realise the mutual interest and questions that the industries had around what  is the private sector doing? What do they need? What do they need from us? And how can  we work with them to make sure they're able to support farmers in the way that they need  to be supporting? Yeah, could I just add to that, Sarah? Of course. On this, so there  
**[0:23:07-0:23:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:23:07):**  was a lot of other industries involved in the other trials, but specifically on the  one Marg and I were working on, which was the cotton industry and the sugar industry.  And I think they were specifically probably interested in this topic a bit more because  those two industries have a high ratio of private consultants working directly with  them. And so obviously, those private consultants are looking for an edge in their business  
**[0:23:36-0:23:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:23:36):**  and taking their farmers forward and their farmers are looking at adopting new technology.  So trying to get their heads around how do they structure their businesses so that they  can harness the new technology that's coming down the line. Yeah, that makes a ton of sense.  And tell me just briefly a little bit, I'm probably slightly more familiar with cotton,  but how does the advisor landscape look in cotton and sugar? Are they independent, not  
**[0:24:02-0:24:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:24:02):**  independent? Do they work in certain geographies? Do they have different skill sets? Are they  like kind of paint a picture for us of the landscape for anyone not familiar with those  sectors? Yeah, so with the cotton industry, anyone who's been involved in the cotton industry  for the last 30 years, pretty much you grow a crop of cotton, you have a private cotton  consultant that looks after your crop for the whole season. Similarly in sugar, it's  
**[0:24:29-0:24:37](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:24:29):**  slightly different. They probably have more of their agronomic consulting input from the  cooperative groups. So they all belong to cooperative groups which are regional, which  is really attached to a mill perhaps, or a grower group. But there is also just straight  independent consultants that are working directly with the farmers as well. So it's not a fee  for service basis type businesses. And has that changed at all? Or you mentioned it's  
**[0:25:04-0:25:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:25:04):**  been going that way for a while. Has there been consolidation in that advisor network  are more independence, less independence, getting bigger, broadening skill sets or size  of operation? Has that changed at all? Yeah, I think with the cotton, probably that same  model has been around for 30 odd years with some, I look back on the main private consulting  group, which is the cotton consultants association, which started cotton consultants now as crop  
**[0:25:31-0:25:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:25:31):**  consultants. Those guys are probably, and the sugar guys are probably broadened out  to be not just plant specific. They might, a cotton consultant now might also be broad  acre chickpea mung bean consultant as well. So they've probably broadened out from that,  but their fee for service coming onto the farm, being the agronomist that works with  the farm manager or the farm owner, I don't think that model's really changed drastically  
**[0:26:01-0:26:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:26:01):**  over the last 20 years. Great, thanks. That's really helpful. So I'm going back to the trial.  So you got sort of 18 people together in a room to talk about this. Were they mostly  advisors themselves that you brought into the room? Do you want me to answer these ones,  please? Yeah, yeah. So the first group that we got together, yes, they were made up of  cotton and sugar consultants. We had some, we actually had an accountant in the room.  
**[0:26:31-0:26:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:26:31):**  We had precision ag providers, like precision ag business providers, private service providers.  We had some industry representatives. Anyone else, Marg, that I haven't covered? We also  did have a lawyer research on IP as well, which added a pretty good dimension to it  all. So a good cross section of people. How did you end up running that workshop? I mean,  lots of different perspectives in the room. Tell me about how it went. Did you get them  
**[0:27:11-0:27:15](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:27:11):**  together and just dive right into challenges, what's not working and came to that value  proposition issue? I guess I ask because we run a lot of these workshops and one of the  things I found is just some of the language, like saying value proposition is not something  that you just use commonly. That's a pretty specific, either academic or kind of startup  term to describe something. A lot of times when I've talked to folks in the ag sector,  
**[0:27:37-0:27:42](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:27:37):**  they don't articulate it like that and it takes a while to get to the issue and then  you don't always get agreement. Walk me through how that workshop went and how you ended up  getting to this issue around value proposition. Yes. So basically I facilitated the day and  we went through a process, which I'm not quite sure if you're familiar and Marg might like  to give a bit more of an explanation around the ORID process, which is a facilitation  
**[0:28:05-0:28:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:28:05):**  tool used to be able to get people to come to a decision or to get information out. So  basically just started off with a brainstorming session, which I posed questions, got them  to get into the space, dump down their frustrations or their questions or anything that they had.  And then we basically started to organize that into groups. And throughout the day we  ended up with a list of things that we then got them to rank and understanding the value  
**[0:28:37-0:28:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:28:37):**  proposition of precision ag came out the top. And why do you think that's such an issue?  Is it that the providers aren't doing a good job? Is it that there really isn't a value  proposition? Like what's the gap there? Well, I think like anything, I wasn't a great  surprise to me that that came out as the top issue. Because like anything, if I'm a cotton  consultant out there and I'm wanting to implement a piece of software as part of my business,  
**[0:29:08-0:29:13](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:29:08):**  and I'm trying to convince my client that they should pay an extra couple of dollars  an acre for this service. What is the value proposition? I can't get them to come on board  unless I understand myself what that value proposition is. So how is it going to help  that farmer in the long term? We might be able to make pretty maps, but what are we  actually going to get out of it? Are we going to be able to increase our productivity? Are  
**[0:29:34-0:29:39](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:29:34):**  we going to be able to increase our bottom line? What is it that we can get out of it?  And so it's like anything, selling anything or trying to even get a new way of doing something  for people to make that change. They've got to understand what the value proposition of  it is first. And do you think that thus far the understanding  of the value proposition has been low because it actually isn't that valuable yet? Like  
**[0:29:58-0:30:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:29:58):**  the technology is not there yet or because it's not being communicated in a way that's  understood or the skills aren't there to interpret the data? Why is that true still?  Yeah, I think there's a number of reasons. Number one is probably lacking an understanding  of how the technology works and how it can do it. As I mentioned before, there's so much  information it can be quite confusing. There is a lot, talking about actual tools, every  
**[0:30:28-0:30:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:30:28):**  day we turn on the internet or the news and there's a new piece of technology that's come  out that's going to solve the world. A lot of farmers have seen that story happen over  20 years and a lot fail. So there's that building that trust that this piece of technology is  actually going to do what it says. And that's like any early adoption of new technology  or new ways of doing things. It takes a while for that to filter through the industry. So  
**[0:30:56-0:31:03](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:30:56):**  I think being able to look at something and be able to evaluate, well, it says it can  do this, can it? And if I'm going to invest money in this, am I actually going to get  a return? Because otherwise what's the point of me doing it?  Yeah. And have you seen or did you come up with any solutions for how to do this? Is  it training on better ability to evaluate the return? Is it something that the tech  
**[0:31:24-0:31:28](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:31:24):**  companies or providers need to do to help bridge this gap? Is there an intermediary  that needs to rate and review products to give people that trust? Is it more research?  How do we bridge that gap?  Yeah. So what we did after we had that group of people to come up with the actual question,  we then set about working out, well, how can we demonstrate the value proposition of a  
**[0:31:49-0:31:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:31:49):**  new piece of technology or service? And so what we did was we then got three private  cotton consultants and three private sugar consultants and made them a working group  and brought them back for a two day workshop where we actually broke this down, unpacked  it and said, well, what is going to help us demonstrate the value proposition? And what  it really came down to was a framework that could help make a decision, an informed decision.  
**[0:32:18-0:32:24](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:32:18):**  So say there's a new drone on the market that says, okay, you know, we can go and fly a  cotton paddock and bring back photographs of it so you can see where there's more weeds  or whatever it may be. You say, yep, that's fantastic. But have you thought through every  little step in the process to be able to go, yep, I'm really happy to invest in that piece  of technology. So one of the, that was actually one of the case studies. So we built each  
**[0:32:43-0:32:48](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:32:43):**  of the review team members built a case study to actually run through a framework that we  developed called the DVA tool, probably getting a bit round circles here. And one of those  guys, he started to run it through this framework that this group actually built. I've jumped  over that little bit a bit too quick. And he, you know, he lives up in the Emerald area.  The drone thought, yep, this would be fantastic. But as soon as he started looking at it, he  
**[0:33:14-0:33:19](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:33:14):**  went, well, it's going to take me forever to fly over the big areas that I've got. Is  this the right piece of technology for me? And he's gone back to the drawing board. So  it's about working, you know, we all can make, we all make decisions in many different ways,  but sometimes we forget steps. And so we built this tool to be able to help facilitate someone  through making that decision. So how would that actually work in practice?  
**[0:33:38-0:33:44](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:33:38):**  So imagine I'm a, so if I'm an advisor and I'm, you know, one of my clients is a farmer  and says, I'm thinking about buying this new thing or I saw this new thing, I would pull  up the framework on a piece of paper and actually walk through it with that product as an example.  Or is it, is it a bit more theoretical than that?  Well, what it is at the moment, and we're hoping to develop it into a little bit more  
**[0:33:59-0:34:05](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:33:59):**  user-friendly platform going forward. But at the moment, what we did was we built this  framework and where this group actually gets all the data, all of the information in the  framework is in questions, it's come from this working group. So, so it's really designed  at the moment towards a private service provider looking at implementing a new piece of technology,  but it could be broadened to a farm, farmer or any other situation or any other segment.  
**[0:34:30-0:34:34](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:34:30):**  So that basically it's in an Excel spreadsheet at the moment and it walks, it walks you through  a number of questions. So the building section might be around IP and it might have, you  know, have you thought about the IP and the question might be no. And so therefore you've  got to go and do more work on that. You don't have to fill in every single question. It  may be that you get to question two of the technology component and you go, oh, okay,  
**[0:34:57-0:35:01](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:34:57):**  haven't even thought about that. Go back to the drawing board and do a bit more research  on it. So it's kind of a prompting thing to help you work through, work through a decision.  Yeah. Margot, did you have something to add?  Yeah. I mean, it's, I understand it. It's a decision support tool and obviously there  are a lot of decision support tools in agriculture, but not many that I'm aware of that are both  
**[0:35:28-0:35:38](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:35:28):**  developed by and for advisors. So it's a structured decision making process, but unlike some other  technology assessment tools, which are of course very useful, there's one that CSIRO  has developed called ADOPT that you may be aware of. ADOPT produces a sort of quantifiable  likelihood of uptake of a technology. Whereas this tool is more just to support a sort of  strategic thinking process. So it doesn't result in any quantity or in any result per  
**[0:36:14-0:36:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:36:14):**  se. But as part of the research in this project, we asked the advisors at several stages in  this sort of co-development process how they understood the tool and what benefits they  saw, I guess, in using it for their businesses and ultimately their clients' businesses.  And they all testified that it really supported them to think in this strategic way. And what  I would argue is also a systemic way. So there were nine sets of different considerations,  
**[0:36:50-0:36:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:36:50):**  or there are, in the tool ranging from, of course, the economic cost benefit analysis,  but right through to social license, to operate considerations, human resource considerations,  legal considerations. And many of them said, wow, we don't usually sit down and think about  that in a strategic way when we're thinking about should we invest or not in a particular  technology. And as a result, for example, as Viv said there, one of the advisors decided  
**[0:37:29-0:37:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:37:29):**  that the best decision was not to invest at this stage in the drone. Whereas others, one  person in particular, actually used the DVA tool, the digital value assessment tool, to  develop a business case to present to his board. And as a result of that, the board  decided that yes, they would invest in this particular technology. And he said that he'd  actually been thinking about this for a long time, but he didn't know how to take it forward.  
**[0:38:00-0:38:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:38:00):**  So I think that's another use of the tool is to sort of give you that structure.  Yeah, interesting. One thing that's striking me is when I think about buying different  tools or technologies for my business or for companies that we work with when they're thinking  of buying something and they go through the process, it seems like it's the role of the  providers or the vendors to help us make that decision. And sure, we might look at aggregator  
**[0:38:31-0:38:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:38:31):**  websites. Like I might look at a flight aggregator to get the best prices for the flights, or  I might look at review sites like a TripAdvisor or Yelp to get the best recommendations on  restaurants. So there are some aggregator sites and then there's really, I guess it's  on the vendor to help me understand how they're differentiated and why I should buy it and  what the return would be and to give me case studies and to really convince me that this  
**[0:38:58-0:39:03](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:38:58):**  is going to be worth it. Do you think that we're not kind of there yet in terms of the  maturity or is there something different about ag that means we need this kind of intermediary  step or training or maybe it's just a training thing. These tools haven't existed and so  we need to up the capability to make these decisions. Like I guess why do you think it's  different that we wouldn't just push this onto the vendors to say, hey, do a better  
**[0:39:22-0:39:28](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:39:22):**  job of saying why we should buy this? I think that's been the problem is maybe a little  bit of mistrust because vendors have overpassed in the past. Not all, but some have gone this  is going to solve the world and it hasn't. And so people are a little bit sceptical.  So I think, and also that training up of having to think a little bit more strategically about  those decisions about something that you're not using yet. So yeah, walking through that  
**[0:39:55-0:40:01](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:39:55):**  and it being also independent. So you're not just listening to someone who is actually  selling a product or a service or what it may be. That ability to be able to think it  through independently on your own is really vital, I think.  Yeah. And I agree with you because that came up a lot in our project that obviously the  advisors who had chosen to participate in collaborating in this project had a particular  
**[0:40:25-0:40:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:40:25):**  interest in Precision Ag, but they were still quite, I don't know where is the word, but  trust was important to them and the source of the information. And so I think you're  right Viv, that there is something about growing. And I think the advisors were themselves keen  to empower their businesses, I guess, to get on the front foot. And I think something like  this particular value assessment tool that came out of their lived experience of this  
**[0:41:02-0:41:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:41:02):**  very, you know, there's characterised by a lot of uncertainty, complexity and diversity  with just the proliferation of tools and the rapid pace that you referred to earlier too,  Sarah. So yeah, I think it is about feeling empowered and not being able to discern which  vendors are trustworthy and which aren't.  Yeah. And owning that decision themselves, you know, making that decision themselves  
**[0:41:31-0:41:37](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:41:31):**  not being influenced by another person's agenda to be able to make that decision.  Right. I see that as I guess my brain still goes to the technology providers need to do  a better job of delivering on the value and of creating products of value and communicating  what the real value is. Like, I think that's a real issue if there's too much sort of snake  oil salesman or, you know, burning people that that's really bad to hear. So hopefully  
**[0:41:59-0:42:01](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:41:59):**  we can fix that side of it as well.  Yeah. Yeah. No. And I think it's just good business practise too. I saw a lot of growth  in that just basic business skills of being able to think more strategically instead of  just by gut, you know, well, quite often their gut feel was right, but if you actually work  through it strategically, it takes that emotion out of it. And they were much more comfortable  
**[0:42:22-0:42:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:42:22):**  with their decision going forward. And then they own it, they own it themselves and they're  more likely to succeed.  Right. I'm really interested in the story you said as well around the using this tool  to make the business case because one of the things we've found is how important it is  to translate. And so the language you might use to talk about the technology or to even  
**[0:42:45-0:42:49](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:42:45):**  think about implementing the technology is probably really different than the way you  talk about the end results or the value to the end user. And until you have someone who  can kind of translate between naively or simply the kind of bits and bytes tech world to the  ag, so what world, then you actually can't really get from the tech side to the adoption  and value side, unfortunately. And so there's, it's interesting that this tool maybe helps  
**[0:43:12-0:43:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:43:12):**  with, with some of that translation because we've seen that translation being really important.  And that was really interesting from, if you unpacked the people that were involved, some  were just sole operators. So all they had to do was convince themselves to spend money.  Others were in partnerships, so they had to convince their partners. And then in this  case that Marg cited, he was actually working with a board. So he was an employee of a company  
**[0:43:38-0:43:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:43:38):**  and therefore had to put together a proper business case to get money to support the  new business venture he was looking at involving digital technology.  Do you think this tool would work? So in the, in the startup world, in the kind of ag tech  world, a lot of these tools are still really early in their development. So maybe they  don't have the full features there yet, or they, there's still some bugs and they, they're  
**[0:44:04-0:44:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:44:04):**  not trying to sell them at that point. Ideally the best practice they're trying to get feedback  and test and trial things. Do you think this tool would, would work to help either advisors  and or growers to make a decision about kind of giving a go for something that's really  early and, and not quite ready yet and maybe working with a startup and giving that feedback?  Or is it really just meant for kind of mature tools that are already built and done?  
**[0:44:28-0:44:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:44:28):**  No, absolutely. When we, after we did the initial six people in the review that actually  built the tool, we then went and grabbed another six people and got them to test the tool with  another case study. So they, they hadn't been involved in actually writing the questions  or writing the tool. They were just, we were just wanting to run it through with similar  type people to see what came out. And one actually was a bit more research orientated  
**[0:44:58-0:45:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:44:58):**  and looking at trying to get an organisation to fund looking at the development of a tool  for industry. So that was really interesting. And he found it very valuable again, in Benov  to making things strategically through why, why, why should we invest in this? What's,  what are we going to gain? So that yeah, and think through every single little step in  that process. So I think it's highly adaptable while it's been built by private service providers  
**[0:45:28-0:45:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:45:28):**  in cotton sugar. I think it's a tool that could be, the fundamentals of it could be  very easily adapted out from that.  It strikes me too, that you could even use that almost on the research side as well.  I mean, one of the things that we've been doing a lot of work in is in how do you help  research providers, for example, research funders, more importantly, think earlier about  
**[0:45:49-0:45:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:45:49):**  the potential commercial utility or extension possibility of, of that project. And so you  want to do kind of a business case or somehow think through strategic criteria around, you  know, is this useful to fund and how will we know that and how will it actually get  in the hands of the people that it's important to impact? And this kind of thinking earlier  in that process could also potentially help with deciding what to fund even earlier in  
**[0:46:14-0:46:15](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:46:14):**  the, in the process as well.  Yeah. Well, Margie might want to elaborate on that, but that's quite interesting because  the other parts of components of this broader project actually we're starting to think about  how can we strategically implement extension earlier on in the research process, but Margie  might want to elaborate on that.  
**[0:46:35-0:46:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:46:35):**  Yeah, no, I think there's, there's definitely potential for this too. I think it's you know,  it's strengthening that it's come from the kind of everyday challenges, I suppose, of  people living and breathing this AgTech world as you put it. So I think, and we did have  researchers involved, as we mentioned in the early development of it. And so, you know,  the process itself, I suppose, the tool is an Excel spreadsheet with a series of questions,  
**[0:47:17-0:47:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:47:17):**  but the advisors recognise that it's actually the process that you build around the tool  that is as important as the tool itself, if you like. I know that's a bit of an, perhaps  an academic perspective on it, but you know, and that's about learning, I suppose, going  back to what I said before, the idea of sort of empowering and as Viv said, making decisions  itself, but also the advisors recognise that the tool could be used to communicate with  
**[0:47:48-0:47:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:47:48):**  farmers and others about particular technologies, that it's not really, yes, it's something  you can sit down and do by yourself, but equally it can be used in a group to strengthen connections  and strengthen understanding around these very complex issues. The other use they recognised  of it was to demonstrate due diligence in their businesses. So that if they were to  demonstrate to their farmer clients that they'd gone through this very strategic, stepwise,  
**[0:48:21-0:48:28](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:48:21):**  vigorous process and therefore understood the particular costs and benefits of the technology  that the farmer, he or she, would have more confidence in their, I guess, in their service.  So as Viv mentioned before, it is about adapting service delivery in a digital world in ways  that strengthen the advisor's connection to digital ag, but also ensure the benefits are  realized for farmers.  
**[0:48:53-0:48:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:48:53):**  So when you guys, oh, go ahead Viv, are you going to add something?  Yeah, no, and I think that comes back to what we were talking about before in, you know,  I've been involved, as I said, in precision ag for 20 years. I've seen lots of pieces  of technology come and promise the world and fall down the creek with a lot of money spent  on them that no return. And so I think that's what we saw in this project was probably 20  
**[0:49:18-0:49:23](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:49:18):**  years of frustration around that. And so there's a lot of confidence now that's got to be built  before people will adopt things, which is not a bad thing. So I think that's why on  the coalface, because we've been talking to the coalface and the coalface has developed  this tool that those sort of questions have come back.  Yeah, interesting. So I love the themes around confidence and trust, and it really seems  
**[0:49:41-0:49:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:49:41):**  like though we're talking about technology and science, the kind of human side of things  really are so critical. And I like the idea that you can start to put a process around  thinking through it. I'm sure there are many different kinds of processes and you could  tweak that tool and I'm sure you guys will be working on that. But the importance is  both the process you go through to make structured decisions and some of the more emotional aspects  
**[0:50:03-0:50:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:50:03):**  of thinking about adopting technology or selling it or interacting with it in other ways. It's  not just the technical aspects of it, but so much more around emotional aspects.  Absolutely. Very well summed up, Sarah.  So last question for you both before I give you a chance to do a shameless plug on where  any listeners can find more about the tool and about you guys. I'd love to hear from  
**[0:50:30-0:50:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:50:30):**  both of you, maybe starting with you, Margaret, around given this project and the work you've  done in extension and otherwise in rural innovation, what do you see as the future of the sector?  Like what are one, two, three things you're excited about when you think, say, 10 years  out about the future of innovation in agriculture?  Yeah, that's a big question. Well, I think things aren't going to get less complex, less  
**[0:51:02-0:51:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:51:02):**  uncertain and less diverse. So I mean, I'm excited to see industries collaborating on  these kinds of issues. I think in a pluralistic extension system, agricultural innovation  system with public and private interests and public and private goods, I guess, to be produced  on that system, collaboration is going to be key. And I think we can see now that both  governments through the Rural R&D for Profit program, which incentivises collaboration  
**[0:51:42-0:51:49](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:51:42):**  and also by agricultural industries themselves, that they've really recognised the value of  collaboration as well as the necessity of it, I guess. So I think for the big issues  that we're going to continue to face around climate variability and globalisation of markets  and rural workforce and precision ag, that the skills and capacity to engage both across  industries and across public private interests is going to be key. But I think we're making  
**[0:52:17-0:52:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:52:17):**  lots of great moves towards that now. So I can see lots of potential.  Great. So the potential is, so in 10 years we'll have super capable, like all the people  working in the ag sector will be total rock star, brainiac geniuses.  We are now. We are now.  No, I think there'll be a more, perhaps a stronger recognition of the need for particular  
**[0:52:48-0:52:53](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:52:48):**  roles in agricultural innovation, like the translator or innovation broker role that  you alluded to before. And that role may not reside in particular, it may reside in particular  individuals and be played out by individuals, but that also particular organisations may  need to come into existence to play that role because coordinating the diverse interests  and goals is a function of rural innovation that needs to be supported. So it's not that  
**[0:53:21-0:53:26](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:53:21):**  everybody has to be doing it all the time, but that across the system, there are spaces  and places where that role is recognised and supported.  Very well said. And I was just teasing that that's a great summary. And I think that is  something to be excited about. Viv, any thoughts?  Yeah, no, probably on from what Marg has said, collaboration I think is key in a diverse  
**[0:53:49-0:53:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:53:49):**  system that we're no longer having a linear route from research to extension to farm.  We've got a multifaceted extension system or innovation system now. That's exciting.  It's hard. It's harder to work collaboratively. But I think we get much, much, much more better  outcomes if we can do it. And I think learning how to do it has been a big result of this  R&D for profit project that has just concluded over the last three years. We're seeing people  
**[0:54:23-0:54:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:54:23):**  naturally now, you know, have built trust and built networks across industries that  can only benefit us going forward. I'm excited to see agriculture evolve, particularly in  this precision ag space. 20 years ago, I felt like a very lone little voice going, wow,  look at this great new technology. We'll be able to do so much more if we understand what's  going on more and everyone just looked at me. Now I feel that everyone's kind of getting  
**[0:54:53-0:54:58](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:54:53):**  there and understanding what that potential is and trying to make it into reality. So  I really feel like the rubber's hitting the road as far as precision ag or digital ag  is concerned. And it's really exciting for me to see that take off and hopefully harness  the benefits out of it over the next 10 years.  Well, I agree with that as well. Very exciting. Well, Margviv, thank you so much for joining  
**[0:55:17-0:55:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:55:17):**  me on the podcast today. Where can people find more about the tool and this project  and you guys? What's a website or two or a Twitter handle or anything you guys want to  throw out there? Viv, I'll start with you.  Yeah. So the project actually does have a website and I can't remember that off the  top of my head. Can you, Marg?  
**[0:55:37-0:55:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:55:37):**  No, but if you... I can't.  That's all right. I can put it in the show notes for anyone listening to find it.  Yeah. I can give that to you, Sarah, anyway. We're still just on the tool. We are still  in the development phase of it while it's ready from a raw perspective. We're hoping  to look at being able to develop that into a little bit more user-friendly and also wrap  
**[0:56:04-0:56:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:56:04):**  a little bit more facilitation around it for it to progress further.  Great. Well, I will share those links in the show notes and thank you both so much for  joining me on the podcast. Really enjoyed the chat and appreciate all the good work  you guys are doing in this space.  Thanks, Sarah.  
**[0:56:23-0:56:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:56:23):**  Thanks, Sarah.  Thanks, Greg.  Thank you for joining us on another episode of Ag Tech So What. You can stay up to date  with the latest episodes and news at agtechsowhat.com. And as always, if you have any feedback or  other guests to recommend, we'd love to hear from you. Just hop on the website and leave  
**[0:56:46-0:56:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=357329#t=0:56:46):**  us a comment or send us a message. Finally, if you like what you're hearing and we hope  you do, please share the podcast with a friend or leave us a review on iTunes or wherever  you get your podcasts. Thanks again for listening. Catch you next time.  