---
title: From Buyer Beware To Seller Beware In Agtech
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### Agtech - So What?  (2022-11-16)  

**[0:00:00-0:00:06](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, and welcome to AgTech So What, brought to you by Tenacious Ventures.  I'm Sarah Nolet.  This week, and for two more episodes in the future, we are so excited to be collaborating  with Trimble Agriculture, who's building technology to make farming better through precision.  A huge thanks to Trimble for partnering with us to bring you today's show.  
**[0:00:21-0:00:25](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:00:21):**  When it comes to software in agriculture, the industry has come a long way.  But what's often less appreciated, especially within the industry, is just how far the users  of software have come in the same time.  I guess social media has really changed how people go about looking for advice and information  on new products.  
**[0:00:41-0:00:49](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:00:41):**  But I do see that dealers, there's a range of reaction to the modern current environment  of users looking for information about new products.  Some have responded very well, I think, and others are a fair way behind.  That's Leet Wilksch, a farmer and an ag technologist from South Australia, who has been sitting  on both sides of the table as farmers have evolved from tech skeptics or maybe curious  
**[0:01:09-0:01:14](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:01:09):**  enthusiasts to discerning buyers and investors who expect a lot more from the tech companies  they work with.  We'll hear a little more from Leet later in the show.  But first, I want to drop you in on a conversation we had with Jason McNeese, software specialist  for the APAC region at Trimble, and Darren Walford, APAC sales manager for Trimble Global  
**[0:01:29-0:01:30](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:01:29):**  Positioning.  We sat down to get their perspective on the changing ag software space, which kicked off  our thinking about just how sophisticated farmers have become and prompted questions  about what that means for ag software businesses, from startups to legacy players.  Here's Jason.  
**[0:01:45-0:01:50](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:01:45):**  The really interesting thing that I've found is that for years, we've been talking to farmers  about software.  Farmworks had been around for 15 or more years.  And every time you talk to a farmer, it was like, oh, yeah, I know I need to do record  keeping better.  
**[0:02:01-0:02:03](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:02:01):**  That's the main ROI for software.  And one of the really cool things that's changed now is that the language or the ability to  describe what they want has changed, and instead of I want to do record keeping better, they're  going, I want to connect all of my machines.  Tell me about Trimble ag software so that I can connect my John Deere machines data  
**[0:02:26-0:02:31](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:02:26):**  into it and my CNH machines data all into the one thing so that I don't have to type  that field name into every one of them.  Or another customer I was talking to, he talked about how easy it was to transfer his prescription  map into the screen, which for many years has been like a Achilles heel to variable  rate is I've got the map, I've got everything I need.  
**[0:02:50-0:02:54](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:02:50):**  Now I'm about to go and I go into the tractor and it's like difficult at that point.  And that sort of been solved by auto sync.  And then you have the even better conversations where the guy goes, do you know what Trimble  ag software makes me able to spend time with my family?  They're using that type of language.  
**[0:03:08-0:03:13](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:03:08):**  It's like when auto steering was coming out and I can drive straighter.  Yeah, you can, but you don't make sense when you get home, mentally exhausted.  And then it's, Oh, I can get home and I can do the books when I get home or I can make  sense when I talk to my wife.  Oh yeah.  
**[0:03:25-0:03:26](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:03:25):**  Okay.  I'm looking at saving money.  So I think there's more of that.  And so for your example, Jason, it might be there's less mistakes.  It's and things are easier to do that.  
**[0:03:35-0:03:41](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:03:35):**  I can move that info from one place to another without topping it out and making 1500 different  mistakes while I'm driving down the paddy.  We think about sales of technology in sometimes it's like the sale is about awareness as in  customers just didn't know this product existed.  And once they figure out it existed, it's Oh my God, there's something that can solve  
**[0:03:54-0:03:55](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:03:54):**  my problem.  How exciting.  Like now let me evaluate it.  In other cases, it's much more of a comparison.  Like, Oh, is it going to be this company or that company?  
**[0:04:02-0:04:06](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:04:02):**  There are areas that you guys are seeing for Trimble fall more into awareness of once they  figure out that it exists, they're super excited versus you're going head to head with other  competition.  Increasingly our customers know what they want.  Again, back to that same thing where they're asking, does it do this?  
**[0:04:18-0:04:19](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:04:18):**  Does it do that?  You know, do we provide the value that I'm looking for?  We're not really talking about features.  We're talking about does the product help me keep better chemical records that maybe  that's their driver of having the conversation or does it do a particular type of guidance  
**[0:04:35-0:04:38](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:04:35):**  line that's important to them in their operation.  A while ago, we were just talking about accuracy and straight lines.  On one of the farms I grew up on, we had a system that cost five times what they do today,  and it just did a straight line and it did that really well.  But now our customers know exactly what they want.  
**[0:05:00-0:05:05](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:05:00):**  They want to do this and this because that's what's important to their operation.  What we would talk about maybe more in the software world or for consumers is because  of the internet, we've gone from this world of buyer beware where you've got almost these  used car salesman, you don't know anything about this car and it's whatever I tell you.  And so it's buyer beware to seller beware and customers are coming in really informed  
**[0:05:20-0:05:23](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:05:20):**  of I want this and I don't want that and I want a green one and I want it to look like  this and I've done my homework.  What do you think has driven that shift in agriculture?  Is it just access to information?  Is it social media?  
**[0:05:30-0:05:32](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:05:30):**  Why have those conversations changed?  It's so much easier now for farmer A to talk to farmer B regardless of whether it's over  the UHF.  Social media is like the new UHF.  Back in the day, we were on the radio going, how's that new tractor going?  
**[0:05:46-0:05:48](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:05:46):**  How's that new bit of steering going?  You need to get that organic growth from word of mouth.  It's changed somewhat to that word of mouth might be over Twitter.  It might be over some sort of social media where a farmer in Queensland and a farmer  in South Australia are both sharing experiences with each other and people they don't even  
**[0:06:07-0:06:08](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:06:07):**  know.  We talk about what's the first thing you do when you get in the cabin and they say, it's  set the phone up so they can talk to people.  So you don't have to steer anymore.  And so what do you do is you talk to people and you share the ideas and you're sharing  
**[0:06:20-0:06:22](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:06:20):**  what's happening around the place.  I guess there's still competition with people, but there's a lot more access to information  out there, which is also part of the problem.  You've got a lot to sift through.  Probably people have made 53% of their decision by the time they go talk to a dealer.  
**[0:06:40-0:06:42](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:06:40):**  They've probably got that far down the path already.  I think that's key.  Like that bit where by the time the phone gets picked up to call a dealer or distributor  of any Agtech product, like we've jumped over the educational part of the sale to the right,  does this do what I need?  
**[0:07:02-0:07:07](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:07:02):**  And you better, as a salesman, you better know your product and your competitor's product  far better than maybe 10 years ago where either was fewer competitors and be the knowledge  or the educational part of the sale was quite a large part of it.  It's less so now.  How has that changed, Jason, how you do your job?  
**[0:07:23-0:07:27](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:07:23):**  I don't know if there's any stories that come to life of getting stuck on that.  I actually haven't done my homework on the competitor's product or just ways that you've  had to work differently as the market evolves.  That's a tough one.  I'm sure many people I talk to could probably point out the time where I didn't know about  
**[0:07:40-0:07:47](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:07:40):**  the next new feature either from our competitors or maybe like things are moving so fast that  even within the company, something could be released just recently.  For example, I've got a nice one.  Talking to a software support guy in one of our dealerships, I said, Hey, this new feature's  out.  
**[0:08:00-0:08:06](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:08:00):**  It's creating guidance lines on the software platform rather than on the screen.  I said, I don't know if that's like something that you guys would be keen on or not.  It's there.  Have a look at it.  He's like, Oh, thank God.  
**[0:08:13-0:08:17](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:08:13):**  I'm doing this so badly because on this one particular screen, you can't enter the latitude  and longitude.  If this is a game changer for us.  And I was like, okay, I didn't know.  Didn't know how important that was to the customer.  
**[0:08:25-0:08:31](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:08:25):**  And for once they had the solution before I'd sort of been able to understand how big  the pain was.  Yeah.  The knowledge you guys would have sounds like increasingly more technical as the technology  evolves, but also the specific use cases on the ground are changing rapidly as well as  
**[0:08:41-0:08:45](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:08:41):**  the developers change it, as the farmers can change what's needed to run things.  Darren, did you have any stories on how you've had to work differently or your teams had  to work differently as the customers become more aware of what it is they want?  I think there's still a bit of misinformation around because there's so much information  around and you get a person that was in the mechanic is now the person selling precision  
**[0:09:04-0:09:07](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:09:04):**  ag and they've made up stories about how things work.  And the education piece is big.  Like you said, it's letting people know what's around.  So know that tractor manufacturer doesn't actually own satellites.  It's actually rents the space like the rest of us do and that kind of thing.  
**[0:09:22-0:09:26](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:09:22):**  So it is a few of those rural legends get around.  I think for us, it's getting people to try things 10 years later that they tried before  when things were in their infancy and they said, no, it doesn't work for me.  And things have moved on a lot since then.  And we had a Trimble RTX service come out in 2011 and used to take over 30 minutes to  
**[0:09:48-0:09:51](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:09:48):**  converge down to four centimetres.  And now with the current generation of equipment, it's under five minutes, it's down to two  and a half centimetres.  So it's a step change, it's taken 11 years, but people need to relook at things as they  go on because the technology changes.  
**[0:10:08-0:10:13](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:10:08):**  So what was the case 10 years ago is not the case now.  And there's probably things that need to be revisited.  And it's easy to do that.  There's less risk in trying these new things now because you don't have to have a huge  capital investment to do it.  
**[0:10:27-0:10:32](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:10:27):**  As Jason was saying back when auto steering came out, it was a hundred grand for steering  a tractor.  And now to try these things often, you can try the high accuracy level without any new  equipment.  It's a demo of a software unlock and you can just try it.  
**[0:10:45-0:10:47](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:10:45):**  It still, I imagine, takes an element of humility.  I know when I have not wanted to change something and then had to go, all right, I probably  should think about doing that differently.  Even if it's easy to do so, I still have to eat my socks of whatever I said or thought  before.  
**[0:10:58-0:11:00](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:10:58):**  Do you see that dynamic playing out and how are people dealing with it?  I often wonder, it talked about the changes for sales.  I think a lot of the time people don't actually like to talk to a sales person because they  get sold things and they'd probably like to discover it themselves.  So being able to do that quietly on their own and understand it, I guess that's the  
**[0:11:19-0:11:24](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:11:19):**  trick of it's getting the best experience out of your trial without talking to someone  that's going to try and shove it down your throat.  I think people like to do things at their own pace and to understand it themselves.  We've probably got some ag tech companies listening to the podcast who are thinking  about how they have conversations with farmers around things that might need to change or  
**[0:11:43-0:11:48](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:11:43):**  having a look at something that they got burned on when they looked five years ago.  Any tips for how to have those conversations?  I think it's often talking about where they've gone in that time.  So the first generation had two constellations.  Now we've got five and we're triple frequency.  
**[0:12:02-0:12:03](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:12:02):**  We've done some things.  Okay, that's great.  A lot of jargon, but where does that get us to?  It used to do this and now it's at this point.  So we used to talk about RTK and satellite positioning.  
**[0:12:15-0:12:19](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:12:15):**  One was accurate, one was convenient and the Holy Grail was to come together.  We're there now.  That's happened.  So probably now is a good time to rethink about what's needed.  And there's a lot of fashion in language at any given time.  
**[0:12:30-0:12:34](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:12:30):**  Everyone's talking about X and just because everyone's talking about it doesn't mean it's  the best thing going or the right thing.  It's just where the conversation's at or that's the easy part for people.  It's that technology, the barrier to entry is lowered.  So there's more players in that space.  
**[0:12:48-0:12:49](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:12:48):**  That doesn't mean they're all good.  It just means it's easy.  And now there's other things that are going on that are more accurate, more convenient  and there's less add-ons needed.  Your gear has it all there.  
**[0:13:02-0:13:03](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:13:02):**  You just have to turn it on.  Those kinds of things happen.  In the corrections space, that's a really good example of how a product's been designed  and delivered through a channel to market that requires less touch points.  Back to your question about advice to ag tech companies, if you're going to create a product  
**[0:13:23-0:13:30](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:13:23):**  and deliver it to market through some sort of direct sales or demo program, you better  be sure that they can get the best sort of wow moment out of that product without too  much handholding and set up and onboarding and all of those things.  Because if you give someone a 15 day demo or 30 days, whatever it is, and they can't  get that wow moment in that period, or we maybe hadn't thought about, okay, to get the  
**[0:13:53-0:13:57](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:13:53):**  most out of this, I then need a rate controller and I need this bit and I need my agronomist  to do his part.  And all of a sudden you're like, okay, my trial period's up.  Did I really see what it was all about?  Maybe not.  
**[0:14:07-0:14:13](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:14:07):**  And then the alternative to that is maybe through a dealer or distribution network who  can have a high touch, very, very service oriented way of giving that person a view  into the product.  And that's a real challenge if you want to go direct or do these software as a service  or these types of things, where it's something that the stuff that just gets turned on with  
**[0:14:30-0:14:36](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:14:30):**  the passcode over the air makes that a lot easier versus say a base station where someone  has to drive out and start climbing up on roofs and putting towers up and radios.  And it could be weeks or months before that actually happens.  I really like Jason and Darren's thoughts about the growing sophistication among farmer  customers, the need to invest more in understanding not only your own tech and use cases, but  
**[0:14:54-0:15:00](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:14:54):**  also those of your competitors and doing what it takes to ensure customers have a good experience  during a software trial so that users really know what they're getting before they buy.  This conversation had us wondering how farmers have experienced some of these changes.  So we reached out to our listeners asking them how ag software companies are accommodating  a much more in the know cohort of farmers.  
**[0:15:18-0:15:20](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:15:18):**  Fortunately, Liet Wilksch was happy to chat.  Liet is based on the York Peninsula in South Australia and has a history in dry land and  irrigated farming.  But more importantly, Liet is an ag technologist who installs environmental and moisture monitoring  devices all over South Australia.  
**[0:15:33-0:15:37](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:15:33):**  He spent some time chatting with our own Caleb Connor about his experience on both sides  of the ag software desk.  Another conversation started with the basic question, what's changed?  I guess social media and the accessibility of that to people seeking more information  has really changed how people go about looking for advice and information on new products  
**[0:15:56-0:15:59](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:15:56):**  and really those that are promoting their products well.  We've got really snazzy and clever videos for people to watch that tell a pretty good  picture about how a new product can be adopted on farm.  But I do see that dealers, there's a range of reaction to the modern current environment  of users looking for information about new products.  
**[0:16:22-0:16:28](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:16:22):**  Some have responded very well, I think, with their social media profile and resourcing  that and others are a fair way behind, a long way behind.  And is that the standard for you?  Like what is the standard of ag companies that do it well these days?  What does do it well look like more broadly?  
**[0:16:41-0:16:47](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:16:41):**  A media profile that allows people to be interactive and get a fair picture because people want  to see the good in a product within one or two minutes in a video.  Those that are doing it well can put their message across very clearly with a new product,  whether it be a tractor or a ripper or a weather station.  And the user then has got a pathway to go for the next step for them to seek information.  
**[0:17:08-0:17:11](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:17:08):**  That might be a phone call, that might be going and seeing a product at a field day  or in real life so they can see what it actually touches and feels and smells like.  And how did this used to look for people?  Like how is this massively different to how ag equipment has been bought and sold and  found by farmers in the past?  
**[0:17:28-0:17:35](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:17:28):**  So where I live at Pascaville, we host Australia's oldest field days every two years.  And in the 90s, there was 70,000 people coming along over three days.  And now that's in the high teens or 20,000 people come over three days.  In the past, those field days where there were exhibitors with a whole range of equipment  and lots of farming food producers coming along, you got to touch it and talk to the  
**[0:17:57-0:17:58](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:17:57):**  people that made it.  And that's how a lot of it used to be, that information transfer of a new product.  Now, yes, there's less food producers out there, but also they're not coming along to  the field days because they can seek a lot of information from social media platforms,  from the internet, and then a bit of engagement with their neighbours to see what have their  
**[0:18:15-0:18:19](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:18:15):**  neighbours done, what research have their neighbours done for a new bit of a product  or a machine.  It makes me think what else happens at those events that, as in like people meeting each  other, coming into contact with the different organisations and things like that, what else  happened at those events that has changed because of the way that people can get that  
**[0:18:34-0:18:35](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:18:34):**  information now?  Look, you're right, that social contact is still very important at those events and people  love coming along and having it over lunch or whatever it might be.  But we've got to face it, there are less people working in agriculture, so those connections  are less.  
**[0:18:51-0:18:55](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:18:51):**  And we also have much stronger connections, rightly or wrongly, through social media.  So I'm a pretty avid Twitter user.  I've got lots of Twitter friends that I've never met, but I feel I've got a good connection  with them.  There's a lot in Australian ag that would be very similar.  
**[0:19:03-0:19:07](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:19:03):**  They feel they have a connection and trust people in the Twittersphere or wherever it  might be because they make sense to them and they tell a good story and they can trust  them for advice on a new product.  And have you specifically had instances where you've taken the advice of a person you have  a good relationship with that you haven't met and that's led to a purchase of new equipment  
**[0:19:21-0:19:24](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:19:21):**  or do you have a kind of a story around that stands out?  Yeah, I do.  So with the weather station sensors that I do sell, and I promote reasonably well what  I do, I've had people contact me saying, oh, if you looked at this kind of sensor in an  avocado tree, for example, I've seen one of these before.  
**[0:19:41-0:19:44](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:19:41):**  Have you got an opinion on it or would you like to try one or use one?  So yes, I have.  With my business, I have had people recommend things that I have now purchased and trolled  myself.  And do you have any views on what it's like for your peers on farms that aren't as tech  
**[0:19:56-0:19:57](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:19:56):**  savvy or aren't looking at it?  Like, how does this new world feel to them?  Yeah, it can be difficult and connectivity is another issue there, which probably is  another whole conversation.  That's what makes me really sad is when farmers can't connect.  
**[0:20:09-0:20:13](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:20:09):**  They can't use social media conveniently or they can't use the internet or whatever it  might be because the connectivity is not there.  That aside, those that do have connectivity, but still just don't engage as much, I can  see some of those missing out because they're not getting information that could be of benefit  to their business.  
**[0:20:32-0:20:33](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:20:32):**  Absolutely.  Maybe kind of switching perspective and speaking about ag dealers and companies.  From your perspective, do you think that ag dealers and the kind of equipment industry  has responded quickly enough?  Lots of ag businesses have quite a reasonable profile on the internet or social media.  
**[0:20:51-0:20:56](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:20:51):**  So that you potential buyers can go and see their wares.  I think in general, that is done good.  There's certainly some pretty old websites out there that need updating.  But as far as servicing those products and servicing products, when we started to delve  into the precision ag side of things, that hasn't been done well by dealers and not all  
**[0:21:14-0:21:16](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:21:14):**  of it is their own fault.  Being able to resource the precision ag field with things that they're selling in their  tractors and harvesters, et cetera.  I hear a lot of grain growers that are disappointed with the backup service they're getting from  their dealers.  
**[0:21:29-0:21:30](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:21:29):**  Tell me more about that.  How understandable is that problem or how do you justify that problem from the companies?  It's a hard one to justify.  The classic story is that a grower buys a new piece of equipment.  The salesman has given them all the rundown on a new $800,000 sprayer.  
**[0:21:48-0:21:53](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:21:48):**  And they have bought this fantastic product, which is loaded with technology.  And it's delivered and the grower wants to use it.  In the first week, he wants some support for some of the software stuff that's there.  And the dealer says, well, actually our software guru left.  And we've been looking for a new guy to replace that person and we can't find them.  
**[0:22:13-0:22:19](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:22:13):**  And the grower is then held up and disappointed because they have spent all this money on  a piece of equipment and they can't get service for a small but integral part of the gear.  And when it comes to something like yield mapping on a combine harvester, I've seen  that time and time again, where an expensive piece of gear has been purchased.  It can do these wonderful things with mapping variability in the field, but the grower can't  
**[0:22:42-0:22:46](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:22:42):**  get support from the dealer because they don't have that knowledge within the dealership  to help them out.  The retention of staff was definitely called out in previous conversations.  It feels like an interminably tricky one, but also to your point, like that just simply  cannot remain a problem if this is going to be legitimately adopted more broadly.  
**[0:23:01-0:23:02](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:23:01):**  You're right.  And it's not always the dealers fault.  There's a great deal that simply can't find people and I've chosen to live regionally  for most of my life and I really do love it, but it isn't for everybody.  We've got to do all we can as an industry to try and get people to live regionally.  
**[0:23:15-0:23:21](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:23:15):**  Yes, there's plenty of things that can be done remotely, but lots of farmers want to  have a face-to-face conversation with somebody about a problem they've got.  Sit around the kitchen table, whatever it might be, to sort out the problem so that  the grower feels confident.  Yes, I now know what I need to know about that bit of software and we need people living  
**[0:23:34-0:23:36](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:23:34):**  regionally to make that happen.  And you say there's no amount of social media, 3D walkthrough kind of thing that solves that  problem.  That feels a long way off, does it?  Yeah, look, it certainly does help and I can see VR really helping with the setup of machines  
**[0:23:51-0:23:54](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:23:51):**  and for growers to feel comfortable in that.  Yes, a fair bit of that can be done remotely and virtually, but there still is absolutely  going to be a need for the face-to-face chat.  How are farmers' expectations around service changing?  You say that's a classic story.  
**[0:24:08-0:24:12](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:24:08):**  What is the impact of that being the classic story on farmers that want to buy new equipment?  Well, it's certainly having an impact on dealerships getting bigger.  That small dealerships that can't service and support their products have fallen away  and they've been goaled up by bigger ones because typically there would be more chance  of retaining staff or having someone there that can service something at a bigger dealership.  
**[0:24:33-0:24:39](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:24:33):**  But there's also growers that are in constant frustration because they've purchased stuff  that they can't get support for.  And at some point they just throw their hands up and go, this really sucks, but that's just  what it's like to be living where I am.  And a bit of a defeatist attitude, I guess.  
**[0:24:50-0:24:55](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:24:50):**  And look, rural connectivity to internet connectivity is one of those things where there's been  a lot of gristling about it, but there's some that have just thrown their hands up and said,  I'm such a small fish in this ocean and I cannot change that.  And I've got to suck it up and live with it.  And that's that big and that makes me sad.  
**[0:25:06-0:25:15](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:25:06):**  And so does that play out that grower spends 800 grand on a machine, gets burned, throws  their hands up in the air?  What happens a few years later when they need to buy something else?  How do farmers continue to engage in that process knowing that they are a small fish  in a big pond?  
**[0:25:24-0:25:26](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:25:24):**  What's been the insight into that side of things?  Yeah, I have had conversations with people that have burned $200,000 because of the machine.  It's not always about the service, but it just hasn't performed like they have expected.  And that support for a new seeding system, for example, hasn't been there and they've  turned it over within a couple of years and lost a whole heap of money on it.  
**[0:25:46-0:25:50](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:25:46):**  And yes, they're burned and plenty will say, I'll never go back to that dealership again,  because I didn't get that kind of support.  But inevitably they probably do because there's so few choices or places to actually go and  choose from.  What does a better future look like for that for growers?  
**[0:26:01-0:26:03](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:26:01):**  Yeah, I don't know.  Look, this is all compounded by the fact that we're talking about machinery that by and  large is produced overseas, the really expensive gear and the COVID pandemic impact on supply  chains and getting hold of products is it's just blown them out so far.  So people are now ordering gear for two years down the track and they don't know what the  
**[0:26:25-0:26:26](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:26:25):**  process is.  They know it's going to be more expensive than it is now, but they simply don't know  what that process is.  So you throw in that challenge as well.  It's really tough for decision making for growers when this is millions, hundreds and  
**[0:26:38-0:26:40](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:26:38):**  hundreds of thousands of dollars on an unknown.  When am I going to get it?  I don't know what support I'm going to get for it.  I don't know, but you absolutely have to have it or your farm can't operate.  But to your point, the pressure is there.  
**[0:26:50-0:26:51](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:26:50):**  So is it a problem they're trying to solve today?  Or are you saying that farmers are just having to look so far down the line to say, I'm going  to need that machine in three years, I better order it now?  Yes.  Yeah, they are.  
**[0:27:01-0:27:03](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:27:01):**  I don't know what the better future looks like.  Because particularly for this big gear, it's one to two years before you're actually going  to see it.  And it's hard to see how there's going to be more support staff than what we have at  the moment, or it's going to be better support.  
**[0:27:15-0:27:16](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:27:15):**  I do struggle to see that.  And I'm not don't mean to be the bearer of doom and gloom about this, because that is  what we've got.  And this gear, the combine harvesters are a classic.  The new ones from henceforth are a million dollars and are going to be around that market,  
**[0:27:30-0:27:35](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:27:30):**  such huge money, but it is imperative that you have those on farm to do the job for six  weeks that you need it to do the job.  You've got to have one.  Tell me for me, if you were to put your feet into the boots of a dealer or one of these  ag retail companies, how should they operate knowing that farmers a more savvy, they've  
**[0:27:49-0:27:53](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:27:49):**  got access to talk to more people they wouldn't have connected with to know more about these  machines and be that they're under the pressures that they're under today.  I think that the sales people, I guess, have quite traditionally been blokes that have  been in the industry for 30 years and doing things the same way they always have.  But I think all dealerships need a few people in their business that understand how these  
**[0:28:16-0:28:17](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:28:16):**  things have changed.  And these people need to be engaged with the community and being at the sporting club on  the weekend or the apex club, whatever it might be, of actually really engaging with  the grain, the food producer community to understand what their needs and wants are  and helping school up the staff at the dealership.  
**[0:28:36-0:28:43](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:28:36):**  So everybody's on the same page about how do we service young farmers that have vastly  different ways of getting information, seeking information than their parents.  Getting among them.  Getting among them.  Getting amongst them.  
**[0:28:50-0:28:51](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:28:50):**  And empathy for their customers.  Yeah.  And I'm not a social media expert, but I suspect that if you're a business worth your soul,  you've got to have a social media person in your business that is engaging in that all  the time and looking at trends and seeing what are people looking at and how can we  
**[0:29:07-0:29:11](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:29:07):**  get information to that group of growers that are looking at this kind of product.  And is that how you do Ag Twitter?  Is it being across new things all of the time and communicating differently?  What do you see as someone that you say you're on Twitter quite a bit?  What do you look for and think is doing Ag Twitter well?  
**[0:29:21-0:29:28](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:29:21):**  I love Ag Twitter where there is sharing of information in what is a competitive environment.  I mean, farmers generally are competing against one another.  That's the reality of it.  But there's also lots of things that we share as an industry and do stuff better.  And I love it when I see a big long thread of just a new product, whether it's a deep  
**[0:29:42-0:29:46](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:29:42):**  ripper for ameliorating soils and there's 20 comments about, oh, I've done this and  this is my experience in my soul type and it's probably relevant to you.  I do love that sharing of ideas that's quite liberating, I think, and can advance a decision  making on a new product or a new practice can actually make the timeframe for adoption  much quicker than what it otherwise would be.  
**[0:30:03-0:30:08](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:30:03):**  That thread that's not necessarily one person saying this is all of my thoughts, but it's  the community chipping in around their view on and their experience.  Absolutely.  And how do you think farmers or your customers, how have you experienced folks getting more  savvy or also the disruptions of the last few years?  
**[0:30:23-0:30:26](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:30:23):**  Any comments on what you're thinking about for your company talking about all of this?  I sell it with weather stations and soil moisture information, but people use it every day.  So I'm very fortunate that what I sell is highly valuable for decision making, essentially  weather stations for spray application or seeding or harvest.  It's used frequently.  
**[0:30:46-0:30:50](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:30:46):**  And so I get positive feedback about, oh, it's the most commonly used thing besides  my phone on the farm is the information you provide.  In that regard, that's useful and nice to know, but there's other options out there  as well in this whole ag tech space.  So yes, there is more competition in regards to sensors going on farm and lower cost sensors.  
**[0:31:05-0:31:09](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:31:05):**  Getting back to one of the earlier points I made, there is still very few people that  want to live regionally and sit down with a grower and say, this is how it's going to  help you make better decisions on farm.  And until we see more of people living regionally and doing those on farm trips, my competition  is going to be limited, I think, because it's a face to face interaction is still very important  
**[0:31:28-0:31:29](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:31:28):**  and still very critical.  Sorting through these two discussions offered some powerful insights, not only for ag software  companies looking to do business with sophisticated farm customers, but also for anyone in ag  tech who wants to get a sense of where the current blind spots might exist.  First, it's really important to pay attention to this transition from a buyer beware world  
**[0:31:47-0:31:52](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:31:47):**  in ag software, where making the sale was mostly about education as the vendor held  all the info, to a seller beware world where farmers know a lot about their options and  are highly choosy, even demanding about what they want.  In our conversation with Jason and Darren, we talked about how this change means companies  must be careful with a customer's first experience in a demo or trial.  
**[0:32:11-0:32:14](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:32:11):**  I'd say the effects are way more wide ranging than that.  And end to end customer experience really matter.  It makes sense then that the ag software space is not dominated by a single player and I'd  say is unlikely to be in the future.  Farm businesses have specific wants and needs.  
**[0:32:28-0:32:32](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:32:28):**  And as Leet pointed out, they're communicating constantly, trading tips, best practices and  drawbacks.  And for vendors, when harnessed correctly, this is a good thing.  If only a few farmers engage with your software, fewer farmers will talk about it and the more  irrelevant it will become in this highly social marketplace.  
**[0:32:46-0:32:50](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:32:46):**  I think Leet's point about the endemic lack of service, both for hardware and software  tools and of connectivity, are also worth elevating.  Though the Trimble guys focused on the importance of the final touch point before the sale,  for so many customers, the more critical success point is the first touch after the sale.  Missing the ball on this side of the equation might be less immediately impactful for companies,  
**[0:33:08-0:33:12](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:33:08):**  after all, you've already gotten the sale, but the risk of leaving a customer unable  to use your tool during the time period when they're most excited about it will have  long-term negative consequences.  This is such a key point for ag tech companies out there, thinking about the total cost of  ownership and whether you can really support your product, because even if it is sold through  
**[0:33:27-0:33:32](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:33:27):**  a channel, when it's your logo on the device, you're the one getting a phone call.  So while buyers might be more aware of what they want than ever before, that shouldn't  mean that they're on their own after the deal is done.  And that's it for another episode of Ag Tech So What.  Thanks to our guests, Jason McNeese and Darren Walford of Trimble, Leet Wilksch from AgBite,  
**[0:33:46-0:33:51](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:33:46):**  and a special thanks to our producer, Caleb Connor, for helping bring us this story.  And thanks again to our partner for this episode and the coming two episodes, Trimble Agriculture.  And of course, thank you for listening.  For more information on any of the resources mentioned in this podcast episode, please  visit our website, tenacious.ventures.  
**[0:34:05-0:34:06](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/from-buyer-beware-to-seller-beware-in-agtech#t=0:34:05):**  I'm Sarah Nolette.  Catch you next time.  