### Agtech - So What?  (2022-00-05)
**[0:00:00-0:00:06](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, and welcome to Ag Tech So What, brought to you by Tenacious Ventures.  I'm Sarah Nolette.  A quick note, if you're excited to hear how fun2 fundraising is going, make sure you sit  tight through to the end of the show.  If you do, you'll get to hear a bunch of juicy insights that Matthew and I have landed on  
**[0:00:16-0:00:19](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:00:16):**  while raising over the past few weeks.  And if you're still hungry for more after that, make sure you check in with us on socials  and visit the website in the show notes for more info.  Pretty much wherever you are in the world right now, there is a good amount of uncertainty  in the finance sector.  
**[0:00:33-0:00:37](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:00:33):**  And though Ag Tech tends to play in the venture world rather than the debt space, rising interest  rates had us thinking about how our colleagues in the banking world are thinking about Ag  and climate investments.  When I look at sustainability, all it is is just the transition from the legacy economy  to the sustainable economy.  
**[0:00:50-0:00:54](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:00:50):**  And it's going to be through innovation and technology and investment.  And the bank realizes that because we're helping our existing clients by doing that as well.  That's Rami Basra, senior VP and national sustainable tech practice leader at Wells  Fargo.  Today, he joined his colleague, Carol R. Flynn, food and agribusiness industries advisor,  
**[0:01:10-0:01:14](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:01:10):**  to chat about the bank's current Ag Tech vision and investment focuses.  Rami cut his teeth in renewable energy, whereas Carol has a more conventional ag background.  Today, they work with both new and legacy food and ag clients at Wells Fargo.  Now, we don't spend a ton of time talking to banks here on the podcast, but given where  we sit in the Ag Tech ecosystem, we thought it would be interesting to compare notes with  
**[0:01:32-0:01:37](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:01:32):**  folks who sit in somewhat similar seats at a very different institution.  I'll drop you in where Rami is explaining more about the team's role.  So we were actually one of the first, I think the first large money center bank to have  a, we used to be called the clean tech group back in the day when I first started 10 years  ago.  
**[0:01:49-0:01:53](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:01:49):**  And that's probably, I think primarily because we're based here in San Francisco where the  BC community has spawned.  And so there's a lot of investor activity around sustainability here.  Like the solar industry started here, the battery industry, a lot of innovation started  here as an extension of, of Silicon Valley.  
**[0:02:06-0:02:10](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:02:06):**  So being here in San Francisco, I think that's was the impetus for this investing.  We were pretty early into it at that time.  It was just Wells Fargo and a few other small tech banks that were covering sustainability.  And this is well before you saw a lot of IPOs and that was clean tech 1.0, which wasn't  necessarily kind to investors, but it's something that we're really close to and have invested  
**[0:02:27-0:02:28](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:02:27):**  in.  Do you see parallels between clean tech and ag tech?  And I guess what, what lessons can ag tech take from clean tech in terms of avoiding  some of those perils?  I'd say yes.  
**[0:02:39-0:02:43](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:02:39):**  It's not very uncommon where we're typically working with series a to large publicly traded  mid-corp type companies and folks within that ecosystem we see moving around.  So you'll see somebody who was the chief general counsel for a solar developer.  That's now working at a general counsel at a CEA, a controlled environmental ag company.  So you see a lot of that cross pollination of talent and they're bringing some of those  
**[0:03:03-0:03:08](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:03:03):**  experiences that they developed and garnered in solar over into controlled environmental  ag, for example.  And I think that's awesome because there's a lot of lessons learned in solar that parallel  this.  I spent a lot of time in electric vehicles and the EV transportation sector, a lot of  
**[0:03:19-0:03:24](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:03:19):**  lessons learned because it's heavy cap backs initially, longer innovation times, a lot  of R and D investing.  Maybe the way you structure contracts to your offtakes or to your customers, garnering customer  adoption, accessing financing capital, debt capital.  You know, as you transition from equity funding to debt funding.  
**[0:03:39-0:03:41](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:03:39):**  So there's a lot of parallels there that you see.  And that's why I think you see that intellectual capital moving amongst these sectors as well.  It's very, very common.  Yeah, that makes a ton of sense to me, Romy, given what you said about the kind of unique  dynamics of financing some of these heavier capex investments that we need in ag tech.  
**[0:03:58-0:04:02](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:03:58):**  Like we can't eat software, so we need physical things and stuff that moves physical things.  And yet from a venture perspective, it's been tough in some cases originally in clean tech  and in early ag tech to think about getting these businesses to scale.  Where would you point to to gain that confidence?  Is it talent?  
**[0:04:14-0:04:18](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:04:14):**  Like you said, is it there's more project finance out there or debt terms are different  or what would you point to as some of the kind of unlock codes that maybe didn't exist  in the early clean tech world?  I think it definitely talent people who know how to run a cash burning company and be efficient  and make sure that they can scale.  
**[0:04:32-0:04:34](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:04:32):**  Because that's the biggest challenge is scaling.  Because many times in these sectors, there is adoption, there's customer adoption, but  how do you run a successful company?  That's the hardest part.  And that's the non-sexy part of it.  
**[0:04:43-0:04:47](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:04:43):**  So people who've been through the trenches there and know how to manage that, I think  that's key, how to get talent, those types of things, but how to also position your company  for debt capital.  Because that's what any company, once you start scaling or successful, how can you get  away from that dilutive, more expensive equity capital and get that repeatable, scalable,  
**[0:05:03-0:05:07](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:05:03):**  lower cost of capital to scale your business is really important.  So just people who've been through all of that, it's a big differentiator.  I know in the VC community, you look at the management team, in the debts community as  well, and we do equity as well, but on the debt side, that's a really important piece  of the puzzle.  
**[0:05:19-0:05:20](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:05:19):**  So maybe we'll flip the tables.  We get asked this all the time, so I'll ask you how you'd answer it.  If you're a startup or I'm a startup, I come to you, I say, look, I'm thinking about raising  money.  I'm a series A stage company.  
**[0:05:29-0:05:31](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:05:29):**  Romy, should I raise equity?  Should I raise debt?  And should I raise it from you as a bank versus the venture community?  How would you answer that question?  Yeah.  
**[0:05:37-0:05:42](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:05:37):**  So if it's a series A company, candidly, it's going to be tough for them to access debt  initially, because typically a series A, just the stage that they're in, they might not  even be regenerating revenues yet.  They're definitely burning cash and they should be because they're growing, they're getting  market share.  
**[0:05:53-0:05:55](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:05:53):**  So that's typically equity risk.  So with that type of risk profile, equity is better suited for you because they're more  patient, the more flexible terms, it's dilutive, but you've got that kind of runway.  And then you're also able to tap into that equity investors talent, that guidance that  you did investors provide is super critical, that hands-on guidance.  
**[0:06:14-0:06:19](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:06:14):**  Sometimes that's a little bit more challenging for a debt provider at that stage.  So I would say being honest and candid and realizing you're going to be equity funded.  There's other sources of capital.  So say we can provide capital Wells Fargo at that stage for those reasons I mentioned  cashflow burn, et cetera.  
**[0:06:32-0:06:35](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:06:32):**  There's partners we work with that might be an equipment leasing company.  That's really familiar with the sector.  So there are other sources or pockets or buckets of capital out there.  And that's where we would guide them to is where you can get that and then try to provide  them insights where you need to be to get our debt capital to provide that guidance.  
**[0:06:51-0:06:53](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:06:51):**  And then they should be thinking of those thresholds to meet.  And as they grow their business.  Got it.  So then zoom forward, I come back to you in, in say two years, I've grown a ton or 18 months  or nine months in the last couple of years, I've grown a ton and, and I'm ready, I think  
**[0:07:04-0:07:06](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:07:04):**  for a round that's going to include equity and debt.  I've got a cashflow is not quite cash positive but something that's consistent and repeatable.  There's maybe a line of sight to what the future will look like.  I'm ready for debt.  Why would I choose Wells Fargo or how would I think about a debt generally and be Wells  
**[0:07:20-0:07:21](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:07:20):**  Fargo in particular?  Yeah.  So the first part is like what, like the types of debt.  So you've got like equipment financing.  We do that.  
**[0:07:29-0:07:33](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:07:29):**  Then there's venture debt where we look at the runway liquidity runway, who your investors  are and their level of support.  Then there's asset based lending where we're lending against your accounts receivable.  You might be in a cash burn position growing very quickly, but you've got some great AR  you've got some inventory we can lend again.  
**[0:07:45-0:07:49](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:07:45):**  So those kinds of basic metrics or parameters are things that we look at.  And then why Wells Fargo?  So we're the largest food and ag lender in the country.  We've been doing it over for a hundred years.  So we've got these massive legacy relationships, which when you think about it as a company,  
**[0:08:00-0:08:01](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:08:00):**  who do I work with?  It's not just capital.  That's obviously huge.  But who can provide that connectivity who can provide introductions who could provide  introductions to JV partners to help me do a manufacturing facility that takes a lot  
**[0:08:13-0:08:15](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:08:13):**  of catbacks.  Do you find that on the traditional ag side, like you're talking to folks in the existing  industry, I know my experience has been being in a room of livestock producers and talking  about alternative protein and you get a couple of light bulbs going on, but maybe a couple  of shoes thrown at you as well.  
**[0:08:29-0:08:33](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:08:29):**  And how do you have that conversation sort of challenging and exploring what the future  might look like, even though sometimes those conversations are difficult?  When I think of this sector and I think of technology and legacy companies, I think of  innovation and disruption.  And I think many times, and this applies to all of sustainability, sustainable tech companies  
**[0:08:51-0:08:57](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:08:51):**  are only the very few select ones who are very vision oriented and forward thinking,  get it early, but most are apprehensive or you're skeptical about what these companies  are going to do.  And that's fair because innovation is super hard.  It takes a long time, especially like leapfrog innovation.  
**[0:09:09-0:09:12](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:09:09):**  So I think some of these legacy companies tend to be pretty skeptical.  In some of the meetings I've been to where I've joined some of our legacy bankers on  calls, there's always like one person on the group of five who's like super championing  innovation and let's get into these areas.  And then there's some folks, maybe the majority of them who are very skeptical.  
**[0:09:28-0:09:32](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:09:28):**  So it takes a while for them to get comfortable with these sectors and why they should JV  why should they invest those types of things.  I think it's very typical with all of tech.  Really.  We see that across the board.  
**[0:09:39-0:09:44](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:09:39):**  You mentioned the indoor ag space that as I understand it is an area you guys have invested  in.  Is that right?  We have a Wells Fargo innovation incubator program, and I actually just joined the board  on recently, but we've been at it for seven years now.  
**[0:09:53-0:09:59](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:09:53):**  And so that's where we're investing in early stage pre-series A companies by way of grants.  And so that's where we've been putting capital out at the very early stage.  So it's a holistic approach there.  But the most recent cohort we did was focused on egg tech and it was focused on CEA.  So our indoor lighting companies robotics plant genomics, that kind of stuff.  
**[0:10:15-0:10:19](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:10:15):**  So that's where we've deployed capital or at the earliest stage through our VC arm,  we've invested in some alternative protein areas and in the e-grocery ugly foods category,  those areas and food tech.  So that's where we've invested in.  And then my team, we're really focused more on providing debt capital and banking services.  
**[0:10:32-0:10:37](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:10:32):**  So we have banking relationships and we're continually looking at in terms of the indoor  farming space providing project level farm debt.  And that's what we're working on right now.  So my sense of the indoor farming industry, how we've thought about it for a long time  is you've got the businesses that are selling farms.  
**[0:10:50-0:10:53](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:10:50):**  You've got businesses that are selling produce and you've got businesses that are selling  sort of picks and shovels, whether that's lighting technologies, seeds, genetics, robots,  whatever it might be.  Can you talk about roughly how you guys have broken down the category and are there types  of business models that you are finding more or less well-suited to debt and to scalability  
**[0:11:08-0:11:09](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:11:08):**  as well?  Yeah.  So I would say where we've seen the most scale is actually the CEA players themselves, the  growers.  They're the ones who seem to be attracting the most investor capital and the ones who  
**[0:11:19-0:11:24](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:11:19):**  are going from farm number one to five to some of them are got 12 now and they've all  got big growth plans and growing and they're sold out of product.  So that's where we've been having the most dialogue and seeing the most scale.  The ones who make the picks and shovels and the ones who are doing robotics or software,  we haven't seen the scale yet, candidly, but that's happening, but just not to the scale  
**[0:11:40-0:11:43](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:11:40):**  that we're seeing in the growers themselves.  And the pushback on the indoor farming space in terms of the growers that we've thought  a lot about is a sort of energy costs and getting to unit economics that make sense.  So I'd love comments on that.  And then market size.  
**[0:11:54-0:11:58](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:11:54):**  I heard someone from a consulting firm the other day say they had done a deep dive and  that there's more venture dollars that have gone into CEA than the total size of the lettuce  market that the CEA growers are growing for.  So a bit of skepticism there.  How would you respond?  
**[0:12:07-0:12:10](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:12:07):**  Well, that's an interesting stat.  I thought the lettuce market was massive.  They're talking like billions.  I don't think there's that much has gone into indoor farming yet.  And there is a lot of skepticism around this right now.  
**[0:12:18-0:12:24](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:12:18):**  Now, like I said earlier, all of the growers that we've talked to, the indoor CEA players,  they're sold out of product.  So it's not a demand issue.  It's just a margin issue.  And that typically comes just like with solar, just like we see in the electric vehicle space.  
**[0:12:33-0:12:35](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:12:33):**  It's a scale game.  So it's a little bit of a land grab right now who can raise enough equity capital to  continue scaling.  So that's what we're seeing.  In order to get those costs down, the equipment costs are still too high.  
**[0:12:46-0:12:48](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:12:46):**  Development costs are still too high.  And so that's what everybody's going to be working on and everybody is working on.  And there's different models within CEA, right, as well.  The greenhouse model versus a truly warehouse vertical farm and the economics there.  And some are taking much more tech risk with pure robotics focus, and then some are more  
**[0:13:04-0:13:06](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:13:04):**  traditional labor.  So I think that the jury is out, you know, how this is going to all happen and scale.  But there still needs to be more tech innovation.  We need to get that cost structure down.  I think that's the key part of it.  
**[0:13:16-0:13:20](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:13:16):**  But what I'd like to see is more incentives, like in the solar industry.  Like there should be an investment tax credit for the CEA space.  Because here in California, we're in droughts, there's so much, I mean, you go all over the  world, there's drought, and there's water issues.  And in California, I got fined a couple of years ago for watering my lawn too much.  
**[0:13:33-0:13:36](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:13:33):**  This is an ongoing thing we've been dealing with.  So when you think about climate, this is a great solution to that.  But there needs to be more policy around it to get more capital and to lower the cost  of capital down.  Because most of these farms are still being financed with equity.  
**[0:13:48-0:13:52](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:13:48):**  We've seen a little bit of debt capital come in, not enough to bring the cost of capital  down.  So that's a factor in it as well.  So we just need innovation on all pieces of this puzzle.  And that's only going to come with time and scale, just like we saw with solar.  
**[0:14:02-0:14:07](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:14:02):**  So there's all these lessons learned that are going to be applicable to the CEA space.  That's happening in real time.  And one other point around that, when you think about the CEA players, they've just  been using their own balance sheet and their own investor capital.  Ideally, it'd be great if they're partnering with, let's say, the REITs out there who see  
**[0:14:20-0:14:21](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:14:20):**  this secular asset class theme.  We're the largest real estate lender in the country.  So we see a lot of interest from the REITs who say, we'll help you build this 300,000  square foot facility.  We know how to do that.  
**[0:14:31-0:14:32](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:14:31):**  We did it with data centers.  We did it in other sectors.  We can do it here.  We'll provide that capital, that expertise.  So it doesn't take you a year to do the permitting and build out a farm.  
**[0:14:40-0:14:43](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:14:40):**  We can do it in three months or whatever that timeframe is.  And then we can provide you all the TI's, the tenant improvements.  So that'll bring your cost to capital down and your execution time down dramatically.  So they should be partnering with that and just focusing on their core business of the  farm.  
**[0:14:55-0:14:56](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:14:55):**  And I think you'll start seeing more of that.  I'd like to make a couple of comments about market share really quickly.  That question is of real interest to me as well.  And I don't think at this point, the products coming out of vertical farming or indoor farming  are being labeled enough so that the consumer understands what they're purchasing.  
**[0:15:11-0:15:13](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:15:11):**  Because there's two elements to spending your dollar.  One is purpose and the second is performance quality.  Is it a true substitute?  Is there some perceived improvement that I'll pay a premium for?  And when I dove into some of that analysis today and some Nielsen data, I was not able  
**[0:15:27-0:15:30](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:15:27):**  to pull enough of that out for me to get a good answer.  So I think we're going to get better at that.  I think there are some consumers out there that want to purchase the purpose, want to  purchase potentially the local aspect, the water issues.  And for the conventional players, there's a seasonality aspect.  
**[0:15:47-0:15:53](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:15:47):**  So when we have drought, when we have windows of opportunity in our conventional growing  year, those indoor farms are going to be able to provide during those windows in ways we  couldn't do before.  So we're going to segment the market and I'm going to be interested in that as that comes  about because some of the consumers are going to buy frankly on price and substitution.  
**[0:16:11-0:16:17](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:16:11):**  Consumers will buy with a premium attached to either organic or vertically farmed or  some purpose statement from the brand.  So there's going to be a lot that sorts itself out as the market develops.  And I'm thinking we'll know a lot more in three years and I'm really having a hard time  reconciling the numbers that I'm hearing from the indoor farming folks to the bigger market.  
**[0:16:34-0:16:36](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:16:34):**  It doesn't mean that there's not real revenues.  It's obviously getting traction.  But as soon as us analysts can get a better feel and some more confidence in those numbers,  I think that'll help everybody in the space.  And one of the potential value propositions or touted value propositions is really that  
**[0:16:50-0:16:56](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:16:50):**  sustainability aspect for these indoor farms, which my understanding is that depends on  running these factories based on renewable energy, which my understanding is also that  is not currently the case.  So I'd be curious how you guys are seeing those sustainability conversations and proof  points play out.  
**[0:17:08-0:17:12](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:17:08):**  In my conversations with the CEA players, initially they're not focused on deploying  renewable energy in their facility and they're being smart, right?  Because the renewable energy is expensive.  So if you're in Texas or someplace and your local energy source might be cheaper than  renewable energy or if you're in Kentucky, let's say.  
**[0:17:24-0:17:26](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:17:24):**  So we haven't seen that, but now we are.  Now we're seeing, okay, on their third farm or their fourth farm, they're starting to  deploy renewable energy with solar plus storage.  So initially they just had to be really careful with their investor capital and use it to  just build out the farm and prove it out and get some product out there.  
**[0:17:41-0:17:44](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:17:41):**  And now they're going to start going to those next stages of, again, part of that whole  cost puzzle, bringing energy costs down, right?  Because these facilities use a tremendous amount of energy as you know.  And today sitting here in August, 2022, we've got a decently challenging interest rate environment.  How does that impact your kind of conviction around these companies getting to scale?  
**[0:18:01-0:18:05](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:18:01):**  So it hasn't been a big issue yet because like I said, most of them are, they're equity  funded.  They're not using debt yet.  So it hasn't been a big issue in tech.  I think where it's heard tech is valuations and it's seen it today in the stock market,  
**[0:18:13-0:18:17](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:18:13):**  but it hasn't really factored, I think, into the debt build out for farms.  I guess I can imagine if there's a business plan that includes debt down the line, the  economics of what that might look like are changing.  Does that kind of cascade down?  I think you could overlay that with potential incentives, like you said, and whether that's  
**[0:18:29-0:18:34](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:18:29):**  on the cost capital side or probably more likely on the sustainability incentive side,  like with solar.  I think that's a fair point.  Biologically, right, it will affect your business plan, but if you look at where rates are now  versus historically, they're still pretty low.  
**[0:18:43-0:18:47](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:18:43):**  We're just so used to being in zero interest rate environment, we're spoiled.  I think that's totally a fair point.  When you guys think about the value proposition of Wells Fargo, both in advising the existing  legacy, quote unquote, client base, or talking to these more innovative kind of ag tech companies  working in the venture landscape, how do you guys think about your competition and value  
**[0:19:05-0:19:06](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:19:05):**  proposition?  I think you've got a lot of different pinnacles here and a lot of value, but big company,  how well can you defend the, we really get the early stage space and on the early stage  side, how well can you defend the we're really agile and a great person to work with?  I think what we like to say is we have a holistic approach to this sectors.  
**[0:19:23-0:19:25](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:19:23):**  So we don't come in and out of markets.  We have a market, we invest in it, we take a long-term approach.  And that's because when we think about ag and food, we've been at it for so long.  We're not going anywhere.  This is just one piece of the puzzle.  
**[0:19:37-0:19:39](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:19:37):**  So that's the kind of way to think about it.  And all those other things we mentioned up front in terms of connectivity and those things  too.  I think that's how we think about it.  And we understand innovation is hard in my team in technology banking.  
**[0:19:49-0:19:51](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:19:49):**  We understand let's be candid.  A lot of companies don't make it at the early stage.  It's just the nature of the beast.  And so you have to be patient and have a holistic approach and still try to provide value, whether  it's even if you can't provide debt, you're providing banking services.  
**[0:20:03-0:20:04](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:20:03):**  Every company needs that.  So we take that holistic approach.  When we started this conversation, we talked about your role, especially Romian, with the  kind of sustainability title.  When we zoom out and look at a task force or climate disclosure and SEC regulations  
**[0:20:18-0:20:23](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:20:18):**  and ESG pressures, how are you seeing that impact this landscape?  Is that a driver for the bank?  And what are some of the threads you think will be pulling on into the future of the  ag tech space as there's more pressure on ESG and climate reporting?  It's a huge driver for us.  
**[0:20:34-0:20:40](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:20:34):**  We announced a few years ago, a $500 billion sustainable finance commitment to deploy that  much capital by 2030.  And we're well on our way there.  And so it's a huge commitment and focus by the bank.  We're hiring a ton of new people around this initiative.  
**[0:20:50-0:20:52](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:20:50):**  We're building out teams around it.  It's top of mind at the C-suite.  And so when I look at sustainability, all it is just the transition from the legacy  economy to the sustainable economy.  And it's going to be through innovation and technology and investment.  
**[0:21:07-0:21:11](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:21:07):**  And the bank realizes that because we're helping our existing clients by doing that as well.  Not only are my tech clients and folks we talk to, but our legacy businesses as well.  Can I ask you the question, Sarah?  Yeah, of course.  So as an investor, how are you thinking about valuations now and what's been going on in  
**[0:21:25-0:21:26](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:21:25):**  the world?  So, I mean, I think the kind of common wisdom is decently true that private markets lag  public markets.  And so we're seeing that kind of impact now as we get into Q3.  And I think there'll still be some rounds that were launched in Q1 closing now.  
**[0:21:38-0:21:39](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:21:38):**  And so the data will kind of lag.  We sit at the seed stage.  And so I think initially decent amount of insulation exceeds stage pricing because you're  not tending to look at those public market multiples.  That said, as the deals that kind of B and C look less appealing are some of the bigger  
**[0:21:53-0:21:58](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:21:53):**  firms coming down into the earlier stages and is that pushing seed stage pricing up?  We haven't seen that yet.  And I think especially in ag tech where it's decently complex and requires that kind of  sector specific insight, we would argue for obvious reasons.  We haven't seen as much of that, but that's what other VCs are certainly talking about  
**[0:22:10-0:22:14](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:22:10):**  in the space that there's now shifting to be a bit of pressure on seed stage valuations.  We'll see though.  And I think in those early stages, if it's going to be a massive company, it's about  finding the right partner to work with both for the founder and for the venture side.  So we're still like really bullish.  
**[0:22:23-0:22:25](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:22:23):**  We think it's a great time to invest.  And frankly, like the climate can't wait.  So we can talk about markets and prices all day long, but we've got a way bigger problem  on our doorstep.  And that's the big opportunity that we're focused on is unlocking some of this transition  
**[0:22:38-0:22:44](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:22:38):**  into a future that's ecologically sustainable and carbon positive and livable and all those  kinds of things.  So we're trying to be really disciplined in the markets, but also look at the bigger opportunity  here and bigger challenge because that's really what it's all about.  This kind of conversation for us and hopefully for you offers some valuable insight into  
**[0:22:56-0:23:01](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:22:56):**  how a more legacy finance player in the ag sector is thinking about innovation.  First, it was interesting to hear the perspective of an investor from the cleantech space and  what he brings to ag tech.  This path is a well-trod one actually.  And I think in the wake of some large scale crashing and burning in cleantech in the mid  
**[0:23:13-0:23:17](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:23:13):**  to late 2000s, a lot of folks made their way to agriculture.  I agree with Rami that there are certainly lessons to be adopted from those experiences  and that the market has changed so we can avoid some of the pitfalls.  From our perspective, I think there are even more valuable lessons coming from the ag tech  1.0 companies, not least because in ag tech, like other tech spaces, time moves fast and  
**[0:23:34-0:23:39](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:23:34):**  the ag tech and finance worlds have experienced dramatic changes in the last two years alone,  let alone the last five or 15.  Next, I was interested to hear that what Rami thinks is needed in the controlled environment  and ag space is both more tech advancement to reduce inputs like energy costs and more  policy.  
**[0:23:52-0:23:56](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:23:52):**  The first is a barrier that is going to be super hard to overcome, not least because  sunlight is free and electricity is not.  Maybe policy, to Rami's point, could cause electricity for CEA to be free or nearly free,  but it seems like a dangerous game on the investment side to make a bet with the hope  that policymakers in the US or anywhere else will take specific action in a reasonable  
**[0:24:13-0:24:14](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:24:13):**  time period.  Finally, I appreciated that on the question of what the market potential of, say, growing  lettuce in controlled environment agriculture actually is, there seemed to be some sunlight  between Rami and Carol's positions.  I think Rami, perhaps because he's a bit more of a tech optimist, sees much more of  
**[0:24:29-0:24:34](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:24:29):**  the upside potential in indoor ag, while Carol is holding out for more data to be convinced  that controlled environment produce has staying power and scale potential in the market.  In our research, we've come down a little closer to Carol's side, especially for things  like vertical farming, though Rami's optimism about the power of scale is understandable.  We found at least a few examples where focusing on both costs and higher value markets can  
**[0:24:53-0:24:55](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:24:53):**  alter the economics significantly.  Overall, I think Rami and Carol were great sports in today's discussion, and though  they weren't able to share more specific stories about investments they've made or  passed on, we'll be keeping an eye on the movements of groups like Wells Fargo going  forward.  
**[0:25:07-0:25:11](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:25:07):**  Before we say goodbye, as promised, we wanted to share some snippets of our fundraising  journey in the past couple weeks.  Matthew and I sat down to talk about what's working and what's hard, and perhaps unsurprisingly,  we found ourselves thinking about the advice that we give to our portfolio companies.  Have a listen.  
**[0:25:22-0:25:26](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:25:22):**  On one hand, it's like some sort of angst about not having enough names in the top of  the funnel and progressing them through.  But on the other hand, I feel certain that I would say to a founder, unless it's a warm  intro, you're wasting your time.  And I find that to be a conflict because there's some kind of reflecting back, the founder  
**[0:25:42-0:25:47](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:25:42):**  of Contrarian was talking back to his original journey and just the whole idea of hustling  to set up a fund.  Like he hadn't done time in an existing VC and hadn't been a successful angel investor  and just literally had an idea and wanted to pursue it.  And I felt that resonated pretty strongly with where we came from first time around.  
**[0:26:02-0:26:07](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:26:02):**  So it feels like on one hand, yeah, there's gotta be just a lot of hustle, a lot of being  prepared to find ways to get to people.  But I think, yeah, for sure this time around the being able to tell a story about how we  are delivering impact and how it feels increasingly important to scale that up now, not later.  Yeah.  
**[0:26:24-0:26:26](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:26:24):**  The journey is up and down.  Like you get punched in the face all the time and there's some element of just like, pick  yourself up, go onto the next one, move on.  That is just part of the deal.  But there's also, I think an underlying emotional toll that fundraising takes of how much of  
**[0:26:41-0:26:44](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:26:41):**  a threat to your self-worth or confidence is it.  And I had someone say the other day, Oh, I hate fundraising because it's like the no's  are so personal.  Whereas like for a founder, you can be about their product or their market or whatever.  And in some ways where we came from as advisors, when we were selling advisory services, a  
**[0:26:56-0:26:59](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:26:56):**  no was like, no, we don't want to work with you and Matthew.  Like it was so personal or when it was just me, it was just like, Nope, you're not smart  enough or you can't help us.  And so with fun one, it was awesome.  Cause it was like, this is a product, it's a thing, it's a model.  
**[0:27:07-0:27:11](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:27:07):**  And so there was a little bit of distance there, but somehow for fun too, it feels personal  again, like you don't believe in us or our model or our impact or our portfolio and finding  the right balance of distance from that, that it's not a.  Criticism of who we are as humans or what we're doing.  Sometimes it's just not a fit.  
**[0:27:24-0:27:25](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:27:24):**  It's not a match.  And yet also finding ways to build up that bank of confidence to draw down on when you  need it and sure there's get more sleep and work out and that kind of run a marathon,  not a sprint.  But another one was just like coming back to the, why, why do we do this?  
**[0:27:39-0:27:40](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:27:39):**  What is important about this?  And I know for me getting out and seeing swarm farm and spending time with farmers who are  using their robots that didn't and wouldn't have their robots.  If we hadn't invested in, been on this journey with them, not because we've built the robots,  not because it's our company, but just like we played this catalytic role in creating  
**[0:27:55-0:27:59](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:27:55):**  it and that's having this tangible impact that you could see.  It was like, all right, when it gets tough or someone says no, I can draw on that to  come back to and not everyone's going to believe it or see it, but there's a bit of a deeper  pool.  Thanks again for going along on this fundraising journey with us.  
**[0:28:12-0:28:15](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:28:12):**  And if you'd like to learn more about our work and how to get involved in fun too, please  visit the website in the show notes.  So that's it for another episode of Ag Tech So What.  Thanks again to our guests, Rami Basra and Carol Arflin.  And of course, thank you for listening.  
**[0:28:25-0:28:29](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/legacy-finance-eyes-agtech-with-wells-fargo#t=0:28:25):**  For more information on any of the resources mentioned in this podcast, please visit our  website tenacious.ventures.  I'm Sarah Nolette.  Catch you next time.  