### Agtech - So What?  (2019-59-06)
**[0:00:00-0:00:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to the Ag Tech So What podcast.  Emerging technologies are rapidly changing the global agricultural industry.  We believe that this revolution is only getting started, but there's still too much hype out  there and too big of a disconnect between ag and ag tech.  So on this show, we try to bridge that gap.  
**[0:00:25-0:00:29](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:00:25):**  In each episode, we bring you the story of a different innovator in agriculture and try  to find the place where ag and tech meet.  I'm your host, Sarah Nolet.  This week's episode is a live panel from the Ag Tech Meetup in Sydney.  The topic of the panel is collaboration between researchers and startups in ag tech.  
**[0:00:53-0:00:58](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:00:53):**  You'll hear from three guests, Dr. Peter Thorburn, chief research scientist and research group  leader in CSIRO's agriculture and food group, Tegan Nock, co-founder and director of Soil  SeaQuest, and Nick Hazel, founder and CEO of V2 Foods.  Given it was a live event, the audio quality is not perfect.  Sorry about that, but we didn't want you to miss out.  
**[0:01:14-0:01:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:01:14):**  Before we jump in, a brief backstory on this panel.  So a few months ago, Peter and I got to talking about researchers working with startups and  some of the big cultural differences and challenges.  He said he had learned some lessons the hard way, but he was willing to share them.  I told him that he didn't have to go it alone, and so we pulled together this panel with  
**[0:01:32-0:01:34](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:01:32):**  Tegan and Nick.  We start off the panel with a bit of fun.  I asked everyone to share a secret talent, then their normal intro.  You'll hear from Peter first, then Tegan, and then Nick.  My secret talent is, I'm told, a very good sensory memory.  
**[0:01:48-0:01:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:01:48):**  And where that comes in handy is, I'm really into wine, and I love it, and I can do things  like go, oh, that reminds me of when we had a bottle of Clarinvale Shiraz, probably from  Maxwell in 1992, and we're under the gum tree, and our kids were running around or something  like that.  I guess a practical secret talent, too, I'd have to say cake decorating would be mine,  
**[0:02:21-0:02:26](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:02:21):**  which comes in handy when you're about to talk to a researcher about a timeline as a  startup.  I think that's probably the practical application of that one.  My secret talent's probably singing, and it's the reason why I have to rush out at 7 o'clock  tonight because we're singing Für es Requiem in the Opera House, so I sing in the Sydney  
**[0:02:40-0:02:42](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:02:40):**  Philharmonic Choir.  But this year, funnily enough, I don't seem to be singing very much.  The reason Nick hasn't been singing as much is that he's just formed a startup called  V2 Foods.  They only incorporated in January, but they've made some insane progress since then.  
**[0:02:55-0:03:01](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:02:55):**  Basically, a collaboration with CSIRO, Investors Main Sequence, which is a venture capital  fund associated with CSIRO, and Competitive Foods, and a guy called Jack Cowen, who owns  Competitive Foods and Hungry Jacks.  And our mission is to figure out what we can do in this plant-based meat space and do something  really as big as we can to make a difference to sustainability on the planet.  
**[0:03:18-0:03:20](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:03:18):**  So that's kind of our big global mission.  And we've been working at an insane speed with CSIRO and pulling out research and technology  as quickly as we possibly can.  And we launched in Hungry Jacks with their rebel whopper about 10 days ago, 12 days ago,  something like that.  
**[0:03:36-0:03:38](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:03:36):**  And we're just accelerating from there.  So it's been a bit of a wild ride.  My background is R&D multinationals.  I was R&D director for Master Foods, R&D director for PepsiCo.  And I've been teaching innovation, which is actually where I met you, I think.  
**[0:03:49-0:03:52](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:03:49):**  I was teaching innovation at UTS BCII.  I guess my personal background to start with.  So I originally come from a property between Parks and Condobolin.  I am what one of my friends likes to call a drought baby.  So kids who grew up in that millennium drought and only knew red dirt for a very long time  
**[0:04:09-0:04:13](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:04:09):**  were very surprised when we actually saw what a crop really looked like.  So I guess from that context, I went to university and studied ag science.  Had farmed for about seven years back at home and then came back into industry.  A little bit about the soil sequester story, which links into my story.  Throughout the time when I was farming, our agronomist had been working with endophytes.  
**[0:04:32-0:04:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:04:32):**  That's something that he had a real passion for and a speciality in.  Endophytes are microbes that live symbiotically within a plant.  So we'd played around with endophytes on the farm for a long time.  There was some research happening at Sydney Uni that our agronomist was really keen on,  had been watching, and it didn't get funded for a second round.  
**[0:04:51-0:04:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:04:51):**  So as growers who'd been watching that research, a group of us went, you know what, this research  is something really, really important and really means something to us.  It was led by a couple of guys from out west, so Mick Wettenall at Trangie and Guy Webb,  our agronomist from Forbes.  And they picked it up and ran with it and started a not-for-profit and said, this is  
**[0:05:09-0:05:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:05:09):**  something we care about, we're going to try and fund it ourselves.  Through that process, got pulled into this kind of whirlwind of research and looking  at different ways of trying to be able to fund research.  I guess to cut a long story short, it's been quite a few years of pushing and realised  that to really have that financial sustainability and to be able to push that research in a  
**[0:05:30-0:05:34](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:05:30):**  way that will really deliver products for growers and something that's actually practical.  We've stood up a commercialisation next to our not-for-profit to take on investment that  can then allow us to have an R&D pipeline going through.  So we have just gone through our seed series in terms of investment and we're kind of right  at the start of our journey, sitting on top of a cliff, you know, watch this space for  
**[0:05:54-0:05:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:05:54):**  us.  Tegan and the Soil Sequest team will be able to share more soon about their capital raise.  But for now, Tegan was able to say that they've raised about $8.5 million.  So stay tuned for more from them.  Peter rounds out our intros.  
**[0:06:07-0:06:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:06:07):**  I start with being a kid who grew up in the city who was interested in country.  So I went off and studied agriculture.  In doing that, I found out I really love the way soils and plants interact and how that  happens.  And particularly, how do you represent that mathematically?  
**[0:06:22-0:06:29](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:06:22):**  I wound up being a cropping systems modeller, which means I collect data to develop algorithms,  I collect data to test algorithms, I take those algorithms and use them to do stuff.  Always been interested in science and research, but I really like the impact side of research.  But unlike a lot of people, a lot of people say, oh, it's either impact or science.  You're either publishing in nature or you're delivering products to farmers.  
**[0:06:49-0:06:51](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:06:49):**  I actually don't believe in that dichotomy.  I think they go together.  If you're well grounded in what you do in the field, you're looking at impact, you do  better research.  On the other hand, if I'm trying to influence government policy, which is one of the things  
**[0:07:02-0:07:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:07:02):**  I'm really interested in doing, if I can whack down a bunch of international journal papers  on the table, they'll never read them, but I've got instant credit in the room with that.  And I suspect it's the same when you're dealing with people who don't know the technology  side as much as you.  If you're good at your research, you get the credit.  
**[0:07:22-0:07:24](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:07:22):**  It shines through, which then helps you get impact.  And so to me, it's this sort of big roundabout that goes on.  So I work my way up through the ranks in CSIRO.  I lead a group of about 45 multidisciplinary researchers and have some cross-organizational  responsibilities in that area as well.  
**[0:07:38-0:07:42](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:07:38):**  I love Peter's view on research, that impact for industry and good science actually go  hand in hand.  I asked Peter to give us an overview of his collaboration with the ag tech startup, GoTerra,  and share what he's learned.  It was at an event like this in May last year, Olympia Yaga was the sole person, not part  
**[0:07:55-0:07:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:07:55):**  of a panel.  And she's starting up, at that stage, was in the process of just raising capital to  expand her insect farming company.  And she got up there and said, hello, I'm Olympia.  I'm a maggot farmer.  
**[0:08:12-0:08:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:08:12):**  And I was like, okay, this is worth listening to.  And then I think she said the phrase, I call bullshit on that, about four times during  her talk about the whole posturing around startup, raising capital and having to prove  yourself.  And so in the course of the evening, she talked about some problems she had farming her maggots.  
**[0:08:37-0:08:39](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:08:37):**  And as I said, I lead a multidisciplinary group.  I have a team of entomologists who actually know a fair bit about raising insects.  And afterwards, I went up to her and said, hi, I'm Peter.  I'm from CSIRO.  I think you need some maggot husbandry.  
**[0:08:51-0:08:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:08:51):**  And she said, yeah, I sure do.  And so we agreed to, the conversation lasted for about two minutes.  So we said, okay, we'll get in touch.  And we did.  CSIRO has a number of programs to catalyse working with small SMEs where their startups  
**[0:09:10-0:09:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:09:10):**  are not.  One of them is Kickstart, which is a co-funding.  So we quickly said, oh, let's negotiate the Kickstart.  And it was through that that we started getting to know each other and some of the pros and  cons of the different organizations.  
**[0:09:23-0:09:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:09:23):**  But despite the alignment between Olympia and Peter's group, things didn't go exactly  as Peter had planned.  After our first talk with her about the problems they're having in the business and the production  of black soldier flies, we said, okay, we think we understand your problems.  How about we go, and we agreed at this stage, let's have a crack at this.  
**[0:09:43-0:09:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:09:43):**  It's Kickstart with sort of 50-50 funding.  So the SME puts in a dollar.  CSIRO matches it.  And we went away and wrote a draft application, sort of thought about the scale of the work  that would be needed and stuff like that.  
**[0:10:00-0:10:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:10:00):**  And we sent it back to Olympia.  And after a while, we weren't getting a lot of response.  And one thing we learned is she's incredibly busy.  And so we learned to understand that no news wasn't necessarily bad news.  And then it came back saying, I actually am interested in something about 40% of that  
**[0:10:19-0:10:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:10:19):**  size and this, that and the other thing.  And we were crushed.  We didn't know what was going on.  Anyone here who works for a research organization used to write grant proposals and get feedback  and things like that.  
**[0:10:30-0:10:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:10:30):**  But we'd never been in this particular situation before.  So we more or less manufactured a reason to jump on a plane and go to Canberra and see  the facilities and what she was doing.  And in that process, it became really obvious to me that a lot of the things she'd talked  to us about, which at that stage is probably eight weeks before that we'd put in this grant  
**[0:10:51-0:10:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:10:51):**  proposal, they'd already solved.  And so we sat down and I said, okay, like, you know, you're over here, we're here, how  are we going to bring this together?  And in her honesty, she said, listen, we'd really like to work for you.  But while I said at the meetup, how much money we'd raised, it's actually a lot of, in my  
**[0:11:13-0:11:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:11:13):**  words, mouths to feed, there's not a lot left over.  And the investors are really putting us under scrutiny with everything we want to spend.  So I thought, oh, okay, right.  So yeah, let's work to see if there's some common ground.  And so I said to her, I'm really impressed by all the problems that we thought you had  
**[0:11:30-0:11:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:11:30):**  that you subsequently solved.  So you're going at go-terra speed really fast.  And I noticed that the director of CSIRO Agriculture and Food, where I come from today, the business  unit newsletter came out and it was featuring V2 Food.  And he talked about the going at start-up speed in the CSIRO side of that.  
**[0:11:51-0:11:53](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:11:51):**  So I'm glad he's flogged my idea.  And I said, but you know, one of the things about research organisations, our research  is really robust.  You know, if we say A is different to B, A is different to B everywhere, or we know where  it is and where it isn't and things like that.  
**[0:12:05-0:12:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:12:05):**  So can we find a problem that you've got that you need to solve fast, that we've got the  skills and we can travel at go-terra speed with, or something that is so critical to  your business, you need a robust solution.  You know you need to invest in something that's going to take a lot longer.  We came to the former, wrote a sort of a two-phase agreement, a first phase to solve some of  
**[0:12:32-0:12:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:12:32):**  the here and now problems.  They also allowed, I suppose, go-terra to work out whether we actually deliver or not.  And we've negotiated the second phase, which will be happening between now and Christmas.  So a couple insights there that I wrote down.  One, like start-ups are busy, which is something probably everyone knows and everyone's busy,  
**[0:12:49-0:12:51](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:12:49):**  I suppose, but start-ups especially.  The other one is this kind of 80-20 rule, which comes up a lot, that start-ups often  only need things solved to 80% and researchers are often incentivised to solve things to  100%.  So I'm curious, maybe Nick, to hear a little bit more of the V2 origin story, but did you  
**[0:13:05-0:13:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:13:05):**  have any parallels in terms of pace of the organisations working or researchers wanting  to be more kind of 100% correct and you only needed things 80% correct?  Any parallels there?  And Tegan, you do.  So the origin story, we came out of a conversation with Jack and Phil and Martin Cole from CSIRO  
**[0:13:23-0:13:28](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:13:23):**  about this space and was there some technology or some knowledge in CSIRO which can be brought  to bear on that.  And then the decision was taken was on the basis that there was some protein chemistry  and some knowledge in protein chemistry, protein extraction and some knowledge around meat  flavour chemistry, which was sitting in the organisation that, yes, they could bring some  
**[0:13:43-0:13:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:13:43):**  expertise to bear.  And the decision was to do a start-up because it was very clear that the only way we were  going to get that stuff out of CSIRO into anything useful was to actually form a company  around that and that was when they asked me to do it.  Interestingly, the process of CSIRO writing what they call Statements of Work, it's just  
**[0:14:02-0:14:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:14:02):**  so tortuous and crazy because the process is there for attracting funds from external  funds or from, you know, for long-term research.  A lot of work goes into writing a Statement of Work when actually in start-up world you  know broadly what the outcome is and what's useful for you, but you're really not interested  in milestones that may be six months away or three months away or even two weeks away.  
**[0:14:26-0:14:28](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:14:26):**  It's just of no interest whatsoever.  It's get started, do something useful and we'll evaluate it as we go.  And that's something which has been a journey.  I think we've now on like project number 13 or 14 with CSIRO, we're spending a lot of money  with CSIRO and they're getting used to being a little bit looser with the Statements of  
**[0:14:44-0:14:48](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:14:44):**  Work and I'm sort of guaranteeing that I'm not going to hold them to a Statement of Work,  which I think personally is ridiculous, but I will hold them to the effort in achieving  an outcome which I think is important for the consumer.  And it's just a totally different mindset and it's a different world for the researchers  to work for a start-up that's only interested in stuff that's useful for the consumer and  
**[0:15:02-0:15:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:15:02):**  not interested in delivering the Statement of Work in itself.  And I've noticed that also in other organisations like I did some consulting for MLA long-term  research and they would sweat this Statement of Work with all of the milestones and then  you'd have project management teams that would hold people's feet to the fire because they  didn't achieve a milestone.  
**[0:15:21-0:15:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:15:21):**  But no one ever bothered to ask the question, well was that milestone useful?  It was written two years before and it might have been useful in the eye of somebody two  years before, but actually the world has moved on and it's no longer useful and yet the organisation  is still doing its best to deliver a useless milestone.  Crazy.  
**[0:15:38-0:15:42](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:15:38):**  So what's noticeable now is that everyone's a little bit looser now and of course it helps  that it's our money, it's venture capital money.  We're a little bit looser with it.  Speed for us is everything because we're on this wave and we know that if we come up with  a fantastic solution in two years time, well it's too late.  
**[0:15:53-0:15:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:15:53):**  We have to have fantastic solutions now.  But I think also I'm noticing that CSIRO is getting it as well a little bit and they're  becoming a little bit looser in the Statement of Work phase of the research.  I just agree with that one and I'd say that we've had a collaboration ongoing with ANU  for a little while now and from that we've realised that one of the big keys is finding  
**[0:16:14-0:16:18](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:16:14):**  the right researcher or the right researcher group to work with sometimes.  We've paired up with the Borovitz group at ANU and with the way that we're working our  mission is obviously carbon sequestration, looking at climate adaptation and mitigation  for agriculture and their group is hugely aligned in that aspect.  They're working with a lot of other technologies that really sit in this space and have been  
**[0:16:36-0:16:42](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:16:36):**  working with not necessarily start-ups but fast organisations previously and we've found  that a really, really fantastic experience just because they're so driven for the mission  as well.  Obviously the science has to be robust, it's something that they take a lot of time looking  over the way that we're working with methodologies and the likes but it's having that mission  
**[0:16:57-0:17:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:16:57):**  that's aligned up front, you're on the same page and you can start to get straight to  the work as opposed to sometimes going through the bureaucracy of dealing with research institutions.  It's taking the time to find the right person to work with and it makes things an awful  lot easier.  One of the things that gets talked about a lot in the researcher start-up collaborations  
**[0:17:18-0:17:23](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:17:18):**  is IP and that the start-up needs freedom to operate and to raise money, they need to  show that they own the IP but the researcher wants to show return to tax payers or that  otherwise it's getting distributed to everyone.  How have you guys in these projects navigated that challenge?  It's always an issue and CSIRO historically have been really difficult to deal with when  
**[0:17:39-0:17:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:17:39):**  it comes to IP.  With us it's easy, I pay them a lot of money to do research and I own the IP that comes  out of it.  They have freedom to exploit any IP that comes out of it that's come from their knowledge  in areas that are not related to what I'm doing and lots of freedom to publish and get  
**[0:17:54-0:17:59](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:17:54):**  the kudos and the reputation stuff so it's actually relaxed things a bit because it used  to be a bun fight, you know the first six months of any research contract with CSIRO  was a discussion about IP and life's too short, you know you've just got to get over it and  with universities it was even worse in a way because some universities would forget that  their mission was to educate and to push the boundaries of science and you would get into  
**[0:18:18-0:18:20](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:18:18):**  crazy discussions around IP.  I think it's relaxing actually, I think people are realising what's it about, what are we  actually trying to do here and the reality of course is that patent has no value, it  has no value, most patents have no value whatsoever.  We're still obsessed with IP in a world where actually we've just got to be obsessed with  
**[0:18:36-0:18:41](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:18:36):**  speed because actually the prize goes to the ones who were first so yeah I think it's a  journey but I can see already that it's sort of thawing out.  When you're collaborating with another organisation there's things that are of key importance  to you and there's things that are of key importance to them and it's as you develop  that collaboration, work out what's most important to you, what's most important to them and  
**[0:18:57-0:19:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:18:57):**  how can you cater to both so we have a project that's happening over the course of next year  and it's a climate resilient soils network so we're looking at microbes in the agricultural  system from a systems point of view as well as pinpointing actual strains of organisms  that have a particular effect.  So when we're working with researchers on that project we're saying well obviously there's  
**[0:19:22-0:19:26](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:19:22):**  that systems piece that is hugely publishable, like there's so much that we want to share  with everybody that's for common good, common knowledge looking at that systems piece and  how do we actually build carbon within the system but then there's also the piece that  we can gain you know as Soils Sequestion from a commercial point of view in terms of some  of those specific isolates and what we actually want to get out of them in terms of IP so  
**[0:19:45-0:19:49](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:19:45):**  it's step back for a moment and say well what do they want to gain and what do we need to  gain and how can we make a project work for both.  I thought about that long and hard in going into the discussions of Go-Tira and I think  it was very clear in my mind that they own the IP and well as an organisation we have  a range of positions on IP depending on how much of the work is funded by CSIRO.  
**[0:20:09-0:20:14](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:20:09):**  If we're contributing funds to it we generally think we should have a share of the IP.  On the other hand if people are paying a lot of money as you know to quote what you said  then we can be more relaxed so it's a big organisation people are individuals as you  say you've got to get the right people but yeah IP is something that can always be negotiated.  I want to ask all of you if in this journey there's anything in looking back that you  
**[0:20:32-0:20:38](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:20:32):**  would do differently in terms of collaboration or more broadly but things that you've said  oh we kind of botched that one up and wish we had done that differently.  I suppose the opposite story to our experience with Go-Tira specifically has been sitting  down with somebody a start up talking with them getting all excited actually going through  writing a lean business canvas and meeting them and things like that and at the end of  
**[0:20:59-0:21:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:20:59):**  the day they wanted to sell us stuff.  They had a data collection system you know when you scraped away they thought the data  that they were collecting from the farmers they were working with would be super valuable  to an organisation like ours or others and it was all just a fig leaf for can I flog  in my product and I'm sure anyone on the VC side or the start up side can tell an opposite  
**[0:21:25-0:21:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:21:25):**  story where the researcher is coming with a hammer saying can I turn your problem into  a nail sort of thing so it's that complete mismatch and the time it takes to uncover  that would be my lesson.  Looking at the Soil Sequests journey and it's probably not a mistake but it could be something  to reflect on.  
**[0:21:46-0:21:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:21:46):**  It was a period of probably six years that Soil Sequests was operating solely as a not  for profit and was driven off the back of a lot of goodwill.  Certainly a lot of crowd funding happened during that time you know we were driven by  farmers for farmers was the mantra that we were using and obviously trying to be very  true to that statement but it certainly was something that was an uphill battle and we  
**[0:22:10-0:22:15](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:22:10):**  had moments where there were organisations coming to us and saying we want to buy your  science we want to you know have a piece of what you've got and we were very idealistic  about it saying no this is an organisation that's by farmers for farmers we're going  to stay true to that and it took us a long time to work out the model that was still  true to that still true to the mission but enabled us to really get on with the research  
**[0:22:35-0:22:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:22:35):**  in a big way and that was just such a long period of time and it's probably something  that if you're thinking about setting up an alternative model do a lot of research and  look around and see what else there is out there what really works and what can actually  align to that mission to save probably a lot of hours of crowd funding that's not necessarily  needed in some cases.  
**[0:22:56-0:23:01](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:22:56):**  With V2 it's pretty difficult actually because things have gone so fast and we've been lucky  in many ways so it's difficult to say what we did I mean we've made heaps of mistakes  but we've recovered from them days after making mistakes so we've never had a fatal mistake  so that's pretty lucky.  I wish I'd met you earlier that would have been good because that would save me there's  
**[0:23:15-0:23:20](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:23:15):**  me thinking about how are we going to grow legumes in a sustainable way that's carbon  positive the reason why plant-based meat is important is because we want to reduce our  carbon footprint and ultimately we have to suck carbon out of the atmosphere it's already  known obviously that we're at a tipping point we're maybe even past the tipping point we've  got to start doing something drastic here and eating plant-based meat is good than meat  
**[0:23:38-0:23:42](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:23:38):**  or reducing your meat consumption but the next question is going to be how sustainable  were those plants and was it you know and there's a huge difference obviously depending  on how you look after your soils about whether or not you're sequestering carbon or actually  depleting your soils so I'm glad we met because that ultimately for the longevity of our brand  we have to be part of a sustainable Australian ecosystem so live up to the clean green image  
**[0:24:02-0:24:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:24:02):**  that we have abroad and we actually make it true because there's a gap potentially between  our image and what's actually happening from a climate change perspective in Australia  so thanks because that's great I mean we've got we're going to collaborate now.  Hopefully Tegan and Nick do find some ways to collaborate that's really what the meetup  is about people meeting each other and finding ways to work together.  
**[0:24:23-0:24:26](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:24:23):**  The last question for me for the panel was about farmers.  For ag tech and food tech obviously farmers are a key part of the whole equation and we  often talk about the researcher startup collaborations but probably talk less about how some of these  ag tech and food tech businesses work with and how the researchers work with startups  so there's kind of a few angles here one is you know CSIRO on just closed and that was  
**[0:24:46-0:24:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:24:46):**  a big program to help researchers think more about their customers you mentioned before  that Nick through your work you got customer feedback getting passed back to the researchers  and helping them think more customer centric so I don't know if you guys have any comments  on collaboration with farmers and how that is or isn't different or challenging in terms  of where you guys sit.  
**[0:25:06-0:25:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:25:06):**  We do a lot of work with farmers the particular industry that I work most in I mean one of  the things we do have is really deep networks into that farmer community and not only a  reasonably good sense of how they think and what their priorities are and how they operate  their business but also those links to say oh you know you want to talk to someone about  such and such we can do that and we do that regularly so you know when we're developing  
**[0:25:32-0:25:38](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:25:32):**  decision support systems apps and things like that you know have UXD people coming in working  with farmers and getting the right people.  This is all people stuff isn't it you meet an SME people you don't know you get to know  them you work out can you communicate or not farmers likewise and then it becomes a triangle  how you can do with that so a lot of us in agriculture are pretty farmer centric and  
**[0:25:56-0:26:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:25:56):**  have pretty good connections into that and sort of have a understanding of the way farmers  that said it's really interesting when you get challenged by someone from outside that  says oh do you know whether it's the male or the female in the household who's driving  the technology development on the farm or something I've never asked that question so  there's always more to learn.  
**[0:26:19-0:26:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:26:19):**  I couldn't stress that one that sentiment enough either so we talk a lot about farmers  and I would say the one thing that we have to be really conscious of in the ag tech space  is that we use the word farmer but it is not a homogenous group of people you know you  have a huge scope of people who are farming with different values you have a huge scope  of people who are farming with different interests in terms of are they interested in soil health  
**[0:26:45-0:26:49](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:26:45):**  is it precision ag that you know they're focused on people who have different appetites for  risk it's not just engaging I'd say with what you perceive typically as a farmer it's making  sure that you're engaging with the whole spectrum of growers and I guess soil sequests our story  is quite farmer centric but can't stress the importance of making sure that the problem  that you're addressing is actually a problem for farmers and dig deep and make sure that  
**[0:27:10-0:27:14](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:27:10):**  that is the problem challenge your assumptions and make sure it is a problem that you're  actually addressing and constantly have that feedback loop with the growers that you're  working to address that issue for.  I'm not really qualified to be honest I'm not that close to the farms I mean when I  was at PepsiCo I know that a lot of the business model for Frito-Lay globally is really connected  
**[0:27:31-0:27:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:27:31):**  to their ability to connect with farmers and encourage farmers to grow better potatoes  which results in better potato chips and there's a very direct feedback loop to make sure that  that is a reinforcing system and it's a long term system that covers generations you know  generations of farmers learning how to do the right thing variety development soil management  all sorts of things results in a sort of an ecosystem which is profitable for everybody  
**[0:27:55-0:28:00](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:27:55):**  a farmer gets security and it was funny because we were just talking about that is that because  farming is the most risky occupation it's risks that and I say I'm coming from outside  but I know the risks associated are risks that we would never normally take but farmers  take these every day or every year when they decide to so and I wonder what is an ecosystem  which is more resilient and less risky that isn't subject to the global markets where  
**[0:28:22-0:28:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:28:22):**  something happens in Ukraine and suddenly the bottom falls out of the potato market  or something and the farmer thought they were going to make some money and now they make  nothing not through any fault of their own what is that system that we could create around  a sort of a sustainable ecosystem in Australia which combines the sustainability and the  carbon sequestration all the things that we know that is part of the agricultural system  
**[0:28:45-0:28:49](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:28:45):**  with resilience but we don't just throw it away because something happens somewhere else  in the world and why is it that we have this sort of farm gate mentality I don't know the  solution but I've been observing it from the outside and thinking this is not a recipe  for a resilient system and it's not going to be helpful for when we actually try and  have a system that sequesters carbon and feeds the world in a much more resilient way so  
**[0:29:10-0:29:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:29:10):**  I don't know the answer but I suspect that maybe almost draw a boundary around us but  somehow make us more resilient to what happens elsewhere in the world because you can't build  a resilient system if your input costs or your output costs just double or halve from  one year to the next you can't build a business that way and I don't think you can build a  resilient system that way.  
**[0:29:32-0:29:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:29:32):**  I could ask these guys questions for literally two more hours but there are questions from  you guys I'm sure and beers to be drunk and Friday nights to be had elsewhere so I will  wrap up my questions there and Nick has to go sing at the Opera House otherwise he'll  have to sing for us and that will be better for us but worse for him.  So from a small start-up perspective Lewis Biscarp in collaboration it's really tricky  
**[0:29:52-0:29:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:29:52):**  in Australia we've got like however many RDCs we've got all the state departments and you  have to keep trying with each one and have different communications protocols and if  one person leaves you lose all your progress do you see any way in which we can kind of  streamline the process of like this completely segmented research and development process?  I think at the moment that's the question on everyone's lips the government has acknowledged  
**[0:30:17-0:30:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:30:17):**  that that is definitely an issue going forward there's at the moment a review looking into  exactly that how does the RDC system collaborate better there's some key areas where they uniform  across the RDC systems there's things like water there's things like climate there's  things like soils I definitely don't have the answer but I would say that it's something  that you should definitely speak out about like if you're having those issues and if  
**[0:30:44-0:30:49](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:30:44):**  you're seeing those issues definitely have those conversations with the RDCs themselves  because there's some really interesting things that's happening in the RDC space at the moment  and they're really open to those conversations.  I'd flip that round and say from my point of view and I know this is my colleagues think  of this as well you're dealing with a start-up and bang they pivot and bang they pivot okay  
**[0:31:05-0:31:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:31:05):**  so the conversation can completely change or you're dealing with a large company and  the person the influential person you've been dealing with has left or they've moved on  and they've done something else I'm not sure that this isn't actually anything other than  human nature and organisational culture big small government non-government private sort  of thing and I suppose that's why humans are so good at making networks and relationships  
**[0:31:31-0:31:38](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:31:31):**  to you know surf that space rather than having a sort of an institutional approach to it  which is oh well there is this prime ministerially appointed single point of contact for such  and such science in the country is that going to work I don't think so it doesn't work in  our organisation they're like with multiple ones but yeah so from our side we see that  turbulence as well.  
**[0:31:55-0:32:00](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:31:55):**  Richard Heath Australian Farm Institute the structural changes to have better collaboration  are happening I can say that as an RDC director but you can do all the structural change in  the world and it has no effect if you don't have the cultural piece right and I think  that I'm just particularly interested in Nick's comments on this given your global experience  about collaboration culture around the world and how we sit in Australia if we just culturally  
**[0:32:22-0:32:26](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:32:22):**  understanding of what collaboration is about and what we need to do to get better at doing  that so we actually have the structural changes have effect.  Nick  Nick  I did a lot of research in Holland I was 11 years in Holland doing as R&D director for  
**[0:32:35-0:32:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:32:35):**  Mars in Europe and Holland has a really really good innovation ecosystem in agriculture if  you want to aspire to something it's Holland that does it and I was trying to unpick why  they say good now obviously Holland is a trading country and it has a really huge you know  trading network you know into Europe etc and maybe it's something about the Dutch character  and they do trade they'll talk to anybody they'll always negotiate you know it's all  
**[0:32:57-0:33:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:32:57):**  about networks they're all multilingual they will do what they need to do to make the networks  to make the trade.  There's a few other things that are interesting and one of the things I always fought for  and I'm obviously useless as a government lobbyist was things like the R&D tax when  I was in multinationals it was a big frustration there was me I was R&D director of a big multinational  
**[0:33:17-0:33:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:33:17):**  everyone assumed I had heaps of money to spend and that the R&D tax would come to me to you  know invest in you know universities and CSIRO and the reality of course is R&D tax goes  to treasury which goes back to head office and the R&D director is going well hang on  a minute I've just sort of two million dollars where is it and well it's gone.  So it was understanding that that's also a system how do we get the money that government  
**[0:33:39-0:33:45](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:33:39):**  does put into innovation gets it in the hand of players who can actually make the ecosystem  better I know we focus on small business and small business is really good I'm a small  businessman now but when I was in a big business big businesses can really get momentum behind  big projects because they do have that scale in Australia there are no there is no more  R&D left in food organisations in Australia everything has gone abroad now the reason  
**[0:34:04-0:34:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:34:04):**  is actually because none of the big businesses have got any real money or cash to work with  universities or with the CSIRO simply because a very simple mechanism the R&D tax doesn't  give the money back to the companies it gives it back to treasury so it's a frustration  I've lobbied for a long time it's just never worked.  I had this chat today with a gentleman I just met so he is a grew up on a farm in South  
**[0:34:28-0:34:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:34:28):**  Australia they own properties in the Northern Territory so pretty kind of ag background  ended up going over to UC Berkeley for an MBA recently and got involved in the start  up scene in Silicon Valley founded a biotech start up that was acquired and then has gotten  really excited about bringing some of the technologies and lessons back to agriculture  in Australia so he was talking to me about kind of what's happening here and how to get  
**[0:34:49-0:34:53](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:34:49):**  involved and he's like oh I have a few ideas for a start up you know working on a couple  of things and I immediately thought he's not going to tell me the ideas because I'm so  used to in Australia people keeping ideas really close to their chest and he goes yeah  so my first one is this and my second one is this and my third one is this and he just  told them all to me and I was like let me just call you out on this because that's amazing  
**[0:35:12-0:35:15](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:35:12):**  that you told me these ideas here's 17 people I can connect you to that are interested in  these spaces and I'm more than happy to make all of these introductions and he was like  that's amazing I'll send you an email right now and then we were both reflecting on the  fact that that's not how things usually work in Australia and that it wasn't until he went  to UC Berkeley and had so many people just open doors and make connections and share  
**[0:35:32-0:35:38](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:35:32):**  lessons that he learned that that's how business can get done so much more effectively and  so it's not to bash Australia because obviously there are many Australians who are super collaborative  and open with what they do but it is a kind of cultural difference that I've really noticed  gets challenged in the US for sure.  Andrew Kirk, product marketer in technology for some time interested in Ag. Just on collaboration  
**[0:35:56-0:36:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:35:56):**  I'm interested in when you're reflecting on your collaborations we've heard about troubles  of things going awry in a collaboration some being successful when you reflect on them  what signs give you an indication that it's going well what signs give you an indication  that it's not going so well?  It's like any other human relationship are you being open do you think the other person's  
**[0:36:17-0:36:23](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:36:17):**  being open can you identify areas of common interest are you prepared to be honest and  say actually no this isn't an area of interest for me thanks but no thanks and walk away  rather than try and pretend something different for that and it's no different for us collaborating  in some respects as I talked before about getting to learn about the trials and tribulations  of being in a start-up but we do most of our research in collaboration with other organisations  
**[0:36:45-0:36:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:36:45):**  it could be pharma group it could be another R&D organisation what are the value systems  what are the drivers of behaviour what are the reward systems in that and can you get  around that stuff and finally and at the end of the day a lot of it is do you like that  person do you have someone on the other side who you feel warm about and who feels warm  about you and you're just going to stick through to confirm I was talking to a colleague recently  
**[0:37:08-0:37:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:37:08):**  who is saying this person in this AgTech SME they've just been so good at sticking with  this and they ring up occasionally and say oh what's happening is it all good it's been  quite and so my colleague says yeah no it's fine it's just taken a while to grind through  the wheels and then they talk about football for half an hour so yeah I don't know it's  particularly magical to any other human interactions.  
**[0:37:34-0:37:39](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:37:34):**  I love your story and it's true we've just got to have lots of conversations I mean we  just hold on to stuff we should just talk about what we're dreaming what we're hoping  and that means that serendipity will happen and I've been reasonably visible it means  that there's lots of serendipity because lots of people say hey you said something about  this so I know something about that and some of it doesn't come to anything and also force  
**[0:37:53-0:37:57](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:37:53):**  fitting collaboration where it really isn't there where you really aren't aligned there  isn't value for both that's fine too you had a great conversation didn't go anywhere great  you have another conversation and just how we get those behaviors and also how we have  those forums so the work that you do bringing lots of people together there are certain  individuals who are master networkers who just love bringing people together those people  
**[0:38:15-0:38:19](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:38:15):**  are gold and obviously Sarah's one of them and there's others who are just they bring  people together their life's mission is to bring people together to have interesting  conversations and out of some of those conversations there'll be a little spark and that could  be really valuable and that's you know and that's the the luck that you need to get things  going and there's been a couple already tonight so that's great.  
**[0:38:35-0:38:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:38:35):**  That's a perfect way to end so I wanted you guys to just like 30 seconds if there's something  you're looking for a collaboration or connection that you want that the audience can maybe  help with or someone they know anything that's on your wish list or as Nick said your hopes  and dreams list the audience here tonight are listening to podcast can maybe help with.  I think as a parting gesture rather than saying oh you know I want to speak to you by a sense  
**[0:38:58-0:39:03](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:38:58):**  of guys because I actually do as an organization there's lots of different ways to interact  with us as almost as many ways as there are people in the organization so don't be afraid  to pick up the phone and you know just say Nick you know you've got the people are natural  connectors and if you find someone it might lead you to someone to someone to someone  so yeah we're always interested in how to get our work on the ground and make agriculture  
**[0:39:23-0:39:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:39:23):**  and other facets of society better.  We are in the process of growing we're seeking researchers we're seeking people with specialist  skills in the areas of soil carbon microbiology anything and everything that relates to our  project at the moment so if you think you know of anyone or if you think you are that  someone reach out and have a chat even if it's not to come on board it's to it's to  
**[0:39:47-0:39:48](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:39:47):**  share some learnings.  I'm at Tegan so that's that's my win out of the scene.  You don't need anyone else.  Don't need anyone else no.  It's difficult I mean what we're trying to do is you know we want to build a brand in  
**[0:39:59-0:40:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:39:59):**  Australia we want to build sustainability is the same time as building all the technology  it's everything is being done in parallel so you know and I'm using and I'm collaborating  with CSIRO.  Luckily with CSIRO there are connectors within CSIRO and a few of them actually know what  some of the people in CSIRO do.  
**[0:40:16-0:40:20](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:40:16):**  There's even within CSIRO there's very few people who know what the what there is there  that you can grab hold of so that that's always a challenge.  So no there's nothing I don't say there's nothing I need there's everything I need everything  and nothing so and I am I mean and also I'm recruiting and it's interesting to start up  and this is maybe something I should I should share because I never knew this is because  
**[0:40:37-0:40:39](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:40:37):**  I've got no time to do recruiting.  It's amazing the team I've got is kind of landed on my lap from people who've actually  approached me and were brave enough to say hey Nick I'm passionate about this I've got  these and these skills and then suddenly they're in my team because I've got time to go and  do proper recruitment process so so if you have skills don't be shy go and approach if  
**[0:40:56-0:40:59](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:40:56):**  there's somebody who's doing something that's really interesting just go and approach them  and who knows you might end up as employee number number 12 or something.  Please join me in thanking the guests.  Thank you for joining us on another episode of Ag Tech So What.  You can stay up to date with the latest episodes and news at agtechsowhat.com and as always  
**[0:41:23-0:41:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:41:23):**  if you have any feedback or other guests to recommend we'd love to hear from you just  hop on the website and leave us a comment or send us a message.  Finally if you like what you're hearing and we hope you do please share the podcast with  a friend or leave us a review on iTunes or wherever you get your podcasts.  Thanks again for listening.  
**[0:41:40-0:41:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=458170#t=0:41:40):**  We'll catch you next time.  