### Agtech - So What?  (2022-00-12)
**[0:00:00-0:00:06](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, and welcome to Ag Tech So What, brought to you by Tenacious Ventures.  I'm Sarah Nolette.  Just a reminder that even here on the bonus episodes, we'll be sharing our lessons and  stories as we wade through raising our second fund.  So hang tight through to the end of the show for some hot off the press fundraising learnings  
**[0:00:20-0:00:21](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:00:20):**  from us.  And if you're still hungry for more after that, make sure you check in with us on Twitter  and LinkedIn and visit the website in the show notes for more information.  For many farmers in the US, Australia and around the globe, 2022 has been a tough weather  year and on the heels of drought, floods and excess heat, a different kind of uncertainty,  
**[0:00:41-0:00:43](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:00:41):**  rising interest rates is also apparent.  I really think in the next 10 years there is going to be a ton of ground for sale, just  tons.  I don't want to have a five or $10 million note with my local bank.  If I can mitigate some of that risk or reduce the interest payments in some fashion.  
**[0:00:59-0:01:06](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:00:59):**  That's Clay Govier, a Nebraska farmer growing a diversified mix of grains on irrigated ground.  Clay was on my radar for a couple of reasons.  One, the weather extremes this year have been truly wild.  And I wanted to hear more about how he's thinking about dealing with those risks.  And as a key part of that, I wanted to learn more about his growth strategy and specifically  
**[0:01:20-0:01:25](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:01:20):**  how he thinks about financial risk and where it collides with environmental ones.  If we received three or four inches of snow last winter, that was probably it.  So it had been from last October until the end of April and we hadn't received any measurable  precipitation of any kind.  So it was bad for pastures, bad for your cattle producers, bad for any crop ground that is  
**[0:01:44-0:01:45](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:01:44):**  not irrigated.  We did catch a few timely rains in the middle of the season.  I think just enough to give us like some hope.  And then it just, it stopped in the first half of July and it's just been super hot  and super dry ever since then.  
**[0:01:58-0:02:03](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:01:58):**  So it's been a pretty challenging year just from not getting enough rain.  Plus when we do get rain, it seems like it comes with just crazy wind.  My hometown of Broken Bow, we had a wind event that they registered, I think it might have  been 93 miles an hour.  It did a lot of damage, a lot of center pivots were flipped over, grain bins were lost.  
**[0:02:22-0:02:25](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:02:22):**  There's a lot of infrastructure damage, not to mention blows corn over at that point,  you get a lot of green snap and just damage to your crops.  So there's a lot of additional stress on the crops.  So even if they are irrigated crops and we can control the rainfall from that perspective,  there's just so much extra stress from just weeks of 100 plus days and it just doesn't  
**[0:02:43-0:02:49](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:02:43):**  cool off at night to no rain to tons of wind and quite a bit of hail.  We had to replant quite a bit of crops and we didn't have it nearly as bad as a lot of  farmers in this area.  And across Nebraska, the whole state just got beat up this year.  And what are the kind of, I guess, strategies you can use?  
**[0:03:03-0:03:06](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:03:03):**  I imagine there's some stuff in season, like you said, you can replant, you can think about  how to salvage what's there.  What do you kind of do both in season and longer term?  Are there changes that you might consider?  There's a variety of things.  
**[0:03:14-0:03:17](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:03:14):**  Crop insurance is probably the number one thing, right?  Your subsidized federal crop insurance is what saves you a lot of times in years like  this.  And then there's private insurance.  So you can buy extra wind or extra hail insurance to give yourself even more protection.  
**[0:03:30-0:03:36](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:03:30):**  We tried to diversify some of our cropping rotation instead of just, you know, higher  value corn, soybeans, like we might plant.  We plant a certain amount of cereal rye that we grow for grain that we then sell for cover  crop seed.  So we can add value to that instead of just selling it unclean out of the field to somebody.  
**[0:03:50-0:03:55](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:03:50):**  We can run it through our cleaner, add a couple bucks of value to the grain.  We grow some yellow field peas, and this was not a great year for that, but it's kind of  a low input crop and then it does some good stuff for the soil.  So your following crop is typically better off because of planting peas.  Yellow peas might be a break even deal the year that you plant them and harvest them,  
**[0:04:16-0:04:21](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:04:16):**  but you know, then the next year you can cut some of your fertilizer inputs and maybe recoup  a little bit more.  It's just, it's not a direct plus or minus.  So it's hard to say, oh yeah, I'm saving 40 bucks next year by planting peas this year.  It's not necessarily that direct of a correlation.  
**[0:04:34-0:04:36](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:04:34):**  Anecdotally, I've seen it enough times.  I'm like, I know I'm doing the right thing.  It's just hard to quantify, which is pretty frustrating.  What's the conversation like with the kind of live examples of weather and variable climate  you've seen this year?  
**[0:04:50-0:04:51](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:04:50):**  People talk about pressure on sustainability.  Are people talking about climate change or people talking about consumers?  I guess what's the vibe on this stuff in terms of are people like saying, oh, we're going  to be able to keep doing what we've been doing unless there's regulations or we can't do  what we've been doing because of the weather and climate change or how normal is your view?  
**[0:05:08-0:05:12](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:05:08):**  I guess if this conversation you're having at the bar, does everyone agree with you or  are you thinking pretty differently about this?  So I was just at Husker Harvest Days, which is a pretty big farm show in Central Nebraska.  And there's a lot more normal, like just casual conversation about climate change being a  thing and how are we going to manage it or adapt to it, figure out how to live with it.  
**[0:05:31-0:05:38](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:05:31):**  I would say in the last two to three years, I've heard way more than the 10 years before  that.  And I've been beating the drum for quite a while.  And I just think when you talk to an old timer and they're like, boy, you can't even predict  the weather anymore.  
**[0:05:47-0:05:52](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:05:47):**  Like used to have normal seasons, but now it's 85 degrees in November and then we get  85 degree temperatures in February, but then April and May are cold.  And then June is 30 straight days of 100 degree temperatures with 50 mile an hour winds.  It's just really volatile and pretty tough to manage.  And this year was exceptionally hot.  
**[0:06:11-0:06:17](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:06:11):**  We had triple digit temperatures in Nebraska in the middle of September.  Almost fall.  And I like, sure, yeah, we beat the previous record by one or two degrees.  So yeah, like 70 years ago it was hot.  But I think the previous record was during Dust Bowl time, 1934, 36, something like that.  
**[0:06:31-0:06:35](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:06:31):**  I don't think people appreciate that Nebraska would be in a severe Dust Bowl if it wasn't  for the amount of irrigation that we have.  We change our regional environment by pumping billions, if not trillions of gallons of water  out of the ground every year.  So getting back to your question, as far as like, how do you manage it?  
**[0:06:50-0:06:53](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:06:50):**  Part of what we're doing is planting different species.  So if you're planting rye, that's a cool season grass.  If you're planting peas, that's a cool season legume.  Everybody plants corn and beans, which are both warm season.  So if you have a really cold spring or early frost or something like that is going to be  
**[0:07:09-0:07:11](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:07:09):**  really hard on those crops.  So I think rotational diversity is also a way to manage that risk.  One of the areas I wanted to ask you about was growth ambitions for you guys and the  kind of finance support that you have to enable those growth decisions.  So maybe just start with a little bit of overview of the operation and then we can zoom into  
**[0:07:31-0:07:35](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:07:31):**  how you guys think about growth expansion and whatever that means to you.  So we farm roughly 3,500 acres.  I would say 70% of that we own and have owned it for a long time.  I'm fifth generation on this farm.  Definitely fortunate in that we don't have a lot of long-term debt from buying a lot  
**[0:07:54-0:07:56](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:07:54):**  of expensive land in the last 10 years.  We have expanded quite a bit.  I would say probably close to a thousand acres in the last 10 years since I've been back  on the farm.  And I don't know how much bigger we really want to be.  
**[0:08:06-0:08:11](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:08:06):**  We can grow cereal rye, but then we get a cleaner and we can add value to that grain  by cleaning it and then selling it locally or wherever it needs to go.  But we can add value through a little enterprise within our organization or our farm.  So I kind of like that idea from an expansion standpoint, not necessarily farming more and  more and more acres, but trying to do it in a way that is more profitable.  
**[0:08:34-0:08:37](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:08:34):**  So as far as like financially, we're in a pretty good position.  We don't have a lot or if any long-term debt.  Yeah, you're paying some notes on a new tractor or something like that, but I don't have to  worry about paying off a couple of million dollars on a land note or something.  So I could go to my local bank, which is where we get our line of credit.  
**[0:08:52-0:08:56](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:08:52):**  And so far we've just went to our local bank just because that's where we've been for the  last 40, 50 years or whatever.  Is that an ag bank or just a generic bank, but local?  It's just a local bank.  So they have the retail business side too, but I would say the bulk of their business  
**[0:09:07-0:09:11](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:09:07):**  is in ag, whether it's farming or ranching.  But we've looked at say like FBNs offerings too.  They've had really good interest rates and we do buy some products through FBN.  So we do have a line of credit with them, but it's just for the products that they sell  because oftentimes if you buy their stuff and you have a line of credit with them, it's  
**[0:09:30-0:09:36](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:09:30):**  0% interest for a year or something if you're buying seed or herbicide or whatever from  them.  So if I'm buying FBN products, I am definitely leveraging that line of credit.  Now if I'm going out to buy a tractor, John Deere has, they have a humongous financial  arm within that organization.  
**[0:09:49-0:09:52](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:09:49):**  We finance equipment if it's a big piece of equipment and that always depends on what  the accountants say and stuff like that.  But I would say the bulk of our financing is either through our local bank or FBN and  we're pretty much all green paint.  So we do stuff through John Deere Financial too.  
**[0:10:05-0:10:09](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:10:05):**  Tell me the playbook, if you were explaining it to someone new to the industry for how  you came to expand the way your family did and own sort of 70% of what you guys farm,  how would you describe the strategy of we would want to acquire property nearby and  we'd think about we should rent versus own versus lease.  We should use debt in this way.  
**[0:10:25-0:10:28](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:10:25):**  What was the expansion playbook to get to where you guys are?  Historically, just having grown up on the farm, dad and grandpa were pretty conservative  in their expansion over the last like 30 or 40 years and we just didn't really overextend  ever.  And just here in the last say 10 years or so, 10, 12 years, it's mostly just been if  
**[0:10:48-0:10:52](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:10:48):**  we've been renting a chunk of ground and the landlord's like, you know what, I don't want  to mess with this rent check every year and any of the headaches that brings, I just want  to sell this chunk of ground.  And so we've been fortunate that we've had landlords just come to us directly and be  like, we're not going to put it on for auction.  
**[0:11:05-0:11:06](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:11:05):**  We want to sell it.  We want you to have the first opportunity.  And some of those things just fell on our laps.  Other than that, like I say, if a piece of farmland came up for sale and it kind of fit  our traffic pattern, like just logistically, it was something right next to another field  
**[0:11:24-0:11:30](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:11:24):**  that we already farmed, then we would be pretty aggressive on something like that.  And I think that's pretty typical for the average farmer.  Some of these farms are getting so big that it doesn't matter because every field that  comes up for sale is bordering some pretty close to something else that they own.  So it's just, I do not have the ambition to become like say a 10,000 acre farmer.  
**[0:11:48-0:11:50](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:11:48):**  Just to wait more than I want to deal with.  I wouldn't say that there is any defined strategy on how we want to grow.  If an opportunity presents itself, we'll just look at if we're sitting on some cash and  we want to do something with it, or if it really fits our operation really nice, then  we'll really consider it.  
**[0:12:10-0:12:14](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:12:10):**  And then just go talk to the banker and, Hey, I need a million dollar loan or whatever.  And then we can make that happen.  So that's been like the last 10 years now.  I think things are going to start getting really interesting in the next 10 years because  the demographics of your average farmer is like the age is 58 or something.  
**[0:12:28-0:12:33](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:12:28):**  And I would say around here, it's much older than that is your average age of a farmer.  And I think just here locally, I think this is going to be pretty much industry wide.  Ground is going to start changing hands a lot faster and a lot more volume.  And we have a lot of neighbors that like this guy has been farming.  He's 65, 70, didn't have any children that wanted to come back to the farm.  
**[0:12:51-0:12:53](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:12:51):**  They're just thinking, might as well sell it.  Land prices are high.  And I think in the next five, 10 years, we're going to see a lot of that.  So I think there's going to be a lot of opportunities to expand if you're comfortable going into  that.  
**[0:13:03-0:13:07](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:13:03):**  And now the interest rates are actually becoming a little bit more meaningful.  In that example where you guys were maybe leasing some land, there was a landlord, they  didn't go to auction and they offered it to you guys.  Is the playbook there to go to the bank and finance it that way?  Or are there other options you might consider?  
**[0:13:20-0:13:25](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:13:20):**  And does that ever not work out where they're selling, but that's a year where you guys  don't have the cash or the kind of economics or the financing options don't make sense?  Since I've been back on the farm, there has not been any sort of problem with financing.  Fortunately, if we go to the bank and say, hey, you need a couple of million dollar loan  to buy some more ground, they're going to say, okay, they know what we're worth.  
**[0:13:44-0:13:47](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:13:44):**  Fortunately, we have quite a bit of ground that's paid for.  The bank's very comfortable lending to us since we're in that situation.  I know there's a lot of farmers that they're more comfortable renting everything and they  just don't have the, they don't want to mess with the taxes and the ownership.  They'd rather just write a rent check.  
**[0:13:59-0:14:02](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:13:59):**  And that's fine because I think there's a lot of absentee landlords that they don't  want to sell.  They want to keep the land that's been in their family for a long time and they want  to rent it and they want to make money.  So that works out pretty well for them.  
**[0:14:10-0:14:13](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:14:10):**  Have you seen any options that look different?  In terms of financing for that expansion, we're looking at a couple people talking about  equity options to maybe access more capital from minority investment partners, whether  you're bringing in someone yourself or going through a platform or something like that  to finance the expansion that way.  
**[0:14:26-0:14:28](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:14:26):**  Is that something you guys have looked at?  We probably haven't looked at it too closely.  I know some of those options exist and I guess if it made sense to do that, then certainly  it would be something that we'd look at.  For better or worse, we just have such a good relationship with our local bank.  
**[0:14:44-0:14:45](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:14:44):**  That's pretty much what we do.  But I've got a friend that works for, I think the company's name is like steward or something  and they're more micro or regenerative ag focused lending.  And I've talked to her about what they do and it just doesn't really fit our model that  well unless we would, I would say, add on another business, like start building some  
**[0:15:04-0:15:06](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:15:04):**  greenhouses or something along those lines.  Plus oftentimes we just don't need the financing fortunately.  But yeah, there's beginning to be a lot more options.  My brothers are using the military.  I know that there's some stuff that you could probably leverage that way, whether it's financing  
**[0:15:19-0:15:22](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:15:19):**  or just like various government programs.  There's energy grants, there's like through the NRCS, you can do all sorts of more conservation  ag programs that you can get quite a bit of money through as well.  Sometimes I look at like just pure financing.  People think, okay, you're looking for a loan.  
**[0:15:34-0:15:42](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:15:34):**  I can also go out and maybe find a NRCS program or some sort of company that is throwing money  at different sustainability projects or something.  You can kind of leverage some of those other funding sources besides just going for a normal  traditional loan.  Are you starting to see more, do you think there will be more of that kind of tying of  
**[0:15:57-0:16:03](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:15:57):**  options to practices even more around the various tools in the toolkit for managing  risk, whether that's input costs or timing or cropping systems?  Like I could imagine that if I was a financier, that approach would be more attractive for  me to finance than someone who isn't thinking about that breadth of tools in the toolkit.  Just from a risk perspective, do you see any kind of more recognition of that in terms  
**[0:16:22-0:16:25](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:16:22):**  of the access to finance that you guys would get?  Yes and no.  Like your traditional financing going through our local bank, they don't have a bunch of  shareholders that want them to have like reduce their carbon footprint.  But I think there's a lot of these alternate funding sources that yeah, they're going to  
**[0:16:37-0:16:43](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:16:37):**  start tying that funding or financing or whatever to your practices or that's the only way you'd  even be able to approach them or apply for a loan is if you're already following these  practices or if you're going to use that funding to adopt new practices and that's going to  cushion the risk a little bit.  I totally think that's going to become more and more of a thing.  
**[0:16:59-0:17:04](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:16:59):**  I really think that some of these government programs right now, they're pretty much all  voluntary.  I think they subsidize federal crop insurance.  I can certainly see a day in the not too distant future that you will have to farm in a certain  way to qualify for those subsidies.  
**[0:17:20-0:17:26](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:17:20):**  So if you're just a corn farmer forever and that's all you do and you do till everything  up and then just dump a bunch of nitrogen down and herbicide and insecticide and everything,  you might not qualify for a subsidized crop insurance anymore.  And I think that would change people's behavior really, really quickly or that would force  a lot of farmers into retirement because they want to change.  
**[0:17:42-0:17:46](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:17:42):**  Farmers are typically stubborn people.  And also, like I said, the demographics.  Are you really going to get a 65 year old guy that's been farming the same way for the  last 45 years to drastically change his farming practices in the last five years of his career?  I bet you most of them would just say, you know what, I'm going to see if I can rent  
**[0:18:05-0:18:09](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:18:05):**  this out to a younger guy that's going to have to deal with the headache.  Clay and I spent some time here getting into the weeds on some financing models that we've  been learning more about, specifically ones that matched well-aligned equity capital with  farmers who are looking for another financing option.  Clay's first reaction was not surprisingly one of a bit of skepticism.  
**[0:18:25-0:18:30](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:18:25):**  We're getting enough Wall Street money in farm ground ownership as is.  So I think the average farmer is pretty wary of some organization.  Like yeah, we're sitting on $500 million that we want to lend to farmers to expand.  So for me, it would all depend on the terms of this bit of equity that I would be giving  them.  
**[0:18:51-0:18:59](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:18:51):**  Land is obviously, it has been in the last 10, 20, 30, 40 years, a pretty good investment.  So if I say, yeah, this particular chunk of ground right now, our county tax evaluation,  like what its assessed value is, whatever, $7,500 an acre.  And then say I do this and then five years down the road or 10 years down the road, I'm  like, you know what, I've got some cash.  
**[0:19:15-0:19:17](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:19:15):**  I want to get my ownership back.  Now the assessed value is $8,500 or whatever.  I'm sure paying that difference, that's part of their strategy.  Personally, some of that sounds really appealing to me because it's really hard telling what  to do.  
**[0:19:29-0:19:33](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:19:29):**  From a land value perspective, what's going to happen in the next 10 years or whatever,  but I can certainly see the interest rates are going to go up.  So for me to go to a bank and get a loan and know that I'm going to pay 6, 7, 8% interest  on that versus I could give part ownership of a particular field, get cash that way.  And then it spreads the risk a little bit because obviously this equity group is absorbing  
**[0:19:54-0:19:55](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:19:54):**  some of the risk.  They think that it's going to return obviously, but that's not necessarily the case.  If land values just really soften, then it sucks for them, but also sucks for the farmer  too.  But it's appealing to me.  
**[0:20:07-0:20:13](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:20:07):**  And I think diversifying your financing options is pretty important anymore.  Just given ground's expensive and I really think in the next 10 years, there is going  to be a ton of ground for sale, just tons.  I don't want to have a five or $10 million note with my local bank if I can mitigate  some of that risk or reduce the interest payments in some fashion.  
**[0:20:31-0:20:33](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:20:31):**  That makes a lot of sense to me.  At Tenacious Ventures, we definitely see this generational transition as a big driver for  change in agriculture.  The stat that I've heard is that over 70% of land is owned by farmers over 75 years  old and that in the US alone, over the next 10 years, over $500 billion of farmland will  
**[0:20:50-0:20:51](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:20:50):**  change hands.  I certainly do see that slightly alternate financing options are going to become more  and more important in the near future just because I think the sheer amount of land that's  going to change hands.  Around here, there are not very many young guys that are farming.  
**[0:21:12-0:21:14](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:21:12):**  I would say 50%.  If you're looking at like, I'm 40, my dad's 72, there's a lot more guys that are in their  60s and 70s that are farming than there are in their 40s.  Do I really want to expand?  Not necessarily, but I don't know who's gonna.  
**[0:21:28-0:21:35](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:21:28):**  Who will actually farm this ground that's been farmed for 150 years if somebody doesn't  step up and do it?  I don't really want to be a 10,000 acre farmer or a 20,000 acre farmer, but I would not be  surprised if I couldn't be there in 10 years if I wanted to be.  And so having these alternate funding financing sources is going to be 100% necessary because  
**[0:21:55-0:22:02](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:21:55):**  our farm might be worth $20 million, but to buy another 1,000 acres, you're talking millions  and millions of dollars and you can't do that with just our local bank.  So I really do think that some of these more alternate sources of financing are very timely.  I mean, it's fascinating too, because what if you don't want to do that, then literally  who buys that land?  
**[0:22:15-0:22:16](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:22:15):**  Does the government buy it?  And then you overlay something with the qualify for subsidies.  You have some kind of practice change or whatever requirements that don't exist today.  And so that land transitions and then there's probably even less demand to pick up that  ground.  
**[0:22:29-0:22:30](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:22:29):**  So what happens then?  Like you could imagine that the confluence of those factors being pretty interesting  to corporates own it, to food companies buy it, like to the government, like what, yeah,  what does that look like?  It's crazy to think about.  
**[0:22:39-0:22:42](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:22:39):**  Somebody still has to farm it, but I have seen autonomous, fully autonomous planners  and stuff 10 years ago.  I think I could have told you what farming was going to look like in 10 years, give or  take.  I cannot figure out what farming is going to look like in 10 years.  
**[0:22:53-0:22:58](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:22:53):**  Cause I think it's going to be so automated and just really different because we even  have automated drones going out and spraying around here.  We've invested in a autonomy company and I was just visiting them at their ground based  drone company.  They do a lot of spraying, a lot of like optical spraying the weed, it and the weed seekers  
**[0:23:09-0:23:12](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:23:09):**  and they've got a lot of that kit on the back of their robots and yet demand for it has  gone up like crazy because it's the only thing they can get into the fields when they're  wet to spray.  And also they can't get anyone to come drive anything, let alone a sprayer that's going  slow to optically detect weeds.  
**[0:23:26-0:23:30](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:23:26):**  And so they just uptake of that and then you can imagine it moves into planting or into  harvesting or into other kinds of applications soon because it has to.  Absolutely.  I think the number of people that will exist that to just farm the ground is going to get  cut in half in the next 20 years.  
**[0:23:45-0:23:47](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:23:45):**  So who's going to pick it up?  And I would say robots or whatever.  I really think we're going to have just in the future.  I think everything's going to be organic because you'll have like little Roomba things going  around just constantly.  
**[0:24:00-0:24:06](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:24:00):**  Autonomous things, weeding everything, maybe more precise fertility.  It's an interesting rabbit hole to go down, but it has to be more autonomous stuff.  That's the way the whole industry has been going for the last like 150 years.  Bigger tractors, more efficiencies through machinery.  And now you're going to have more efficiencies through a ton of automation and just start  
**[0:24:22-0:24:28](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:24:22):**  really eliminating the person from the equation, which I guess we'll see how it all plays out.  In theory, it sounds okay to me.  It just has to go that way.  There's just no alternative.  I still think there'll be more automation, bigger stuff, higher yields.  
**[0:24:38-0:24:45](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:24:38):**  But at some point if we can start growing more meat in labs or do more plant-based protein  or whatever, we won't need to grow as much corn if we're not growing as many cattle.  And if vehicles become more electric, which they are, we won't need as much ethanol or  soy biodiesel or whatever.  The need for all these ag commodities might start being reduced too.  
**[0:25:04-0:25:06](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:25:04):**  So we'll see.  My conversation with Clay offered a few insights that were really helpful in building out our  thesis on the future of financing in agriculture.  First, I think the testimony Clay shared on the scale and intensity of the climate impacts  that his farm is already facing is extremely telling about the timeline on which financing  
**[0:25:23-0:25:25](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:25:23):**  solutions have to operate.  In other words, we do not have a decade to get our feet under us in figuring out how  to finance investments in resiliency and climate adaptation.  The risk is here today and failing to address it as soon as possible will only be more painful  and costly in the future.  
**[0:25:40-0:25:44](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:25:40):**  I was also excited to hear Clay's interest in exploring alternatives.  He sees tremendous opportunity in capital investment on the horizon, despite the risks,  and is intrigued by the possibility of working with well-aligned partners.  But there's also a lot of skepticism, it seems, in the production community of outside  funding.  
**[0:25:59-0:26:03](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:25:59):**  Financial relationships are intimate, and earning trust and defending reputation in  this space is nuanced.  It'll be interesting to see if new overlays like sustainability incentives can align interests  or if they entrench more of this skepticism.  Finally, though I think the conversation we had at the end was interesting, it's a bit  
**[0:26:16-0:26:21](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:26:16):**  of an incomplete capture of what the aging population of farmers in the US might mean  for the future of agriculture.  Though we here at Tenacious are betting on a future with more autonomous equipment and  less difficult manual labor, I also think there will be real, tangible opportunities  for farmers like Clay who don't want to operate at enormous scale and would prefer to grow  
**[0:26:36-0:26:39](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:26:36):**  their businesses by different dimensions than acres.  I think novel forms of finance and entirely novel business models will totally have a  place in that kind of growth.  Overall Clay left me with a lot to think about, so look out for some more written and podcast  content on climate and the generational transition in agriculture in the near future.  
**[0:26:56-0:27:00](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:26:56):**  Now it's time to check in on Fund2 and our efforts to continue fundraising out loud.  Matthew and I are still very much in the thick of things, so today we're sharing some lessons  learned in terms of tactics and some reflections on what's the right way to rekindle a warm  relationship that's gone a bit cold.  Have a listen.  
**[0:27:13-0:27:17](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:27:13):**  The week after I visited Storm Farm is instead of just sending another email that's like  following up, checking in, where you at?  Blah, blah, blah.  I just sent emails with the subject line robot video and then would send them a robot video  and not surprisingly the response rate was slightly higher.  
**[0:27:29-0:27:32](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:27:29):**  People want to see robot videos.  I did note the robot video.  I think what I've been spending a bit of time thinking about is how to think about how much  tailoring each message needs and shortness of email, subject composition, and also a  lot of them.  
**[0:27:47-0:27:54](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:27:47):**  I think some of the conversations were warm, but they're up to three years ago, certainly  two years ago.  And so finding the kind of right way to start a conversation that doesn't feel like, hey,  we haven't spoken in two years.  But I'm back asking for money again.  
**[0:28:09-0:28:10](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:28:09):**  Yeah.  Yeah.  And how do you feel like I genuinely would chat with you other times and feel like there's  reasons we could be talking, you just haven't, everyone's busy, COVID happened, et cetera,  et cetera.  
**[0:28:22-0:28:26](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:28:22):**  But yeah, there's some awkwardness of I'm back.  I think it's interesting.  I was thinking about that the other day that for founders approaching VCs, the business  model of a VC is to deploy capital into startups.  And so I wonder how much you avoid that awkwardness of here I am asking for money because that's  
**[0:28:41-0:28:43](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:28:41):**  my job to find companies to invest in.  Whereas in this world of any individual, any corporate agribusiness, family offices, et  cetera, like we're competing for attention in a broader pool of options.  And yeah, I don't know.  There's something that feels different about, about that.  
**[0:28:57-0:29:00](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:28:57):**  Not like a woe is me, like it's way easier for founders, but just the, I had one of our  founders asked the other day, okay, I'm going over to the States.  Like I want to reignite a bunch of these investor conversations.  What's the kind of pretense of whatever.  And it was like, just say, Hey, I'm in town.  
**[0:29:09-0:29:10](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:29:09):**  I want to catch up.  You don't need another one because it's like part of the expectation that founders will  make, we'll build relationships with investors and investors will build relationships with  founders.  And that's just how it goes.  
**[0:29:20-0:29:28](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:29:20):**  Whereas I think in the GPLP world, it's a little bit less clear what the context is.  I do wonder about that.  I do wonder about that.  I mean, yeah.  If I received an email from a founder that I hadn't talked to for 18 months and the subject  
**[0:29:37-0:29:43](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:29:37):**  of the email was we're raising against like, great, that's the normal context for you to  reach out to me.  It would have been better if I had been on your updates maybe, or I had a sense of momentum  absent the here's our update we're raising.  But equally if they were like, Hey, I want to catch up.  
**[0:29:54-0:29:57](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:29:54):**  And then during the catch up, they were like, by the way, we're raising, or you would know  during that catch up that one of your questions would be, are you raising?  Whereas I could, I can imagine there's a bunch of people on our.  Fund-to fundraising list that we would catch up with that us fundraising may or may not  ever come up because there'd be other reasons to be talking, which is both a good thing  
**[0:30:11-0:30:12](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:30:11):**  and a bad thing.  Thanks again for coming along on the fundraising journey with us.  If you'd like to learn more about our work and how to get involved in fund two, please  visit the website in the show notes.  And that's it for another bonus episode of Ag Tech So What.  
**[0:30:24-0:30:26](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:30:24):**  A huge thanks to our guest, Clay Govier.  And of course, thank you for listening.  For more information on any of the resources mentioned in this podcast, please visit our  website tenacious.adventures.  I'm Sarah Nolette.  
**[0:30:36-0:31:05](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/on-farm-climate-risks-and-the-future-of-ag-finance-with-clay-govier#t=0:30:36):**  Catch you next time.  