### Agtech - So What?  (2022-00-21)
**[0:00:00-0:00:06](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, and welcome to AgTech So What, brought to you by Tenacious Ventures.  I'm Sarah Nolet.  Before we get to our show today, I have a quick but very exciting announcement.  Here at Tenacious, we are officially hitting go on raising our second fund.  The more we did in preparing to kick off fundraising, the more we realized how much of venture,  
**[0:00:21-0:00:27](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:00:21):**  especially in AgTech, is kind of a black box, and how interesting and useful it could be  to share our experience out in the open and in near real time with all of you.  So as part of the podcast, over the next several weeks, we'll be sharing our fundraising thoughts,  hopes, fears, failures, and successes right as they happen.  Fundraising out loud is scary, but we have conviction that doing it will be worth it  
**[0:00:47-0:00:49](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:00:47):**  for us and for the AgTech community.  So listen out for more info, stories, and updates.  And in the meantime, you can learn more about Fund2 and our vision for a digitally native  and climate resilient food system at the link in the show notes.  And now, here's today's show.  
**[0:01:05-0:01:11](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:01:05):**  When we think about ag, food, and everything in between, we often take a systems approach,  recognizing that each part of the value chain is not its own tidy, siloed world, but instead  our deeply interconnected spaces.  The problem is many in the system do not think this way.  What we've done in recent years is entirely decouple the system.  
**[0:01:27-0:01:35](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:01:27):**  So the agricultural system runs almost separately to the food processing system.  And the food processing system runs almost separately to distribution elements and the  like.  And that's really counterintuitive.  These things are interlinked.  
**[0:01:45-0:01:47](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:01:45):**  It's the interdependencies which matter.  That's Nigel Hughes, Senior Vice President of Global R&D and Innovation at Kellogg.  He's been in what he would unwillingly call the big food space for more than three decades,  and he's seen quite a bit of industry transformation during the course of his career.  Nigel's knowledge of the history of the consumer food space informs where he thinks the system  
**[0:02:06-0:02:11](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:02:06):**  is headed and helped drive our conversation about the role of legacy players in what is  a shifting food landscape.  Nigel and I cover a lot of ground here, from the fundamental drivers of the modern food  system to how Kellogg thinks about Scope 3 emissions to how Nigel personally communicates  about systems thinking.  
**[0:02:25-0:02:28](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:02:25):**  But it all started with a bit of history.  Really there was a fairly standard model for consumer businesses.  I would probably say from, depending on which part of the world you were in, but 1940s,  1950s, regarding the nature and kind of consumer, because you'd got economies around the world  which were growing.  
**[0:02:47-0:02:51](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:02:47):**  You've got consumer groups through the baby boomers that were growing.  You then got a route to market for those people that was fairly similar for many years.  You basically worked through the big retailers, and you essentially, throughout that period,  sourced commodities.  Your ingredient streams were commodities.  
**[0:03:08-0:03:14](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:03:08):**  And in the last 10 years, but even more accelerated in the last five years, so many dimensions  of that have turned on its head.  If you look at population and population growth, now in markets that had huge population growth  for many years, particularly in North America and Western Europe and the like, we don't  have high population growth.  
**[0:03:28-0:03:31](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:03:28):**  We have population aging, but we don't have high population growth.  If you look at the way we reach people, yes, we still have big retailers, of course, but  we've now got a landscape that's dotted with hundreds of ways of getting food and getting  product to the consumer.  And that's only increasing.  
**[0:03:48-0:03:51](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:03:48):**  E-comm is increasing incredibly.  The role that we play going direct to our consumers, but also going via away from home  channels, the way that people interact with our foods.  It's not three standard meals a day.  It's snacking throughout the day, et cetera, et cetera.  
**[0:04:06-0:04:12](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:04:06):**  And then the third dimension is about the ingredients in the ingredient streams.  And this becomes a space for massive amounts of innovation.  It's interesting when you look back on these changes, they probably feel a little bit like  incremental changes and shifts that have been happening.  When you look forward, do you think it will be a sort of step change or a system change  
**[0:04:30-0:04:32](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:04:30):**  or kind of continuing in these incremental trends?  Or is there something where you look back 20 years from now and be like, this is so  different than it was, this was a full system shift?  I believe we're on the cusp of a system change.  Why do I say that?  
**[0:04:44-0:04:51](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:04:44):**  I say that because the people that we need to feed in the future are across the world  going to be older people that need to really put food at the center of their wellbeing  agenda.  They can't decouple wellbeing and food anymore.  That would be my first point.  
**[0:05:05-0:05:13](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:05:05):**  My second point is the way in which we then tune foods to the needs of those people, both  culturally from an access point of view, but also from a wellbeing point of view, I think  he's going to become way more sophisticated in the future.  And then the third and probably the most important piece is we have to find new ways of fueling  that whole system through new agricultural approaches that are going to be more positive  
**[0:05:38-0:05:43](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:05:38):**  from a climate change point of view, but also from a biodiversity point of view.  And again, also from an access point of view.  I think the confluence of those three things, those three elements perturbing the system  so fundamentally, I think we're going to have to see a system change.  It's so interesting the opportunity to think about food as a system and how these value  
**[0:06:01-0:06:04](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:06:01):**  chains work and how they connect with people and planet.  And yet consumers are making that decision busy after a day of work, trying to get food  on the table.  Not a lot of system thinking.  That's not how decisions get made.  
**[0:06:12-0:06:16](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:06:12):**  How do you think about that tension between what the consumer is thinking and how we do  need some of these more nuanced systems perspectives when we think about complex challenges like  climate change and sustainability?  I think we spent too long waiting for the consumer to get it or trying to convince the  consumer about getting it.  
**[0:06:30-0:06:37](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:06:30):**  And it's actually really interesting now because if I look at the biggest driver for action  in big food companies or in food companies generally, it's actually becoming a requirement  to de-risk our business.  I always like to tell the story Kellogg's got this wonderful history and W.K. Kellogg  and this net.  
**[0:06:51-0:06:58](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:06:51):**  W.K. Kellogg was a systems thinker within his sphere, but his system was quite limited  because he could see what was around it.  But what did he do?  He had a belief that you could deliver well-being through certain kinds of food and certain  kinds of nourishment was required and accessible nourishment would be valuable.  
**[0:07:08-0:07:11](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:07:08):**  But he looked out the window and he saw what was the system that was around it.  The system was around it was wheat and corn and all that.  It was in the Midwest.  And he absorbed that and he adopted that and he found ways of translating that into his  purpose which was to provide accessible foods.  
**[0:07:24-0:07:29](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:07:24):**  What we've done in recent years is entirely decouple the system.  So the agricultural system runs almost separately to the food processing system and the food  processing system runs almost separately to distribution elements and the like.  And that's really counterintuitive.  These things are interlinked.  
**[0:07:46-0:07:49](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:07:46):**  It's the interdependencies which matter.  So it's only about us opening up those conversations, about us learning about the issues and the  opportunities that lie in those interdependencies that we're really going to make progress.  When I think about how procurement incentives have worked and how sustainability programs  have worked, you start with here's a region, we can think about this program, we might  
**[0:08:10-0:08:14](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:08:10):**  provide some funding, we've got to think about scaling it up, but it starts small and  moves ideally into more of a system change.  If I contrast that to like, why don't we as a food company just provide the farming kind  of kit in one, here's your inputs, here's your seeds, like completely change the business  model to do something different.  
**[0:08:27-0:08:31](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:08:27):**  That's maybe a silly example, you're a food company, not a seed company, but do you have  those conversations internally about the trade-offs between a small pilot that gets scaled up  versus like, how would we re-imagine this system if we were truly solving for this outcome?  I think it comes down to what do you define as the scope of the closed system?  So rather than talk about food for a moment, I'm going to talk about transportation.  
**[0:08:49-0:08:55](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:08:49):**  Many people thought for many years about these highly sophisticated integrated transportation  programs, but many of them never got off the blocks because they required huge amounts  of capital, they required groups to speak to each other that never spoke to each other,  maybe a city, a state, a country level, et cetera, et cetera.  What's interesting in transportation, particularly, there's some beautiful examples in cities  
**[0:09:14-0:09:20](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:09:14):**  today, one of the biggest revolutions in city transportation is the provision of low-cost  bikes.  Now you don't give the bikes away, otherwise people will just steal them and not give them  you back, but you charge a very small amount and you put bikes around the city.  Suddenly you've removed the consumer barrier because the consumer doesn't need to think  
**[0:09:36-0:09:40](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:09:36):**  about what they're going to do, all they need to do is walk out of their office building  and see that there's a bike wrapped down there and if they want to get across the city, they  can just get across the city.  They don't have to use it every day, they can use other forms of transport if it's raining,  but it's extraordinarily accessible and you can do that on a manageable level within a  
**[0:09:54-0:09:55](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:09:54):**  city.  And that to me is extremely interesting because I don't say it's necessarily just geographically  defined but there are ways of aggregating closed systems that become really interesting.  Another example of an area we're working is on the Cooled Soil Initiative in Australia.  In Australia on cooled soil, we found as Kellogg that we've got common interest with the Mars  
**[0:10:22-0:10:29](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:10:22):**  Wrigley company and so we're able to provide something of a sufficient scale there.  That can be the boundary if you like of the experiment.  Going to your more extreme example, I was in Dubai earlier in the year and I am blown  away by some of the experiments that they're trying to do.  What's really interesting there is they import 90 to 95% of their food and obviously they  
**[0:10:52-0:10:59](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:10:52):**  don't necessarily have a high level of natural resources but they do have a lot of cash,  capital and they have a lot of sun so they're able to grow things.  And it's really fascinating to me how they are taking on a more fully integrated model.  How far that will be translatable to other places I'm not sure.  Yeah, it's interesting to think about the both imposition of constraints there around  
**[0:11:21-0:11:25](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:11:21):**  the quality of soils and conditions that that environment presents but also the loosening  of constraints in terms of not a public company that's reporting quarterly and access to capital.  So you think about what degrees of freedom you actually have to innovate.  And I also believe they have another massively important degree of freedom which is they're  not self-constraining.  
**[0:11:41-0:11:44](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:11:41):**  They believe this can be done and will be done, therefore they do it.  You mentioned safety and nutrition.  Do you feel like we're on trend to keep increasing that or do you think with climate change,  more science coming into the food system, different pressures we're facing that we're  actually becoming less nutritious or less safe where we're headed and what might we  
**[0:12:01-0:12:02](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:12:01):**  do about it?  I always think that we've got a view, yes, the climate issues but also the nutrition  issues and the access issues altogether.  You can't take one versus the other.  You can't start to balance the nutritional value of foods versus the climate impact of  
**[0:12:18-0:12:20](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:12:18):**  foods and I think there's a risk that we do that.  One of the things that always sends a shiver down my spine is the latest trend of the perfect  diet or the perfect foods simply because they are founded in a very narrow doctrinal part  of what food is about.  People talk to me with a glint in their eye and they say to me, yes, but what about the  
**[0:12:38-0:12:40](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:12:38):**  future of food as medicine?  Food is not medicine.  We're made of food.  We're not made of medicine.  Food is more fundamental than that.  
**[0:12:48-0:12:49](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:12:48):**  Medicine isn't cultural.  I know medical treatments can be cultural but scientific Western medicine isn't cultural.  Your food choices are and therefore we've got to work so hard to make sure that we're  matching all of those elements.  As I said, safety, access, nutrition, and climate.  
**[0:13:07-0:13:10](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:13:07):**  Do you think we're trending more towards food, maybe not food as medicine since you don't  like that term, but food as culture and as experience or food as fuel?  I think that's one of the trade-offs with pressure on convenience, but also pressure  on health.  Are there tensions there?  
**[0:13:22-0:13:26](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:13:22):**  There are clear tensions there, but there are clear tensions in every individual's life  across those spectrums.  Sometimes we want to indulge.  Sometimes we want to match very specific nutritional needs.  What we are finding is less that one consumer is an indulgent consumer and another consumer  
**[0:13:39-0:13:46](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:13:39):**  is a fuel or I'll even go with food as medicine, but really a very scientific perspective on  the food they consume.  What we find is that consumers cover that whole spectrum and at particular times and  occasions within their lives and within their day and week and month, they will be making  choices.  
**[0:14:00-0:14:03](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:14:00):**  We will be making choices across all of those things.  I believe that's a really good thing because the idea that we live in a world where everything  is scientifically controlled.  I grew up in the late 60s, early 70s.  We were all going to be popping pills by now.  
**[0:14:18-0:14:19](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:14:18):**  That was very clear.  It didn't happen, did it?  The idea that we would all live in that world, no, but the idea that we all live in this  indulgent world where you don't need to consider the nutritional value of your food is just  as crazy.  
**[0:14:31-0:14:34](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:14:31):**  It's really interesting and people are smart.  They do understand that.  Now, sometimes they may find it difficult to execute against that because of the range  of foods that are available to them.  Let me play devil's advocate for a second.  
**[0:14:46-0:14:51](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:14:46):**  I'm imagining someone listening to this going, this guy from big food, it's an incredibly  consolidated industry.  Talk a big game here, but is there really that much choice and is there really that  much of this kind of innovation where consumers are truly going to have these kinds of choices  without trade-offs around affordability and nutrition and climate impact?  
**[0:15:04-0:15:06](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:15:04):**  How would you respond to that?  I know that with the ability to touch billions of people's lives comes an incredible responsibility.  I've already said, I think the advances that have been made in providing safe and nutritionally  dense food have been tremendous in recent years.  Do we always have to keep raising that bar?  
**[0:15:23-0:15:24](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:15:23):**  Absolutely we do.  The biggest issue we have now from a nutritional point of view is not undernutrition, although  it is still a serious issue in many parts of the world.  It is actually, if you like, overnutrition and we have to be constantly conscious of  that.  
**[0:15:39-0:15:42](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:15:39):**  But that takes me back to the system approach.  That takes me back to having a better understanding of the challenges and the relationships with  the farmers, the challenges and the relationships of processing ingredients for us to then make  them into finally form foods.  I believe that there is an enormous set of opportunities there to be taking more nutritionally  
**[0:16:05-0:16:11](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:16:05):**  dense ingredients to ensure that they are processed in ways which are a minimal process.  Incidentally, you can't get much more minimal processing than a cornflake.  We take one flake of corn and pressure cook it and flatten it.  But that aside, I think there are some myths around processed foods, heavily processed  foods.  
**[0:16:24-0:16:31](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:16:24):**  It is absolutely a responsibility, working in my kind of role and in my kind of company  to be able to tackle that.  In the end, a system will work if there's value in it for everyone.  And that means that it has to have value for the consumer.  It means it has to have value for people who process the food and make the foods like we  
**[0:16:44-0:16:45](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:16:44):**  do.  But it also has to have value for the farmer and people upstream in the system.  How do you think about the evolution in the kind of middle infrastructure of the supply  chain that might need to take place?  We can say we want more cover cropping, but where's the equipment that's going to harvest  
**[0:17:00-0:17:01](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:17:00):**  it?  We want you to grow these other grains because they align more with what consumers want.  But where's the processing infrastructure?  And it's going to be commingled.  And how do we preserve the integrity of what was produced?  
**[0:17:11-0:17:13](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:17:11):**  Like how do you think about that middle supply chain?  There are many new technologies coming through that have the potential to really help us.  So if I look at Kellogg's climate impact, then the most significant part of our climate  impact, 80%, is from scope three.  It's from the ingredients and the way that they're grown.  
**[0:17:28-0:17:34](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:17:28):**  Pretty true of any major food company, particularly at being a fundamentally plant-based, if you  like, food company.  I sometimes balk at that distinction, but I'll go with it right now.  So then if you look at that 80%, of that 80%, roughly 50% of that climate impact comes from  fertilizer production.  
**[0:17:50-0:17:56](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:17:50):**  If you look at all of our inputs, and we can say it's between 40 and 60, but roughly 50%  of it comes from our fertilizer.  We can be more efficient at using fertilizer, but until we explore and discover new ways  to fertilize, then we're going to really struggle with that.  There are new biotech approaches that are extraordinarily exciting.  
**[0:18:14-0:18:20](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:18:14):**  Looking at how do you start to modify the microbiome of the soil?  How do you start to positively interact such that maybe you can't remove traditional fertilizer,  but you can certainly have a significant impact?  If you start to do that, that's really interesting to me because, first of all, it has the climate  impact.  
**[0:18:36-0:18:40](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:18:36):**  Frankly, you're still probably getting the same crops, so you're probably not too worried  about that.  You're not having to redesign everything.  And thirdly, you're actually able to decrease overall costs in the farm.  Now I can be accused of a bit of science fiction.  
**[0:18:52-0:18:57](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:18:52):**  We don't have all the technology there yet, but we have the potential for that kind of  technology.  There's no reason scientifically why not.  You mentioned fertilizer there.  We spent a lot of time looking at this space, as have many of our listeners.  
**[0:19:06-0:19:11](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:19:06):**  We've actually invested in a company called Jupiter Ionics, and they make ammonia from  air, water, and renewable energy.  And it's indistinguishable from magic, really, to your point.  And yet this stuff is coming, right?  It's still early, but it's starting to come.  
**[0:19:21-0:19:25](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:19:21):**  When I think about Kellogg, though, and core strengths of an organization like yours, it's  probably not in electrolysis or in the future of Haber-Bosch.  How do you think about your innovation strategy in terms of what you do yourselves, what you  do with partners?  Are you getting into the investment world?  
**[0:19:36-0:19:39](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:19:36):**  Yes, yes, and yes.  Because all of this is predicated on working with partners.  What we believe we are best at is identifying opportunities and opportunity spaces and designing  food to rare bear.  That's what we do.  
**[0:19:53-0:19:58](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:19:53):**  Lots of other things we've got some knowledge of, but we certainly are not expert in many  things we have even very little knowledge.  If you're going to believe in systems thinking, you've got to operate with an ecosystem approach.  And then if I look at less than four years, 34 years ago, I entered Unilever.  There were several thousand R&D scientists all under one roof.  
**[0:20:19-0:20:24](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:20:19):**  Actually, there were under three roofs, but they were all pretty much gathered together.  And Unilever believed at that time that all aspects of innovation were going to come from  inside the company.  That has thankfully fundamentally shifted over my career.  And I know now that we as Kellogg are good at some things, very good at some things,  
**[0:20:44-0:20:51](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:20:44):**  but also that we absolutely will depend on partnerships, relationships that can be with  current companies, relationships that can be with startups and the like.  And that just adds more fun to the whole conversation as far as I'm concerned, because it stops  being a conversation about who owns what.  And it starts being a conversation about how are all of us going to have an impact.  
**[0:21:10-0:21:13](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:21:10):**  I would like that to be true.  I wonder if all of those rooms, everyone sort of saying, how can we grow the pie versus  which slices mine?  Tell me about some of the trade-offs, partnerships easy to say and hard to do.  How do you think about the right kind of partners, the areas you want to play?  
**[0:21:27-0:21:30](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:21:27):**  And I guess where are some of the limits as well?  I can't imagine Kellogg's going to be owning and operating farms, although maybe.  So yeah, some of those limits and some of the types of partnerships you think make more  sense.  Never say never to anything, but highly unlikely that Kellogg would back integrate to own farms.  
**[0:21:44-0:21:48](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:21:44):**  Highly unlikely that Kellogg would back integrate to process grains.  There are people who are better suited to doing that.  A live example that we have looking at plant protein.  So investing in startups that are able to produce plant proteins, we invested a number  of years ago in MycoTech.  
**[0:22:02-0:22:06](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:22:02):**  This is plant protein from fungal base, basically.  And with that, they have other investments from other parts of the food company.  We're happy to work with them and sit with them, because what that does is allows us  to very early on test the kinds of plant proteins they're producing, see how compatible they  are in terms of making great tasting foods that can be accessible, et cetera, et cetera.  
**[0:22:24-0:22:31](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:22:24):**  What we are also interested in is indirectly supporting programs like irrigation programs  or measurement programs in the farming space, where because of our scale, we can be a key  partner in setting up a standardization of measurement.  That matters.  It matters a lot because then other people will join such partnerships and you suddenly  
**[0:22:47-0:22:49](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:22:47):**  are able to create value.  You mentioned plant based before and I sensed some, I don't know, skepticism or hesitant  in your voice there, Nigel, around this term plant based.  How do you think about that term and what does it mean to Kellogg?  Straightforward term like that can be a double edged sword.  
**[0:23:01-0:23:06](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:23:01):**  So there is a strong argument that Kellogg was one of the first plant based companies.  That's what W.K.  Kellogg did 116 some years ago.  However, in recent years, that's become very clearly a bandwagon for a lot of people who  are designing foods that may not be nutritionally better foods and may not really be providing  
**[0:23:25-0:23:29](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:23:25):**  a direction for the food business, for the agriculture sector that is a better place  to go.  So I'm always somewhat skeptical about cliches and those beautiful phrases.  And so the one thing that's important to me.  Absolutely, we need to eat more diverse plant based diets in the future.  
**[0:23:47-0:23:49](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:23:47):**  There is no question about that.  The scientist in me knows that there's plenty of proof of that if we're going to attack  climate change and if we're going to make progress in terms of overall well-being.  Given that's the case, I just don't want that to get hijacked into a very narrow band definition  of what plant based is, because this needs to not be the next fad.  
**[0:24:10-0:24:16](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:24:10):**  This needs to be the way that when we look back in 50 years time or 30 years time or  20 years time, we say, wow, look at how all of those dimensions have changed.  The parallel I draw, I remember the mid 90s when we had the first dot com bubble and there  were some companies that started in that dot com bubble that are still around today.  And that's one of the biggest companies in the world.  
**[0:24:39-0:24:40](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:24:39):**  Amazon's a great example.  I remember buying my first book from Amazon probably in about 96 97 if my memory serves.  But there are many companies that aren't there today because they took a very narrow version  of what the dot com was going to be.  And more importantly, what the four ramifications of the Internet were going to be.  
**[0:24:57-0:25:03](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:24:57):**  I think we're in a change in the food system and the way that people look at food and the  role it has.  I think we're in a change that is of similar proportions to that dot com change.  But it wasn't all clear in 1996 97.  Yeah, absolutely.  
**[0:25:13-0:25:16](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:25:13):**  I agree with the system change.  One thing I wanted to come back to that you said Nigel is around this kind of association  that's getting made nowadays between plant based and health.  And one of my favorite products as a kid was I go waffles.  I would say plant based but perhaps not the healthiest of product.  
**[0:25:32-0:25:37](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:25:32):**  You could your Pringles pop tarts, fruit loops, arguably plant based, but I wouldn't say the  nutritional pinnacle.  What's your response to that?  I think these things get grouped together and it's potentially dangerous.  I go back to what I just said about don't look at plant based as being just one thing.  
**[0:25:46-0:25:48](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:25:46):**  Plant based is also looked at as not being enjoyable.  Those foods are all enjoyable.  Kellogg is not trying to claim that Pringles are something which is going to transform  your well being other than your mental well being perhaps because you eat Pringles with  friends and their moments of enjoyment.  
**[0:26:01-0:26:09](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:26:01):**  But also, most importantly, Kellogg's has a broad portfolio of foods.  And that is the most critical thing.  And it's not just about Kellogg's foods either.  We firmly support a diverse diet.  That's what people have got to be eating.  
**[0:26:18-0:26:22](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:26:18):**  I really like what you said about systems thinking and the systems perspective.  That's a lot how we think and believe that change will really come from that broader  perspective.  And yet I know I find myself in a lot of conversations where people just want a more black and white  answer than the kind of nuanced, oh, but yes, we need to change the mid supply chain.  
**[0:26:37-0:26:38](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:26:37):**  And then there's these other incentives.  And yeah, it's not as easy when you think about natural systems as just a black and  white answer.  Do you have any advice for me on providing a bit more systems thinking and nuanced into  conversations when other people just want a black and white answer?  
**[0:26:52-0:26:56](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:26:52):**  I think it's a tremendous challenge because we're taught from a very young age, that very  deterministic approach.  And it's only in recent years that we're starting to see the world and everything around us  from a system perspective.  When we talk about issues like climate change, suddenly you can't think about that as being  
**[0:27:12-0:27:13](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:27:12):**  point occurrences.  This is a transformation of the overall system.  So the way that I like to help people think about it is stop thinking about the entities  and start thinking about the interactions.  And if you can get people to just say, think about the interactions and look at the natural  
**[0:27:32-0:27:36](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:27:32):**  world, the natural world is a set of interactions.  The natural world doesn't produce waste because the waste of one process becomes the fuel  of another process.  And so you can start to paint this picture of interdependency.  You can start to paint more of a map.  
**[0:27:52-0:27:55](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:27:52):**  And for me, it's a conversation.  It's always a conversation for people because you can begin to get people to think like  that.  You can begin to move them from structure to processes.  You can begin that.  
**[0:28:05-0:28:09](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:28:05):**  And then suddenly you slide back to yes, but yes, but.  And that's okay.  That's okay because it is a very different way of looking at it.  I have to ask Nigel, as we wrap up here, Telleg recently announced that it'll spin off into  three separate companies.  
**[0:28:23-0:28:27](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:28:23):**  How do you think that will impact your work and some of the trends and opportunities we've  talked about today?  I'm very clear that we'll just give greater strategic focus to the different elements  of the work.  The reason that we are spinning the three companies is because they have very different  
**[0:28:39-0:28:40](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:28:39):**  strategic needs.  One is a, we call it a plant-based company, but it is essentially about meat replacement.  That company is competing in a very different world today than our core North American cereal  business, which is competing in a very different world to our global snacks business.  And so it's important that we unleash the potential and power of each of those businesses  
**[0:29:02-0:29:07](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:29:02):**  and to do that makes enormous sense that they're able to plot their own strategic paths and  therefore we have to spin.  But if I go back to the core issues facing those businesses, the issues around the ingredients  they source, the issues around transforming those ingredients into culturally relevant  accessible foods and the issues of wellbeing and nutrition for people going to the future,  
**[0:29:25-0:29:28](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:29:25):**  they hold for all three companies.  Talking to Nigel about innovation and the future of food from the Kellogg perspective  left me with a couple solid takeaways and some lingering questions.  First, I appreciated the three dimensions of change Nigel identified for the food system.  Changing populations and incomes have been a talking point for ages, but I liked the  
**[0:29:45-0:29:50](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:29:45):**  attention he paid to the idea of aging populations and how this is increasing the focus on food  as nutrition, as well as enjoyment.  I think his ideas around changing markets and diversity of delivery mechanisms was also  interesting though I wish he would have said more about the third factor, how Kellogg is  thinking about changing ingredients and ingredient streams going forward.  
**[0:30:04-0:30:11](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:30:04):**  Next, I was interested to hear Nigel's insider perspective on change within food organizations,  especially his assertion that the sector waited too long for consumers to buy into the sustainable  food narrative when the risk to organizations was already present.  As we think about ESG and climate disclosure reporting here at Tenacious, especially when  it comes to scope through emissions, as Nigel discussed, we're seeing a growing awareness  
**[0:30:30-0:30:35](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:30:30):**  of this threat and expect to see more companies responding in new ways as the industry moves  beyond the idea that sustainability is just a marketing term or a box to tick.  Finally, I resonated with Nigel's call for a systems-based approach and I liked his tactic  of asking people to think about interactions rather than entities.  I also appreciated his pointing out that the response to such prompting is often yes, but.  
**[0:30:55-0:30:59](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:30:55):**  The status quo way of thinking is not systems-based and converting people to thinking that way  whether they're customers, lawmakers, business leaders, or investors is no easy task.  Though Nigel resisted much of my prying to hear about what specific innovations or ideas  his R&D team are cooking up, we'll be watching closely to see how Kellogg and their competitors  navigate the challenges ahead that he's identified.  
**[0:31:18-0:31:23](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:31:18):**  To bring us full circle here, I think this conversation tied to, for me, why we'll be  talking a bit more about Tenacious and our Fund2 fundraise here on the podcast.  This whole exercise is about asking people in ag tech from legacy player executives like  Nigel to start up founders, to farmers, to advocates, to scientists to be vulnerable,  to learn out loud about their failures and to share their struggles so that others can  
**[0:31:41-0:31:44](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:31:41):**  benefit from their scar tissue.  The reason this podcast exists is because we believe that there are lessons to be shared,  trust to be built and credibility to be earned.  We think that applies to us and our work beyond the podcast too.  Again, make sure you tune in if you're interested in learning more about our raise and if you'd  
**[0:31:57-0:32:01](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:31:57):**  like to learn more about our work and how to get involved in Fund2, visit the link in  the show notes.  So that's it for another episode of Ag Tech So What.  Thanks again to our guest, Nigel Hughes.  And of course, thank you for listening.  
**[0:32:09-0:32:13](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/systems-thinking-and-the-legacy-of-big-food-with-dr-nigel-hughes-kellogg#t=0:32:09):**  For more information on any of the resources mentioned in this podcast, visit our website,  tenacious.ventures.  I'm Sarah Nollet, catch you next time.  