### Agtech - So What?  (2022-00-19)
**[0:00:00-0:00:06](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, and welcome to Ag Tech So What, brought to you by Tenacious Ventures.  I'm Sarah Nolette.  A reminder, don't forget to stick around until the end of the show for some fresh insights  on our Raising Out Loud journey.  And make sure you check in with us on socials and visit the website in the show notes for  
**[0:00:17-0:00:19](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:00:17):**  more information on fun too.  Now onto today's show.  If you are, well, alive in agriculture right now, you've probably heard a little something  about the challenges in today's fertilizer industry.  Last year, 2021, we were buying liquid nitrogen for $195 a ton.  
**[0:00:38-0:00:41](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:00:38):**  This year it cost us $650 a ton.  So you usually need about a pound of nitrogen to grow a bushel of corn.  If our nitrogen cost went from 60 to 80 bucks an acre, now to over 200 bucks an acre, that's  pretty significant.  That's Clay Govere.  
**[0:00:53-0:00:58](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:00:53):**  He's a Nebraska farmer who joined us for our latest bonus episode to talk about financing  expansion.  But he also offered an eye-opening look into the current situation on the ground when it  comes to nutrients.  There are a lot of factors at play here, not least of which the war in Ukraine, which has  
**[0:01:09-0:01:14](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:01:09):**  largely cut off Russia and Belarus, huge fertilizer producers from world markets.  Our recent conversation with Clay and similar ones with other farmers and experts really  made it clear to us how opaque and in many ways antiquated the modern crop nutrient space  is, and how much innovation is sorely needed in fertilizer.  This was our inspiration and motivation to bring you a series of episodes on the future  
**[0:01:34-0:01:38](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:01:34):**  of fertilizer, starting today, where we're tackling probably the most talked about element,  nitrogen, the N in NPK.  Now the modern factors affecting nitrogen fertilizer are many, and there are a lot of  people with a lot of different ideas aiming to relieve the pressure that farmers like  Clay are feeling.  
**[0:01:51-0:01:56](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:01:51):**  To be successful, however, these companies will have to figure out both the science and  the business of N. These are two big topics, so we've decided to tackle them in two parts.  Today we'll talk the science of N, and over the next episode we'll break down the business.  Over these two episodes, we're going to hear from a couple of different voices.  First I want to introduce you to Charlie Day, the CEO of Jupiter Ionics.  
**[0:02:14-0:02:19](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:02:14):**  Now a relevant disclosure here, Jupiter Ionics is a portfolio company of ours, which, well,  means he better be good, right?  Anyway, Jupiter is pioneering a novel pathway to the creation of ammonia, the essential  basis of nitrogen fertilizer, using a combination of electrochemistry and renewable energy.  If you're not up to your eyeballs in the fertilizer industry every day, that sentence  
**[0:02:35-0:02:37](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:02:35):**  was probably pretty jargony.  So I asked Charlie if he'd share his snappiest introduction to the science that his company's  working on.  To answer the question of how the science works, I might start with a history of how  the existing process to make ammonia works, which is the Haber-Bosch process.  
**[0:02:50-0:02:52](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:02:50):**  It's a very famous process.  It's one of the first large-scale industrial processes developed at the turn of the last  century in the early 1900s.  And essentially what that does is it takes nitrogen from the air, the air around it is  80% nitrogen, takes nitrogen from the air and at very high temperature and very high  
**[0:03:07-0:03:12](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:03:07):**  pressure, it cracks open that nitrogen molecule using a catalyst, combines it with hydrogen  to make ammonia, which is NH3.  So essentially the industrial process to make ammonia, to make fertilizer for the last century  has been this very large, high pressure, high temperature process driven largely by fossil  fuels.  
**[0:03:25-0:03:30](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:03:25):**  And so our technology comes into a world where it's no longer the case that fossil fuels  are our sort of dominant or preferred form of energy.  We're moving to a world where renewable electricity is the preferred form of energy.  And so our researchers have figured out a way to crack open that nitrogen molecule,  not using high temperature, high pressure, but using electricity.  
**[0:03:46-0:03:49](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:03:46):**  And so what we do is we use renewably generated electricity.  It can come from solar or from wind or whatever, but we use that electricity to crack open  that nitrogen molecule and combine it with protons to make NH3.  So we've moved from what is to use a big word, a thermochemical process to something that's  an electrochemical process.  
**[0:04:04-0:04:05](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:04:04):**  So it's driven by electricity.  And we're excited by that because it takes the fossil fuels out of the equation and enables  you to have a synthetic ammonia process that is just powered by renewable electricity.  So from an end user perspective, I guess, who do you think about as the users and for  them will what Jupiter produces be different than what they can get out of the existing  
**[0:04:23-0:04:25](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:04:23):**  Haber-Bosch system?  At the end of the day, we're still making ammonia.  It's a molecule, it's a gas or a liquid depending on the pressure, and we're still making the  same substance.  So in that sense, there's no change to what we're making.  
**[0:04:34-0:04:40](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:04:34):**  But the interesting thing is that our technology opens up the potential to do it at a much  smaller scale than has traditionally been possible.  So the traditional Haber-Bosch process to make ammonia tends to be done in very large,  centralized industrial plants that make a million tons a year.  But because our process is an electrochemical one, it's inherently more modular and more  
**[0:04:56-0:04:57](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:04:56):**  flexible.  So we open up the opportunity to make it in a more decentralized way.  It's a little bit like moving from a world where all of our electricity is generated  in large centralized coal fired power stations to a world in which we can make our electricity  using solar cells on our roof and our paddocks.  
**[0:05:13-0:05:18](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:05:13):**  And so for end users, it opens up the opportunity of making your ammonia, your fertilizer much  closer to the point of use.  Now, given the pretty significant pressure on emissions, intensity of production and  kind of environmental credentials of the sector, as well as just like supply chain volatility  and the kind of brittleness of that centralized model, a lot of people are trying to green  
**[0:05:34-0:05:37](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:05:34):**  or redesign the Haber-Bosch process.  Tell me about kind of other approaches and how Jupiter fits into those different models.  So there's a few different approaches to decarbonizing green ammonia that we see in the industry.  The most advanced one and the one where most of the energy is going into at the moment  takes the traditional Haber-Bosch process, but tries to make it work at a smaller scale  
**[0:05:58-0:06:02](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:05:58):**  and in milder conditions that are more amenable to working at a small scale.  And what you can do is you can take that process and then marry it to a water electrolyzer  as your source of hydrogen, because the challenge in the traditional process is you typically  get hydrogen from fossil fuels.  And so if you marry up a water electrolyzer with a scaled down Haber-Bosch, you can make  
**[0:06:18-0:06:21](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:06:18):**  a distributed ammonia production system.  And there are several companies that are trying to do that.  And I think that's a really exciting pathway, has some challenges because you're still using  a thermochemical process.  So it doesn't like the sort of intermittent type of supply that you typically get from  
**[0:06:34-0:06:35](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:06:34):**  renewable electricity.  And that can be a challenge.  The other way to go to fertilizer, not so much to ammonia, but to fertilizer is to use  electrical currents.  So some say lightning actually forms nitrates directly.  
**[0:06:47-0:06:52](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:06:47):**  So you can go directly from nitrogen in the atmosphere to nitrates.  And there's a great startup out of California called Nitricity that's using that approach.  So there are a few different pathways to do this.  And we certainly think that the speed at which we need to make this transition to sustainable  fertilizer is such that we're going to need every possible pathway.  
**[0:07:07-0:07:09](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:07:07):**  And tell me about the environmental benefits.  Charlie, you mentioned running on renewable energy and being able to be used with intermittent  energy production.  What's the overall environmental benefit or performance based on both the kind of existing  fertilizer options or ammonia options, but also based on potentially biological alternatives?  
**[0:07:25-0:07:32](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:07:25):**  If you look at the sort of carbon footprint of farming in an archetypal broadacre cropping  kind of scenario, there's a carbon footprint that goes with the fertilizer manufacture  stage and for ammonia that's two tons of carbon dioxide for every ton of ammonia that you  make.  But then there's additional emissions through the supply chain as we bring the fertilizer  
**[0:07:46-0:07:47](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:07:46):**  from the production point to the farm.  And then there's emissions associated with the application of fertilizer in the field.  And in fact, those supply chain plus field emissions can exceed the quantum of emissions  in the production stage.  And so the benefits that we can bring on a carbon emissions front are certainly in that  
**[0:08:03-0:08:08](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:08:03):**  production stage and in the supply chain, potentially also in the on-farm application,  depending on how much flexibility we can give to the farmer.  But beyond the carbon emissions, I think one of the exciting parts of our technology is  that it decouples the cost of the fertilizer from the key input cost today, which is the  natural gas price.  
**[0:08:22-0:08:26](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:08:22):**  And as we've seen in the market this year with the natural gas price going berserk,  the fertilizer price has gone similarly.  And so our technology opens up the opportunity to essentially give you a very stable fertilizer  price because it's largely in the capital cost.  The inputs are water, air and renewable energy, which can be quite stable in price.  
**[0:08:40-0:08:44](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:08:40):**  And so that I think takes a risk factor out for our end users.  So yeah, there are environmental benefits in terms of carbon reduction, but I think  also stability and price is a key benefit.  And what are the limitations to the Jupiter solution?  I know it's early and we can talk a little bit about challenges to scaling up, but if  
**[0:08:57-0:09:02](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:08:57):**  you imagine it at scale and working the way you intend it to, what are the limitations?  The main limitation at the moment is that it's early stage.  And so there will be some unknowable technical challenges that will hit as we go to scale.  Certainly we're very excited by what we see at the moment in terms of the performance  that we're able to achieve.  
**[0:09:15-0:09:20](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:09:15):**  But as we go to scale, there'll be some complexities or compromises that I'm sure will come up.  So we certainly anticipate that they will be there.  As a new technology, we are, if you like, competing against the Haber-Bosch technology,  which is a century old, it's a very mature technology.  It's had a lot of engineering applied to it.  
**[0:09:32-0:09:37](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:09:32):**  And we would expect that our performance in the first instance on whether it's energy  consumption or productivity will start out behind that mature technology and we'll have  to catch up.  We see with a lot of other electrochemical technologies that there are very significant  learning benefits.  
**[0:09:49-0:09:55](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:09:49):**  So as you build more and as you deploy more capacity, costs come down and performance  improves.  So we would expect to see that happen with our technology as we go forward as well.  We've always thought there are other benefits along the lines of like energy storage or  kind of other potential uses.  
**[0:10:05-0:10:07](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:10:05):**  Can you talk a little bit about that?  Yeah.  So that's one of the things we're excited about is that if you like an ancillary benefit,  because at one level you can think about our system as a way of converting electrons into  molecules.  
**[0:10:19-0:10:24](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:10:19):**  So we're converting electricity into a molecule, in this case, ammonia, which has the benefit  of being easy to store and be useful for a wide range of things.  And we haven't really talked about some of the other uses of ammonia as a fuel potentially,  but obviously it has uses fertilizer as a core use, but also potentially as fuel.  And so our technology opens up the opportunity to help balance a grid potentially where you  
**[0:10:43-0:10:45](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:10:43):**  have surplus renewable electricity.  And we see this certainly here in Australia at the moment, there are times of day when  there's a significant surplus of renewable energy in the grid.  And it'd be great to have ways to convert some of that surplus electrical energy into  a usable chemical form.  
**[0:11:00-0:11:02](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:11:00):**  And that's one of the things that our technology enables.  And so we are excited about that potential and because our technology operates across  a range of scales from kilowatts, megawatts, hopefully ultimately up to gigawatts, we can  offer that solution, if you like, at a range of scales.  I imagine the interest from industry is varied in that some of the existing producers of  
**[0:11:24-0:11:28](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:11:24):**  fertilizer and owners of Haber-Bosch facilities are saying like, no way this will work and  maybe some resistance or pushback, but yet there's probably pull from various players  in the industry.  How much do you think about the current industry's momentum and capital as a barrier or what  kind of responses are you getting?  
**[0:11:43-0:11:48](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:11:43):**  There's clearly wide recognition around the industry of the need to decarbonize ammonia  production.  And as I said, there are a range of other strategies being deployed that existing industry  players are very comfortable taking those.  We are a very new approach, very different approach.  
**[0:12:01-0:12:05](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:12:01):**  And so I think we are being carefully watched by the larger players in the space.  Some share our optimism that it will work at scale.  Others are more skeptical.  And so we have to manage that as we get to scale, as we hit our sort of scale up milestones  and manage our interactions with some of those large players.  
**[0:12:17-0:12:22](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:12:17):**  But as I say, I think the need to decarbonize ammonia is such that our technology will not  be the only green ammonia technology that takes us through to 2050.  We think we can play a significant role, but there will be several green ammonia pathways  that take us to 2050.  Have you experienced any setbacks so far, Charlie, either on the scientific end in terms  
**[0:12:37-0:12:41](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:12:37):**  of getting towards an MVP or as you move as industry conversations?  What can you share about any setbacks so far?  Yeah, look, the life of a startup is, as I often say, a real roller coaster.  And you can go up and down the roller coaster in the space of a week sometimes.  So you can have some days when you think you're going to solve the world's problems in an  
**[0:12:57-0:13:02](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:12:57):**  instant and then you can have weeks where you hit challenges or you hit technical problems.  And so we certainly had our fair share of technical problems like that in the lab where  we've tried to do things or we've tried to adapt discoveries that we made in one context  and take them to a new context.  And it turns out it doesn't work like that or nature doesn't want to reveal its secrets  
**[0:13:16-0:13:17](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:13:16):**  quite that readily.  And so that's a normal part of daily life, I guess, in our company.  We've got a team of really smart scientists and engineers who thrive on hard problems  and don't like to take those kind of failures as knockout blows.  And pleased to say that so far we've seen some really great progress with the technology.  
**[0:13:33-0:13:36](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:13:33):**  But we know that there will be setbacks all the way through.  As I say, nature won't reveal their secrets to us easily.  So we're very focused on just trying to make sure we can bring the best brains to bear  on solving those challenges as fast as we can.  And what's next for Jupiter?  
**[0:13:48-0:13:51](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:13:48):**  It's on the near term horizon.  And yeah, you talked a little bit about what keeps you up.  But what are the next couple of things that you'll be chipping away at?  Yeah, so we're obviously working at the moment on scaling up our prototype.  So we started in the archetypal test tube in the lab and now we're working with a larger  
**[0:14:06-0:14:07](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:14:06):**  and larger prototype.  So we're up to prototypes that are about the size of an iPad, if you like, to give people  a sense of the scale of the cells that we're working with now.  And we need to continue to scale that up in the lab.  And then we want to take it out into the field.  
**[0:14:19-0:14:23](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:14:19):**  So we've got some partnerships with farmers and fertilizer manufacturers.  We want to take our technology out of the field and prove that we actually can integrate  this into a fertigation system.  So that's on our roadmap for next year.  Then beyond that, obviously, then taking our prototypes and turning them into a product  
**[0:14:35-0:14:37](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:14:35):**  that we can actually put on the market.  And I'll be able to finally answer all those farmers who are ringing me looking for a unit.  I'll be able to say we'll have one on sale, but that's probably more a mid decade kind  of thing.  And that's the roadmap that lies ahead of us for at least the next few years.  
**[0:14:50-0:14:55](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:14:50):**  But as I said before, the green ammonia opportunity is so large that we've certainly got a 10  or 15 year roadmap that sees us scaling up as fast as we can to meet that emerging demand.  Charlie, where does the name Jupiter ionics come from?  Yeah, at about the time that I was working to write the business plan for the company,  my son, who was in secondary school, was doing a project on the solar system.  
**[0:15:14-0:15:18](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:15:14):**  And by coincidence, I happened to read about Jupiter and I realized the clouds on Jupiter  are made primarily of ammonia.  And so it felt that that connection to ammonia worked.  And also given the scale of the opportunity that we see in electrochemical ammonia, something  big like Jupiter made sense to us.  
**[0:15:32-0:15:35](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:15:32):**  That was really the genesis of Jupiter ionics as a name.  And it stuck and we love it.  This was just the beginning of the conversation I had with Charlie about the business model  and strategies for tackling the crop nutrient space.  But in learning about the science behind Jupiter ionics and the alternative pathways that Charlie  
**[0:15:48-0:15:52](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:15:48):**  outlined here, we thought it would be worth bringing in another voice, someone who's  following one of these alternate pathways, to learn more about the other options on the  table.  So we called up Bill Brady, CEO and director at Kula Bio, a startup that is shaping a fertility  product that's in some ways similar and in others unrecognizably different from Jupiter  
**[0:16:07-0:16:08](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:16:07):**  ionics.  Kula is a biologically based nitrogen fertilizer powered not by renewable energy, but by living  material.  Here's Bill.  We produce microbes that grab nitrogen from the air and deposit it in the soil.  
**[0:16:23-0:16:28](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:16:23):**  So the air we breathe, as most everyone knows, is 80% nitrogen.  The problem is you can't get at it because there are these fierce nitrogen-nitrogen triple  bonds.  And the only way you can break them down is through extremely high power or biologically.  And these microbes do it.  
**[0:16:44-0:16:48](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:16:44):**  So that was the starting point of the technology.  The difficulty is that these microbes, when they get into the soil, have to compete with  other microbes for food and energy.  So actually their lifespan is very, very short, measured in hours.  And so while they do fix some nitrogen on their own, they don't live long enough to  
**[0:17:10-0:17:12](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:17:10):**  fix a lot.  So to give these microbes their own independent source of energy before they go into the soil  – and this is what we do in our proprietary bioreactors – so that when they're in  the soil, rather than living for hours, our microbes live for two and a half weeks.  All of a sudden, two and a half weeks, that's a lot of time to do the nitrogen fixation.  
**[0:17:37-0:17:40](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:17:37):**  So the quantity of nitrogen becomes very relevant.  And so when you say microbes, people have maybe heard about microbes in soil or microbes  generally, maybe microbes in the precision fermentation space around yeast or fungi.  Tell me more about your microbes and maybe the process.  Walk us through how it works.  
**[0:17:54-0:17:57](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:17:54):**  So our microbes are bacteria.  And the bacteria is naturally occurring.  We do not genetically modify the bacteria.  We simply fatten them up before they go in the soil, like a bear prior to hibernation.  It fattens itself up and then lives off of that fat over the winter.  
**[0:18:14-0:18:18](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:18:14):**  And this is a little bit like what we do to these microbes.  So what happens is, the way we make them, is think of a big vat, and into that vat goes  water and microbes.  And in the first part of our process, we feed those microbes a nutrition mix, and they multiply  like crazy.  
**[0:18:37-0:18:43](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:18:37):**  So we try to get as high a density of microbes as we possibly can.  Just to give you a sense, if you think of a teaspoon of our product, which is a liquid  by the way, a teaspoon of our product probably contains 50 billion microbes.  So the first phase is really get them to multiply, multiply, multiply.  And then at a certain point, we cut the nutrition.  
**[0:19:04-0:19:08](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:19:04):**  The microbes now, just like a human would, goes into a panic mode.  Oh my goodness, there's no more food.  We better start to store food, energy, fat.  So now at this point, we feed the microbe carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, and they produce  basically a carbohydrate that is the energy storage that we fatten them up with before  
**[0:19:29-0:19:30](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:19:29):**  they go into the soil.  So once we get them fattened up to the right level, then we're finished.  They come out of our reactor and they're ready for the soil.  Now you mentioned that they are non-GMO.  Is that an important characteristic for the engineering process and or for our customers?  
**[0:19:46-0:19:47](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:19:46):**  I think both.  So I think certainly if you have a genetically modified product, it's a whole nother level,  a whole nother bar to get on the farm for good reason.  So that's one thing.  But I think equally as important, and I give Dan Nocera so much credit for this, is that  
**[0:20:05-0:20:11](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:20:05):**  he started with an extremely robust microbe and we didn't genetically modify it.  We're not operating on the edge of science.  It's not a very fickle microbe.  And so it allows us to be really aggressive in the bioreactor, density and fattening them  up, and it's really robust in the soil.  
**[0:20:27-0:20:32](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:20:27):**  And so that's really allowed us to do what we wanted to do in the reactor.  And it's also allowed us to get on the farm pretty quickly and start to get feedback on  the microbe, which is what we did.  And how do you fit into the existing ag system?  You've got manufacturers, you've got retailers, you've got agronomists that are recommending  
**[0:20:47-0:20:51](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:20:47):**  practice change, you've got farmers that are buying things, distribution.  Where do you guys fit in knowing that it's still early, but how do you imagine fitting  into the system?  One thing I would just tell you is when we started the company, we contacted 600 farmers  and had really meaningful discussions with 100 of them.  
**[0:21:07-0:21:09](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:21:07):**  And we went out and told them what we were doing.  And the general reception was really positive.  They were really interested for a solution like this, particularly because we improved  soil health over time, which is their primary asset.  So there's a lot of positive vibes, but they said, but listen, let me tell you a few things.  
**[0:21:30-0:21:34](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:21:30):**  Number one, I'm not going to pay you any more money.  Number two, I'm not going to change my farm practices.  And number three, I'm not going to buy any new capital equipment.  So you had better fit your product offering into that.  And then we were walking away and they said, oh, and by the way, you have to show us that  
**[0:21:50-0:21:57](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:21:50):**  it works and not in some fancy lab in Harvard, but on my neighbor's farm.  So talking about fitting into the system, that was lesson number one, which is, okay,  it's got to fit into those constraints.  Otherwise it's not going to fly.  So we went ahead and did that.  
**[0:22:10-0:22:17](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:22:10):**  And now we're working through how you get the farmer to say yes, which I get asked all  the time, what keeps you up at night?  That's it.  You ultimately get the farmer to say yes.  And like you said, there is a network of people that farmers trust.  
**[0:22:29-0:22:31](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:22:29):**  And sometimes it's their retail distributor.  Sometimes it's a crop advisor.  And these are people they've known for a lifetime.  Their fathers probably knew each other and maybe their grandfathers knew each other.  Maybe they go to church together on Sunday, but it's a very tight, very important network.  
**[0:22:48-0:22:52](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:22:48):**  And we're not only working with the farmers, but we're working with getting that entire  network to understand what we do and to do it in a way that's credible to them.  And so that's a lot of hard work.  Tell me about the practice change aspect.  Kind of what are the differences in using biology versus chemistry in terms of like  
**[0:23:06-0:23:11](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:23:06):**  how things get applied and how it fits into the agronomic system?  So our product is a liquid.  It looks like orange juice if you saw the product.  And so we tried to design the product so that whatever the farmer's liquid distribution  system is on the farm today, you could plug our product into that system and fertilize.  
**[0:23:31-0:23:33](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:23:31):**  And so that's what we do today.  I will say if it's a drip irrigation system or an infero system, great for us.  If it's a pivot sprayer, foliar application, we have less experience with that and it's  probably less desirable of an application method for us.  But we'll get there with that too.  
**[0:23:55-0:24:01](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:23:55):**  And agronomically, do they need to change when in the season, thinking about water requirements,  thinking about other products, is there other elements of practice change in using Cooler's  product?  Not really.  The way we operate with the farmer is that we understand the grower's standard practice,  
**[0:24:12-0:24:16](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:24:12):**  and then we figure out how they want to use the product.  Some maybe want to do an application with synthetic and then the rest of the applications  with Cooler.  Some might want to do them together.  You might imagine they want to do both to mitigate the risk.  
**[0:24:27-0:24:32](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:24:27):**  And so we just work with the farmer on what works best for them.  And then we figure out how much nitrogen we're going to replace.  And based on our product density, etc., and how much each microbe can deliver, we recommend  a quantity of our product that will equal those pounds of nitrogen.  And it just gets applied at the same timing intervals through the existing system.  
**[0:24:53-0:24:59](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:24:53):**  And how would you explain both the environmental benefits and limitations as well as the economic  benefits and limitations?  I know you mentioned cost parity, and I imagine you're working on that still.  But how do you break down environmental and economic benefits and limitations?  So on the environmental side, there's really two parts to the story.  
**[0:25:14-0:25:16](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:25:14):**  One is the huge carbon avoidance.  So if you don't use Haber-Bosch and you use Cooler, you save four pounds of CO2 for every  pound of nitrogen, at least.  And then because of the way we feed the microbes carbon, remember I mentioned feeding them  carbon was part of the fattening them up.  
**[0:25:37-0:25:42](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:25:37):**  What happens is that when we fatten them up and the microbe goes into the soil, it draws  on that source of energy, does its job, and then eventually dies and stays as a source  of carbon in the soil.  So we actually sequester carbon.  Now how deep, how long it stays, those are all open questions.  
**[0:25:58-0:26:04](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:25:58):**  But the fact of the matter is we add carbon to the soil through our process.  And so we're sequestering carbon, and you can look at that from a soil health point  of view and a carbon sequestration point of view.  So that's the environmental side.  On the cost side, we're really confident in this.  
**[0:26:18-0:26:21](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:26:18):**  Of course, we're in the process of scaling up.  But if you in a reasonable, sensible engineering type of way, just go to a commercial scale  from where we are today, you get costs that are equal to or lower than synthetic nitrogen.  And what does that look like in terms of performance, yield impacts, outcomes, does that end up  comparable as well?  
**[0:26:42-0:26:47](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:26:42):**  Most of what we've done is you can replace a significant part of your synthetic nitrogen  with Kula and get equivalent yields, no loss in yield.  We have had a handful of produce crops where farmers have done that.  But they have also done experiments using 100% of their synthetic nitrogen and put Kula  on top as a booster and gotten very interesting yield boosts.  
**[0:27:09-0:27:13](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:27:09):**  And we've seen this in particular in tomatoes and berries.  So the product can be used in both ways.  I think it depends on the crop and how the farmer wants to use it.  My sense too of the strength of the value proposition or risk of the objection probably  goes something like just add it to what you already do and you get a yield bump is probably  
**[0:27:28-0:27:29](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:27:28):**  the easiest sell.  And then substitute it for some of what you do and you get a cost reduction with no impact  is probably the next easiest.  And the third one is like some environmental benefit that probably still feels a little  bit nebulous.  
**[0:27:40-0:27:43](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:27:40):**  Does that tend to be how they stack up?  I think you describe it quite well.  There's one factor though that is very important in that hierarchy of what you said.  There are parts of the world where nitrogen usage is starting to get regulated and reduced.  And so in the US, for example, the state of California in certain counties is starting  
**[0:28:03-0:28:10](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:28:03):**  to mandate significant nitrogen reductions on the order of 25 or 30% reductions.  And so farmers just can't do that and lose the yield.  That just doesn't work.  And so in those cases, the value of simply having a sustainable nitrogen replacement  is probably higher than anything you said.  
**[0:28:24-0:28:27](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:28:24):**  So that's another key environmental driver as well.  And you mentioned before that kind of maybe I got this wrong, like tailoring of how much  nitrogen you're replacing and that kind of customization.  Is that like a per farm type of modeling that the agronomist would need to be involved in  or is that a more generic just how much you apply kind of calculation?  
**[0:28:44-0:28:48](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:28:44):**  It's pretty clear to for us, for a leader of our product, how many pounds of synthetic  nitrogen equivalent that equals.  So then how much you want to replace and how you use it.  We have recommendations on that, but it depends on the farmers, the farmers comfort.  The farmers can't and won't take a ton of risks.  
**[0:29:01-0:29:07](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:29:01):**  So whatever it takes to step into it in a very rational fashion with the farmers, we're  ready to do that.  But we're quite confident that we can replace meaningful amounts of nitrogen.  And it's only going to get higher as we drive up the density of microbes and as we drive  up the fattening process to make those microbes even more viable in the soil.  
**[0:29:24-0:29:28](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:29:24):**  Have you experienced or what can you tell me about the setbacks that you've experienced  along the way, whether that's scientific or in terms of getting to an MVP or the rollout  or the investor tensions?  In these type of scientific endeavors, you take a few steps forward and then you get  knocked down and you get a step back.  
**[0:29:41-0:29:45](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:29:41):**  And with biologics, the interesting thing, I had a long career in a public company that  was a chemical company.  And you put what you needed to put in the reactor, you did the reaction right, you got  the same thing every time, you put it in a package, it didn't change and you were done.  Everything's alive.  
**[0:29:57-0:30:01](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:29:57):**  It's alive when we make it, it's alive when we pack it, it's alive on the shelf and it's  alive when it gets in the field.  And there's a lot of challenges there.  So you bump into really unexpected challenges all along the way.  And we've had our share of them for sure.  
**[0:30:13-0:30:15](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:30:13):**  Bill why the name Kula?  One of the young scientists that came out of Dan Nocera's lab when we started the company  was Hawaiian.  And the Hawaiian name for the green horizon is Kula.  And so that's where the name came, it made a lot of sense when he said it.  
**[0:30:33-0:30:36](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:30:33):**  And so we combine that with bio and there you go.  Getting the chance to compare and contrast the science behind two companies looking to  define the future of nitrogen fertilizer was fascinating and has helped to shape our understanding  of how the whole crop nutrient space might evolve.  First, I love that both Jupiter ionics and Kula are taking on the fertilizer challenge  
**[0:30:52-0:30:55](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:30:52):**  at a kind of first principles level.  Rather than innovating on the margins of the existing industry, these companies and many  others see a specific defensible opportunity in creating a product that's decoupled from  fossil fuels, not only for the carbon benefit, but also to help farmers control prices and  be able to meaningfully participate in the efforts to reduce scope three emissions.  
**[0:31:13-0:31:18](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:31:13):**  Next, I appreciate the similar university lab origin story for these two companies.  But even more, I think they've nailed an important lesson that many early ag tech companies missed,  which is that farmers both in the US and Australia and elsewhere prefer and prioritize products  that fit into their existing production system.  We've seen a lot of interesting science and tech, probably some really world changing  
**[0:31:36-0:31:41](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:31:36):**  stuff that because its creators didn't do the work to understand the market, never really  made it off the bench.  Finally, I think it's critical to appreciate that companies like both Jupiter and Kula  are still really early in their journeys.  Figuring out how to scale a fertilizer, as Charlie said, from grams to tons is no easy  
**[0:31:54-0:31:59](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:31:54):**  task nor is getting it into farmers hands once it's made.  I asked both Charlie and Bill about this, digging into questions around business models  and go to market strategies.  You'll hear more from them and from farmers and other experts next week when we bring  you part two of the future of N. In the meantime, if you're interested in learning more about  
**[0:32:13-0:32:17](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:32:13):**  other novel ways to produce nitrogen or about the history of Haber-Bosch, you should definitely  check out the Future of Agriculture podcast with our friend Tim Hamrich.  He did a recent episode featuring Nitricity, the company that Charlie referenced here.  Before we say goodbye, I wanted to share a bit more of our Raising Out Loud journey.  This week, we've been thinking about and answering a lot of questions about whether  
**[0:32:34-0:32:36](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:32:34):**  ag tech is a fit for venture capital.  To us, the answer is an emphatic yes, and we actually think it's becoming an even better  space for venture all the time.  As this series will illustrate, farm inputs and advice are transforming completely.  Given everything we learned today, I think it's clear that today's common farm inputs  
**[0:32:52-0:32:56](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:32:52):**  account for a significant amount of the emissions profile of agricultural production, that they're  getting more expensive and are susceptible to global shocks.  Looking forward, there's an opportunity and an imperative to transition toward lower-intensity  production, including biological and digital replacements for synthetic inputs.  This transition will be far from straightforward though, and ag-chem incumbents such as manufacturers  
**[0:33:15-0:33:18](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:33:15):**  and retailers will be pretty significantly impacted.  As cells and bits replace molecules, incumbents will need different types of expertise to  transform not only product development, but also to shift from margin capture to service  delivery.  A lot of this expertise is most likely going to come via acquisitions.  
**[0:33:35-0:33:39](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:33:35):**  But in addition to incumbents transitioning, these shifts may also create opportunities  for novel kinds of digitally native retailers to gain market share, companies that could  easily get to IPO scale focused on inputs alone.  There are a few other big factors driving ag tech exits and returns.  If you'd like to learn about them or about our work and how to get involved in fun too,  
**[0:33:55-0:33:57](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:33:55):**  visit the link in the show notes.  And thanks again for going along on this journey with us.  So that's it for another episode of Ag Tech So What.  Thanks to our guests, Clay Govere, Charlie Day and Bill Brady.  And thanks to Renee Vasilos at The Nature Conservancy for connecting us to Bill.  
**[0:34:10-0:34:12](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:34:10):**  And of course, thank you for listening.  For more information on any of the resources mentioned in this podcast, please visit our  website tenacious.ventures.  I'm Sarah Nolette.  Catch you next time.  