### Agtech - So What?  (2022-00-02)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to Ag Tech So One, brought to you by Tenacious Ventures.  I'm Sarah Nolet.  This week, and for two more episodes in the future, we're excited to be collaborating  with Trimble Agriculture, who's building technology to make farming better through precision.  A huge thanks to Trimble for partnering with us to bring you today's show.  
**[0:00:19-0:00:24](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:00:19):**  Also a quick note, we have a ton of insights to bring you this week on the future of fertilizer,  so to keep things snappy, we're going to skip our Raising Out Loud segment.  You can always check in on the latest from our fun2 journey on our social media, or visit  our website in the show notes for more info.  Now onto the show.  
**[0:00:36-0:00:41](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:00:36):**  Today, we're tackling part two of our future of fertilizer discussion, focusing in on the  business models of nitrogen and how completely reimagined strategies may be poised to change  the buying and selling of crop inputs.  But first, I think it's worth a reminder of why this story matters so much right now.  Fifty percent of the world gets their nitrogen from synthetic nitrogen sources.  
**[0:01:03-0:01:08](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:01:03):**  So said another way, if we didn't have synthetic or chemical nitrogen, we would only have enough  nitrogen to have three billion people in the world.  The bad news is for every pound of nitrogen you make, you make four pounds of CO2.  Of that synthetic nitrogen you put on the ground, half of it washes off and ends up  in our waterways.  
**[0:01:24-0:01:27](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:01:24):**  So it's like a huge environmental crisis.  With the Russia invasion of the Ukraine, we now also have a humanitarian crisis because,  number one, Russia makes about 20 percent of the world's nitrogen fertilizer.  Ukraine makes, I think the number is around 12 or 15 percent of the world's wheat.  So while you and I in the developed parts of the world are paying more and will continue  
**[0:01:50-0:01:55](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:01:50):**  to pay more for our food, there's a pretty big part of the developing world that's not  going to have nitrogen and not going to have food.  That's Bill Brady, CEO and director at Kula Bio, a company that's harnessing the power  of microbes to reduce emissions in the crop nutrient supply chain.  In the second part of our discussion, we focused on the challenges around marketing, distribution  
**[0:02:10-0:02:15](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:02:10):**  and scale, and how innovation is baked into more than just the biology of their product.  Well, a really interesting aspect of this technology is that we can decentralize the  production and not lose the economics.  And the farmers really lit up on the thought of this because, of course, synthetic nitrogen  is humongous centralized production.  
**[0:02:34-0:02:42](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:02:34):**  And then it goes through a distribution and supply chain that many farmers would describe  as a bit difficult to work through.  They really love the idea of it being closer to the farm, a little bit of just-in-time  capability.  And then there's a lot of really interesting business models that might be interesting  
**[0:02:54-0:02:55](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:02:54):**  to do.  So we're in the process now of figuring out what does decentralized mean.  We had a thought early on that it might mean on the farm.  But I don't think farmers have enough problems.  They don't want to deal with fattening up microbes.  
**[0:03:11-0:03:17](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:03:11):**  So it's probably a regional type situation where, you know, 100 or a couple hundred farms  get served by a certain site.  And then we'll figure out the right partners, distributors that the farmers trust.  We'll figure out the right partners to get it to the farmers in an efficient and economic  way.  
**[0:03:30-0:03:36](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:03:30):**  I imagine the resistance from the existing fertilizer industry could be quite strong  if you're replacing some of their product and therefore some of their revenues, if you're  talking about setting up a local operation, like the human psychology of who's willing  to take on that and the potential pushback they might get from the established industry  that's often really embedded in the community.  
**[0:03:53-0:03:57](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:03:53):**  How does that dynamic play out or how do you see it playing out?  First of all, I would tell you all of the incumbent industry players have been here  to talk to us, to figure out if there's ways to make one plus one equal three.  So we're sorting through that.  For a company like ours, the challenge is, in my opinion, you want to have that established,  
**[0:04:18-0:04:24](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:04:18):**  very strong distribution network supportive of what you're doing, but you also can't be  held hostage to what they want to do or don't want to do.  And big companies, I ran a big company before I started working in small companies.  They think they're innovative.  They think they like to change, but they don't.  
**[0:04:39-0:04:46](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:04:39):**  And so we've got to find a way in the beginning to both create the pull through from the farmers  and the packagers and the CPG companies and get some parts of the distribution network  who really do want to lock arms with us and move it.  And then when some of these big companies have a sales meeting and somebody has to report  that their numbers are down because they lost farmers to Cula Bio, then we can have the  
**[0:05:06-0:05:07](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:05:06):**  discussion about partnerships.  So that's how we view it.  And I'm not being critical, I'm just being realistic, but that's how we view it and how  we're proceeding.  Kat Kerlin Biologicals have been really on the radar recently, a bunch of acquisitions,  
**[0:05:19-0:05:23](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:05:19):**  investments, et cetera in this space, but also kind of have a bit of a bad rep in agriculture.  I'm curious how you go about tackling that perception.  Michael O'Reilly Yeah, it's there for sure.  There was a period there, I don't know if it's five, 10 years ago, I don't know what  it was.  
**[0:05:37-0:05:43](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:05:37):**  A lot of the farmers use the term snake oil when they talk about biologics.  So that's a hard hurdle to get over.  It's also hard, I think, if your business model is to ask the farmer to give you X dollars  per acre now, and then you'll get it back in yield at the end.  That's a much harder sell than what we're trying to say to the farmers, look, just give  
**[0:06:01-0:06:05](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:06:01):**  us the same amount of money you were paying for the synthetic and it'll be the same.  So it's hard.  The way we're trying to deal with it is to not have the Silicon Valley hype to our company,  but to be conservative, to be humble and to do the work.  And our style is more, we're going to put the points on the board, and then point to  
**[0:06:23-0:06:29](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:06:23):**  the scoreboard rather than boast about 100 things we can do and not deliver on it.  You won't get a second chance with the farmers if you do that.  So we're just trying to be as credible as we can to do the work.  We've raised enough money and we have investors who understand that, I think, even though  there's always a little tension there.  
**[0:06:42-0:06:43](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:06:42):**  But that's what we're trying to do.  It's like good old fashioned hard work and good old fashioned business building.  I imagine that some of the challenges with the product being a biological is just does  it work?  But you'd also have things like who's selling it, agronomic recommendations, shelf life,  
**[0:06:59-0:07:01](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:06:59):**  depending on where it comes from.  How much of that do you feel like you guys can really take on?  Is it Kula reps wearing Kula shirts having Kula conversations?  Or is this a kind of channel education?  Or is it more trials and the scientific data?  
**[0:07:15-0:07:20](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:07:15):**  What are the tactics for managing or tackling those perceptions?  I think it's both.  I really do think you need to have the support of the agronomy networks that know the fields  and been doing it for decades and decades.  But on the other hand, this is different.  
**[0:07:32-0:07:38](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:07:32):**  And so we need our own experts in the field holding hands, locking arms with the farmers  and these advisors and making sure the products gets used right and is most effective on the  farm.  One thing though, we're in the phase now, we're trying to make this term from just trials  to a certain number of early adopter customers.  
**[0:07:57-0:08:03](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:07:57):**  And these are customers who ultimately are very large growers or have a very large contract  growing network.  And we've done some work with them on trials, but now we're focusing on bigger and bigger  acreage, optimizing the product for their crops, and ultimately commercializing together.  And that's a little different than just developing a product, putting it for sale and see who  
**[0:08:23-0:08:24](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:08:23):**  buys it.  But we're really trying to step through this together with these key early adopters.  And who does the competition tend to be?  Like I imagine just status quo is the biggest one, but do you get conversations around other  nitrogen replacements, other biologicals?  
**[0:08:38-0:08:41](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:08:38):**  What's the landscape look like?  Most farmers are not using any of other biologicals.  So when we're in these real discussions at the farm level, it's really relative to either  their synthetic or their organic sources of nitrogen that they've been using for a long  time.  
**[0:08:56-0:09:03](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:08:56):**  And that's really where we've kept our focus with regard to other biologicals doing nitrogen-related  work.  There's plenty of room for more than one person to be successful, for sure.  And I don't know what they're doing, but I hope there's a handful of us who are really  successful and we really make a big difference in the world.  
**[0:09:15-0:09:18](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:09:15):**  Another aspect of the business model where Kula has gone with perhaps a less obvious  path is the type of farming system they're starting in.  We took a really important decision early on in the company as to which markets we were  going to focus on.  And we ultimately decided that we were going to do produce first and row crop second.  
**[0:09:36-0:09:41](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:09:36):**  At the end of the day, there were a whole host of reasons why we were going to do that.  But that was the point of significant debate of what it took to be successful in produce  versus row crops, what the real capabilities of these microbes were, and would be, how  much we could really realistically develop them over the next five years.  And just trying to put all that together on how you go about matching technology and market  
**[0:10:07-0:10:09](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:10:07):**  fit.  Because for sure, the acreage in corn, wheat, soy is, my gosh, your mouth water is thinking  about the acreage and acreage there.  But we thought we could actually get to that faster.  We still believe we're going to get to that faster by going through produce first.  
**[0:10:24-0:10:26](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:10:24):**  But there was quite a hell of a debate.  What do you see as the biggest challenges, either now or in the future, for scaling Kula's  technology?  And what's your strategy there?  What's on the horizon and how are you going to tackle those challenges?  
**[0:10:36-0:10:38](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:10:36):**  The product works.  The product works, it's not perfect yet, but the product works.  And so we still have a little bit of time ahead of us to make the product perfect.  The bioprocessing is in a really strong position, but it's not perfect yet.  And so we need to do that as well.  
**[0:10:54-0:10:59](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:10:54):**  But on both of those things, we don't need technology miracles.  We don't need breakthrough innovations.  We need really good, hard science and engineering work to get there.  So I feel great about that.  I think the biggest thing is ultimately getting the farmer to say yes.  
**[0:11:13-0:11:17](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:11:13):**  We can have the best product, we can have our bioprocessing and our costs in place,  but getting the farmer to take that amount of risk and say yes is the biggest challenge.  And I think getting over it is multifaceted.  It's around doing our work, having all our ducks in a row on the field results.  It's about having the supporting networks behind us.  
**[0:11:37-0:11:41](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:11:37):**  And it's about spending time with the farmers and being patient to step through it with  them in whatever they view as their de-risking steps.  And we're just going to have to do that.  Have you thought about any business model changes there, whether that's like an embedded  risk management kind of tactic with that adoption or a downstream supply chain pull around some  
**[0:11:58-0:12:00](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:11:58):**  of those environmental incentives?  Are those avenues worth exploring?  Yeah, and we're exploring all of them.  It's not inconceivable to think about some form of insurance as part of the early offerings.  A price on carbon and that bonus would be fantastic, but we are both going to get old  
**[0:12:17-0:12:20](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:12:17):**  waiting for the world to get their act together on that, I'm afraid.  I really hope I'm wrong on that, but that's a huge upside for us when it happens.  But yeah, we've thought about all those things.  Because also just based on the way we make the microbes, there might be some interesting  pricing models for farmers that might make a lot of sense that address both the price  
**[0:12:40-0:12:46](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:12:40):**  volatility they have to deal with now, because nitrogen is so closely tied to fossil fuels.  The wild variation in prices is really difficult for farmers.  We can take all that away because we don't have any dependence on fossil fuels and our  inputs are quite benign.  So there's a lot of interesting things we can do ultimately to take that risk down and  
**[0:13:01-0:13:05](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:13:01):**  to make it really make a lot of sense for the farmer.  That part seems really interesting to me in terms of once you democratize biology or digitize  biology, whatever you want to call it, when you understand so much more about how the  world around us works, you can tie the digital to the physical.  And so you can say, we know now when it gets really wet or when it gets really dry or when  
**[0:13:22-0:13:26](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:13:22):**  these kinds of things happen, how the biology is going to perform.  And so we can actually have products that consider that, or we know how pricing volatility  will or won't change or those kinds of things.  And so you can share in those economics when you understand that much more granularly about  how the biology is working.  
**[0:13:39-0:13:41](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:13:39):**  So it seems like that's going to be part of the future.  I think so.  I think you're definitely right about that.  I would say one of the things we are trying to do, because we start from such a robust  microbe starting point, is try to take some of that complexity out of it.  
**[0:13:56-0:14:03](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:13:56):**  So a couple of the really big advantages of what we do is, number one, just because these  microbes are so robust, the quantity of nitrogen that we can deliver.  And then the other thing that's really interesting is that our microbes are plant agnostic, because  the microbe is an independent actor in the soil, grabbing nitrogen from the air, depositing  it in the soil.  
**[0:14:21-0:14:27](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:14:21):**  So it doesn't really matter what the plant is, whereas a genetically modified approach  can sometimes be pretty dependent on plant-soil combinations.  I know when we looked at the precision fermentation space, for example, there's increasingly supply  constraints on getting strains, but also on just scaling up in bioreactor capacity.  Is that something that you guys face, or you're different enough that you've got enough control  
**[0:14:47-0:14:50](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:14:47):**  of your own destiny in terms of scale up?  We definitely have felt what you just described, and it's part of the reason we went ahead  and built out this facility.  So we'll have the pilot scale capacity by the end of this year, and then the demonstration  scale, which will be full commercial scale, maybe 18 months after that.  
**[0:15:09-0:15:14](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:15:09):**  Another kind of interesting aspect to that, and I'm sure maybe some of my other biologic  startup companies share the same thing, is while we have a good contract manufacturer,  we don't teach them everything.  So in some way, I think everybody needs to get their own manufacturing so they can do  all their proprietary stuff without any hesitation.  
**[0:15:30-0:15:35](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:15:30):**  Which comes back to your point early on around the capital stacks that are available to fund  these kinds of things, and until investors get increasingly comfortable with, we need  physical things that are made in physical places.  This isn't necessarily crazy high capex.  We can still think about margins, and we can still think about capital efficiency, but  
**[0:15:47-0:15:50](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:15:47):**  it's not just software, and that's what's going to be needed, at least in our view,  to solve some of these climate challenges.  So we can't shy away from that.  That's right.  You do have to get the right set of investors because this is not software.  
**[0:15:58-0:16:00](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:15:58):**  These are not apps we're developing.  This is tough tech, if you will.  So you need a reasonable amount of capital, but more importantly, you need a reasonable  amount of time.  And these ventures, every one of mine that had been successful, have taken seven to 10  
**[0:16:15-0:16:19](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:16:15):**  years, and every other one that I've ever been involved in, looked at, read about, heard  about, successful, have been seven to 10 years.  And so you've got to have the staying power to do it.  From our perspective, the more distributed model that Cula is exploring, which has a  fundamentally different idea of scale than the large, centralized Haber-Bosch facilities  
**[0:16:34-0:16:39](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:16:34):**  of today's fertilizer sector, reminds us of the model that Jupiter Ionics is pursuing  with a different product.  Here's Charlie Day, CEO of Jupiter Ionics.  And I'll disclose again, Jupiter Ionics is a portfolio company of ours here at Tenacious  Ventures.  
**[0:16:49-0:16:51](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:16:49):**  And of course, this is not investment advice.  So there's the business model for us as the manufacturer of ammonia synthesis equipment,  and there's a range of models that we see in similar electrochemical sectors that we  could follow.  So it's actually ranging from us licensing our technology to other manufacturers to make  
**[0:17:08-0:17:14](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:17:08):**  our kits through to us actually manufacturing turnkey ammonia production units ourselves.  But then there's quite a lot of interest then about what's the business model for those  to use that technology.  And as I mentioned before, it's a little bit like moving from centralized to decentralized  power generation.  
**[0:17:24-0:17:28](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:17:24):**  Once you move into a world where people are generating power in a distributed fashion  or making fertilizer in a distributed fashion, you open up lots of really interesting business  models, different ways to actually service the end customers.  So we certainly expect that as we bring our technology to market, that will enable some  really creative business models as well.  
**[0:17:43-0:17:47](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:17:43):**  And in terms of ag, who do you see as some of your initial customers?  Like how might you work with the agricultural industry?  Is it a kind of straight replacement for something farmers are already using?  What kind of farmers are they?  What kinds of use cases do you see?  
**[0:17:56-0:18:00](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:17:56):**  Yeah, so we're chemists and chemical engineers originally, so we're learning a lot about  the ag sector, but we've really come to realize how diverse it is.  And so there are some parts of the industry where we expect potentially will be a, if  you like a drop in replacement.  So there are plenty of parts of the world where anhydrous ammonia is used directly as  
**[0:18:13-0:18:14](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:18:13):**  a fertilizer.  And so what we can do potentially there is offer a decentralized generation solution  that cuts out the supply chain from the original plant, but you're still applying anhydrous  ammonia as your final form of fertilizer.  But there are plenty of other places where different fertilizers are in use.  
**[0:18:30-0:18:35](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:18:30):**  And so we're developing techniques and technology to take our ammonia and convert that to other  types of fertilizer that might be used in different places.  And so the go to market strategy and the partners or the organization we might work with will  likely differ by the markets and the types of fertilizer that we're looking to support.  And do you see either needing to be a practice change?  
**[0:18:51-0:18:55](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:18:51):**  Can it fit into the existing channel and existing agronomic advice?  You actually produce the same thing that farmers would be using today?  We're still in an early stage of technology developments.  We've still had a bit of flexibility in the form of the product that we get.  But I do think that one of the things that we're likely to head towards is making a liquid  
**[0:19:09-0:19:12](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:19:09):**  fertilizer much more readily than a dry fertilizer.  And in fact, a lot of the dry fertilizers today are that way because that's easy to  transport and that's because they're made a long way from the point of use.  And so we think that once you start making fertilizer closer to the point of use, some  of the reasons you might not use a liquid fertilizer are mitigated.  
**[0:19:31-0:19:34](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:19:31):**  And so the willingness to use liquid is greater.  Having said that, we also see a lot of places where liquid fertilizer is used in increasing  amounts.  So we think that'll work better.  But we think that our system will work much better in a liquid fertilizer environment.  
**[0:19:45-0:19:51](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:19:45):**  And from your perspective, is the fertilizer and agricultural industry interested in technologies  like this and products like this?  Or is there some resistance?  Oh, look, I wish I had a dollar for every email or phone call I've been getting from  farmers who want one of our systems like right now.  
**[0:20:00-0:20:05](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:20:00):**  So we're getting a lot of inbound interest from people who recognize the importance of  decarbonization and welcome this idea that we can put some more control into their hands  over how they get their fertilizer.  And so my only frustration is the speed at which I can scale up our technology and bring  it to market.  
**[0:20:17-0:20:24](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:20:17):**  And the need to pull carbon and other global warming chemicals out of the production chain  is very widely recognized.  And we're seeing a real appetite for solutions that can help address that challenge.  As you think about new business models here, like decentralized production, local production,  and maybe even on farm production, how do you see the farm or the skills of farmers  
**[0:20:40-0:20:45](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:20:40):**  and their teams needing to change in terms of being able to produce fertilizer locally  around these systems?  Yes, certainly there will need to be some changes in the ways that farmers use their  fertilizers, although as we know, there are plenty of farmers already who are using anhydrous  ammonia.  
**[0:20:58-0:21:04](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:20:58):**  So it's not like the skills that are required are unknown in the agriculture sector broadly.  It's just that in particular markets or particular geographies, they may not be as well developed.  So we need to share expertise and share knowledge around that.  But again, the exciting thing for me is this idea that we can put more control back into  the hands of farmers and let them make choices about their fertilizer types that are really  
**[0:21:23-0:21:26](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:21:23):**  more suited to their particular circumstances.  So instead of them sitting at the end of a long supply chain from a centralized fertilizer  producer, where I guess they get a choice of products, but it's limited by what can  be delivered on farm at the time in the place that they need to a more decentralized solution,  which can be tailored much more to their particular circumstances.  
**[0:21:43-0:21:46](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:21:43):**  I think there's like an interesting tension, like how far do you sort of go?  Is it decentralized in the sense of local regional production, but there's still a company  that owns and operates it?  Or is it all the way on farm?  And I as a farmer now want to operate my own fertilizer factory?  
**[0:21:56-0:21:58](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:21:56):**  I mean, imagine the answer is who knows?  And it depends.  But how do you see that changing things?  We spent a lot of time thinking about that and trying to understand the various factors  that will influence that because clearly there is some technology factors.  
**[0:22:11-0:22:14](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:22:11):**  We're taking a technology from a lab bench scale.  We ultimately need to go from making grams and kilograms up to making tons of ammonia.  And along that journey, I'm sure that there'll be some things that will come up that will  either lend themselves more or less to a more decentralized model.  But at the same time, there are those adoption issues and the sort of commercial issues around  
**[0:22:34-0:22:36](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:22:34):**  who captures the value of those kinds of things.  So we spent a lot of time working through different scenarios and thinking about how  that might play out.  But we probably won't know until we actually get a bit further down the technology development  path because there are plenty of technology factors that play into that substantially.  
**[0:22:51-0:22:57](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:22:51):**  And what are or will be the biggest challenges to scaling the technology?  The thing that keeps me awake at night a little bit is if you look at the opportunity in green  ammonia, there's a sort of 200 million ton demand for ammonia today, most of which is  for fertilizer.  And out to 2050, we expect to see the world's population continue to grow.  
**[0:23:14-0:23:19](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:23:14):**  And whilst I'm excited to see some of the sort of fertilizer efficiency activities that  are underway, I'm expecting that demand for ammonia will continue to grow out to 2050  for its existing set of uses.  But then there's a lot of interest across industry about using green ammonia in other  applications, including as a fuel.  
**[0:23:34-0:23:39](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:23:34):**  And so if you model that out to 2050, you can easily see an ammonia industry that is  three or four times its current scale.  So in the next 30 years, we've got to build sort of four times as much infrastructure  as we've built in the last hundred years to make ammonia.  And that keeps me awake at night is how do we scale fast enough to meet that challenge?  
**[0:23:52-0:23:57](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:23:52):**  How do we manufacture these units quickly enough to meet effectively the decarbonization  needs of the planet?  And so we are ultimately building quite a modular solution.  So we're thinking very much about how we can scale that up in a way that lends itself to  rapid manufacturing and rapid scale up.  
**[0:24:10-0:24:14](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:24:10):**  But it's a little bit like Tesla who were ahead of the curve with electric cars, and  now they can't make them fast enough.  I think that in the next 10 years, you're going to see that demand for green ammonia  is such that we can't build green ammonia plants fast enough.  As we think about the future of fertilizer, the technologies that companies like Jupiter  
**[0:24:28-0:24:32](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:24:28):**  IONIX and Kula are aiming to bring forward offer some real alternatives for an industry  that's hungry for new solutions.  But we're also well aware that this tech still has a lot of growing up to do.  And in the meantime, farmers like Clay Govier, who opened up part one of this future of fertilizer  series, are dealing with exploding nitrogen prices right now.  
**[0:24:49-0:24:54](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:24:49):**  So I wanted to include a little bit of a conversation we recently had with Jason McNeese, software  specialist for the Asia Pacific region at Trimble Agriculture, and Darian Walford, APAC  sales manager for Trimble Global Positioning, who offered a valuable on the ground perspective  of how farmers are tackling fertilizer challenges.  Here's Jason.  
**[0:25:08-0:25:14](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:25:08):**  Ensuring the business continuity within the larger economic pressures that we're getting,  not only on fertilizer and fuel and things, it's something that keeps the guys I know  up at night.  And previously, many of the farmers I know have had a recipe that works.  And we just reuse that recipe many times over.  
**[0:25:29-0:25:34](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:25:29):**  And now the economics of that recipe have had to be analyzed quite significantly.  Does it still work on the liters per hour that my machine is using?  Does it still work with the cost of fertilizers?  And by the way, this is not the most expensive fertilizer we've ever had.  But it's such a massive change in a short time that we haven't had time to fully absorb  
**[0:25:51-0:25:53](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:25:51):**  the impacts that that has on our cost of production.  And I was talking to a farmer not so long ago, maybe three, four weeks ago, he says  his return on investment on variable rate technologies has doubled because of the fertilizer  price.  Whereas previously, he wasn't maybe so motivated to go through some of the pains to get himself  
**[0:26:10-0:26:15](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:26:10):**  set up to get it done and get the zones and adopt software and then make sure the mission  machine has the right control system and talk to his local dealer and say, hey, what do  I need to do to convert this to be able to do that?  But now the returns right there, guys are talking 50 and $100,000 returns for a quite  a small addition in investment.  
**[0:26:30-0:26:33](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:26:30):**  And the accuracy stuff goes in the same boat.  When you can save six inches on every pass, it adds up pretty quickly.  And we know our farmers have been talking about that for a long time, but it's just  come really to the fore of conversation lately.  There's a lot in farming that's about risk mitigation and putting your chips on this  
**[0:26:51-0:26:53](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:26:51):**  one this year and let's see how it goes.  And risk in not changing.  So if you stay with what we've always done, it will not provide the returns that you would  expect this year.  This is not the year to do what you did last year.  
**[0:27:07-0:27:11](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:27:07):**  And there's risk associated with not making a change.  So as Jason was saying, you're making the effort into understanding what variable rate  can do.  The risk of not looking for those extra efficiencies when input costs are high.  And a lot of farmers doing things to mitigate some risk by getting lots of parts and having  
**[0:27:29-0:27:33](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:27:29):**  all the consumables they can get their hands on, getting hold of all the fertiliser they  can get their hands on.  I think the grain price has allowed people to go hard on their programs and plan as much  as they can in most places.  So there's returns available if things stay as they are.  
**[0:27:45-0:27:52](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:27:45):**  But if you continue to throw money at the back of your implement like you did before,  you're not going to realise any of that.  And it's not so much, oh, you won't make a few more bob.  The problem is you're actually wasting money this year.  Over the last few weeks, we've been thinking a lot and hearing from many of you about the  
**[0:28:05-0:28:09](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:28:05):**  challenges and opportunities in the nitrogen space, both on the science and the business  front.  And I think a big reality of this space at the moment is that it still has a long way  to go and that most of the organisations and technologies, including the ones we've highlighted  here, still have plenty of commercial and technical work to do before they arrive at  
**[0:28:22-0:28:23](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:28:22):**  scale.  But when I think about the so what of this fertiliser tech, a few key ideas rise to the  top.  First, of all of the many go to market strategies that are possible in the fertiliser space,  I think that a distributed model that both Jupiter ionics and Kula are targeting in slightly  
**[0:28:38-0:28:41](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:28:38):**  different ways is the most interesting.  From a cost savings and efficiency standpoint, of course, given fertiliser economics rely  on having the right product at the right place at the right time.  And that needle is likely easier to thread if the fertiliser is made on farm, but also  from a climate impact perspective, using renewable energy or biology to actually produce the  
**[0:28:59-0:29:03](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:28:59):**  ammonia is good, but being able to cut out the fossil fuels used to mine and transport  material all around the globe is even better, especially as scope three emissions concerns  grow within the value chain, this will be a huge benefit.  Next, I appreciate Charlie's highlighting of the opportunity for customization that  this model creates at the grower level.  
**[0:29:18-0:29:24](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:29:18):**  For the savvy farmer, this offers a potential gateway to new possible competitive advantages,  and being able to tell an interesting data driven story about their crop to their customers.  The obvious limitation is that farmers will have to have this expertise on farm, but upskilling  a farm staffer with some fertiliser production expertise might well be a small price to pay.  To be able to get out from under the extraordinary price swings of the global fertiliser commodity  
**[0:29:42-0:29:44](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:29:42):**  market.  But from my perspective, the biggest risk both strategically and by extension to these  technologies is in the realm of farmer trust.  Again, having the right fertiliser at the right time is often make or break for a farm.  A high price for conventional nitrogen might be hard to stomach, but it's worth it or perceived  
**[0:30:00-0:30:05](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:30:00):**  as such versus the alternative of trusting an unproven product or technology in risky  conditions.  As both Charlie and Bill pointed out, delivering usable products to customers consistently  is the real challenge, regardless of the model.  And for many and alternatives, the battle is already uphill because the recent past  
**[0:30:18-0:30:21](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:30:18):**  is littered with technologies that couldn't deliver.  For us, this was one of the big benefits of Jupiter ionics versus biological approaches,  given they're able to produce exactly what farmers already use today.  As we continue to think about the future of nitrogen and fertiliser more broadly, we'll  continue to keep an eye on new companies, both their technologies and business models.  
**[0:30:39-0:30:43](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:30:39):**  So if you're seeing something exciting, we'd love to hear about it.  That's it for another episode of Ag Tech So What.  Thanks to our guests, Charlie Day, Bill Brady, Jason McNeese and Darren Walford.  And thanks again to Trimble Ag for partnering with us on this episode.  And finally, of course, thank you for listening.  
**[0:30:56-0:31:01](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/the-future-of-fertilizer-nitrogen-part-2-with-jupiter-ionics-and-kula-bio#t=0:30:56):**  For more information on any of the resources mentioned in this podcast, visit our website,  tenacious.ventures.  I'm Sarah Nolette.  Catch you next time.  