### Agtech - So What?  (2019-01-25)
**[0:00:00-0:00:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, and welcome to the Ag Tech So What podcast. Emerging technologies are rapidly  changing the global agricultural industry. We believe that this revolution is only getting  started, but there's still too much hype out there and too big of a disconnect between  ag and ag tech. So on this show, we try to bridge that gap. In each episode, we bring  you the story of a different innovator in agriculture and try to find the place where  
**[0:00:30-0:00:48](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:00:30):**  ag and tech meet. I'm your host, Sarah Nolette. Today's guest is Tim Hammarich. Tim is the  founder of AgGrad, an American recruiting company that specializes in agribusiness and  ag tech. Tim is also the host of the Future of Agriculture podcast, which you should definitely  check out. Tim and I chat about a few things, some challenges he's seeing ag tech companies  struggle with, tips for getting a job, and some of Tim's ideas for how we can attract  
**[0:01:10-0:01:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:01:10):**  and train more talented young people in agriculture. As usual, Tim starts with his background.  I grew up in Northern California on a hobby farm and so got a good taste of sort of direct  to consumer agriculture. We sold pigs and goats and ducks for Hispanic and Asian markets  specifically straight out of our little five acre farm. And from there, I tried to do everything  I could to position myself well from the FFA program and livestock judging and national  
**[0:01:39-0:01:43](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:01:39):**  ag marketing. And then kind of when it came time to graduate college and go out into the  real world, I still felt like I didn't have any real context on choosing a career path.  And so after spending eight years in the feed and grain business, I started AgGrad, which  we specialize in early career recruitment for agribusinesses and ag tech companies.  It's not obvious to me that having no context would lead to, well, I'll just do it myself.  
**[0:02:00-0:02:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:02:00):**  So like, how did that decision come about to actually start your own business?  Yeah, I guess I kind of skipped eight years in there that I spent, I worked for a company  called DeBruce Grain, which was bought by Gavilon, which was bought by Marabini and  kind of a private equity flip. And so I found myself in the situation where because of all  of that sort of merger and acquisition activity, a lot of the people I knew had spread out  
**[0:02:21-0:02:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:02:21):**  into other companies and other feed and grain companies. And I knew I wanted to do something  on my own, but I didn't know what it was. And I thought that was kind of something that  I had that not a lot of people had, which was relationships spread throughout the industry.  And I kind of leveraged that to start a real traditional recruiting company.  You may be familiar with what Tim means by the traditional recruiting model. But just  
**[0:02:41-0:02:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:02:41):**  in case, I asked him to explain what he means and what has changed for him and for his business,  AgGrad.  The title is, companies have only so many resources to go out and constantly be searching  for the right people. And it can get really time intensive, especially if you're only  doing it when you have an opening and be very demanding and very expensive. And so they  
**[0:03:00-0:03:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:03:00):**  hire someone like myself who is willing to do it on a contingency basis to go out and  find that person. And contingency basis meaning they pay nothing unless they hire a person  I bring to them, in which case I would collect a fee. That's traditionally how it's been  done. Even these days, despite the internet and LinkedIn and social media, there still  is quite a demand for people who can find talent because it's not such a natural thing  
**[0:03:22-0:03:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:03:22):**  to develop these types of relationships and constantly be asking people if they're willing  to make a change. That's kind of how I started.  And is it particular roles like just agribusiness, do you cross into, and senior and junior,  like how do you kind of divide up where your specialty is? Or is it generally just across  agriculture and agribusiness?  
**[0:03:39-0:03:43](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:03:39):**  That's a great question. When I started, I knew I needed to differentiate myself. And  as you can imagine, because the fee is a percentage of salary, most people want the senior roles.  They consider themselves executive recruiters, they target director level VPs and C suite.  And so I thought, as I looked around to the competitive landscape, it would seem like  there weren't a lot of people my age trying to dive into this space. And so I thought  
**[0:04:03-0:04:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:04:03):**  maybe I would specialize in early career recruitment. So from graduating college to maybe seven  years in, and my client base when I started was kind of these feeding grain contexts that  I had from my previous experience. But I launched a podcast when I started my business, and  I was most interested with a podcast in ag innovation. So I started talking to investors  and startup founders and people kind of more on the ag tech side and started kind of growing  
**[0:04:26-0:04:31](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:04:26):**  my recruiting practice in that space, in the ag tech space as a result of some of the work  I was doing on the podcast.  And tell me how different that is. Is it a different, like maybe the people are younger,  but are there different skills they require? Is it easier or harder to recruit for them?  Are there more or less jobs? Like how does that space compare to more traditional agribusiness?  
**[0:04:44-0:04:48](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:04:44):**  It's reflective of kind of what we're seeing in ag tech right now in general, which is  customer adoption is a huge challenge. And so my role generally speaking, is with companies  that say we have this great product, we have proven this can make farmers more efficient  in whatever way, but we really need talent to help grow customer adoption and customer  success. And so the roles I'm recruiting for on the tech side generally are either in sales  
**[0:05:08-0:05:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:05:08):**  or business development or marketing or in customer success or sales support in that  capacity.  That's a little bit different than the traditional roles in which I'm recruiting for, you know,  female managers or grain operations managers or grain merchandisers just requiring a little  bit of a different skill set. I wouldn't say they they're always younger cause there's  
**[0:05:24-0:05:27](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:05:24):**  plenty of people more senior in their career that are fascinated and interested in this  ag tech space, but it certainly has to be the type of person who's open to new ideas  and can take a complex idea and make it simple.  One of the things that we see in more traditional tech is that the sales process and sales cycle  is really different and the skills you would need to do things like, you know, have a digital  
**[0:05:44-0:05:48](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:05:44):**  funnel and all this content marketing and then a more of an inside sales team where  people kind of calling and setting up meetings before you'd go out versus kind of more traditional  agriculture which would be out in the field, driving up driveways is the ag tech space  somewhere in between and imagine the skills that you would need sit in between those two  things and that could be hard to find.  
**[0:06:04-0:06:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:06:04):**  Generally speaking, ag tech companies are trying to find where that balance is because  you hit the nail on the head. It does fit somewhere in between, especially if you're  selling to farmers, which most ag tech is. The software model of hiring a bunch of business  development reps and sitting down in a call center and having them pound the phones, that  can only get you so far. It can only call a farmer so many times when he or she is busy  
**[0:06:25-0:06:29](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:06:25):**  and them tell you not to ever call again. And so I do think we are searching for that  hybrid model, you know, where a company might have a business development rep because you  have to start somewhere and you have to kind of establish leads in some capacity, but also  coupling that with some, some more modern marketing strategies. And I do see quite a  bit of success among ag tech companies with developing leads through platforms like Twitter  
**[0:06:45-0:06:49](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:06:45):**  and really getting their word out there digitally and trying to capture some of that early adopter  type of grower where the challenge comes in is how do you transition from the early adopter  grower that's on Twitter, that's really trying to look going to the events and trying to  find the cutting edge to the more mainstream. The other, let's call them 93% of growers  that you really need to hit. And I think that's where you need to go a much more traditional.  
**[0:07:06-0:07:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:07:06):**  Yeah, interesting. But I mean, it's such a common topic and what we've been digging into  in the kind of getting ag tech ready theme of different buying patterns. And I found  it fascinating that growers on that really early innovator adopter scale would be looking  internationally in different places, like totally kind of thinking laterally versus  someone else who's looking over the fence nearby. And it's a really different sale,  
**[0:07:26-0:07:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:07:26):**  a really different skillset that you would need to sell them products and almost a different  person in the company. And that's really tough for hiring talent and training a team.  Are you seeing much success with, for lack of a better term, and we're both going to  cringe when I say this, but kind of influencer marketing, it does seem like there are some  progressive farmers out there that other farmers spend a lot of time understanding what they're  
**[0:07:47-0:07:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:07:47):**  doing and how, and that would seem to be a good way to tip the scales. But I don't know,  are you seeing that much?  It's funny cause I think everyone would cringe at that word and especially the influencers  don't think of themselves like that and yet would have so much pride about the influence  that they have. So it's a digital marketing language challenge. But yes, they have pride  
**[0:08:05-0:08:08](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:08:05):**  in the fact that they are the first one to adopt something that they found it somewhere  else and they want to tell everyone and help everyone else kind of get on board with this.  And it also depends too in different commodities, like if it's more competitive or not, depending  on what type of crop you produce or where. So that would change things. The other kind  of influencer I guess we're seeing is more of the traditional like social media influencer,  
**[0:08:27-0:08:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:08:27):**  someone who is actually like generating tons of content, often videos about this space  and that that hasn't been tapped into at all from the ag tech companies. And I find that  fascinating cause it's one of the first places I might go.  I think we're going to continue to have this conversation a lot over the next few years  of we've got some of these more progressively minded, probably the type of growers that  
**[0:08:45-0:08:49](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:08:45):**  are listening to this podcast. I say growers, but I mean that to encompass, you know, farmers  and ranchers, but how do we sort of replicate that among the vast majority of producers  out there? Yeah, exactly. So how does that change for  you as a recruiter thinking about these different skills that people will need in these ag tech  companies? Does it require a different business model or a different approach from you?  
**[0:09:06-0:09:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:09:06):**  It requires a much more consultative sales mentality rather than just transaction. If  you're selling fertilizer or selling chemical, you can kind of go, you know, beat the bushes,  so to speak, until you get the sales you need. In this case, you have to be a whole lot more  of a teacher, I would say a lot more of a consultant in terms of your mindset because  you really have to take sort of a partnership role with the customers you serve.  
**[0:09:29-0:09:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:09:29):**  And for you recruiting these people, do they come from the same places? Do they have those  skills? Do you have to help them develop those skills or is it kind of just shifting to find  those people and it's all the same model or do you need a different model to actually  like help them be able to have those capabilities? What I have realized is there's plenty of  talent out there. There's plenty of talented people that are interested in agriculture  
**[0:09:48-0:09:54](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:09:48):**  and certainly interested in ag tech. Where there is a shortage is not so much in the  talent that wants to be in the space, but in the background and skills it takes to be  in this space. And so through that, these have been challenging roles to recruit from  because you're looking for empathy and that someone who really understands the customer  and has proven they understand the customer, but you're also looking for drive. So like  
**[0:10:09-0:10:16](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:10:09):**  somebody who doesn't just want to visit, somebody who really wants to see these producers improve  and is willing to do whatever it takes to make their customer successful. And so those  two things are a bit of a challenge, especially if in empathy you mean experience in understanding  a farmer customer because I think the game is shifting a little bit. And so how we're  addressing that at AgGrad is we're actually exploring the possibility of offering some  
**[0:10:36-0:10:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:10:36):**  job related online training. What we've discovered is in addition to having sort of the skills  shortage also what we're seeing is a shortage of opportunities to break in. Most employers  will tell you that their best employees, their best recruitment strategy is internships,  which I totally understand and agree with, but internships are also extremely limited.  I mean, usually they're limited at least in the US to juniors and seniors in college.  
**[0:10:59-0:11:03](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:10:59):**  They're limited to certain locations. I was a location manager for a grain facility in  Binkleman, Nebraska. We were not going to transition an intern out to Southwest Nebraska,  middle of nowhere for the summer, pay for their lodging, pay for them, and then pay  for them to go back home. It just wasn't in the cards. And so we're looking at how can  we replicate the internship model online through training so we can start to develop this type  
**[0:11:19-0:11:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:11:19):**  of skill set we're talking about. So how do you do that? Like, is it online courses? Is  it webinars? Is it, do they kind of enroll and do you have experts in sales come teach  them? Yeah. So our first concern is a lot of these skills, you just have to do them.  You can't really teach, let's say tractor driving online unless you have a really cool  kind of simulator. It's not going to be very effective, but there are a lot of skills that  
**[0:11:38-0:11:42](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:11:38):**  can be taught through a traditional online course. The way that looks is no, you can  call an online course, you can call an internship. We're so early in the exploratory phase here.  I don't know that we really know what we're calling it for sure, but it would be sponsored  by the employer where they say, here are the objectives we like to see met from an intern.  So we'd like them to learn X, Y, and Z, and we like them to experience, you know, a, B,  
**[0:11:58-0:12:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:11:58):**  and C, as far as experiencing our company culture and experiencing the job. And then  we say, okay, how best can we replicate that with, with online training combination of  video, text and assessments and put together, let's say a, you know, a 10 to 15 hour course  where someone interested in a job that has no background can hop on, take that course.  And then that data is actually shared with real employers. So you can sort of replicate  
**[0:12:20-0:12:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:12:20):**  that experience without all of the limitations that come with traditional internship programs.  That is so cool. I'm really excited to see how it goes. I wanted to hit on the point  you said about technology enabled training. So there's a whole conversation around like,  can we have virtual reality and use that to train people to shear sheep or milk cows?  Do you think that's real? And do you think there's other kind of technology enabled ways  
**[0:12:43-0:12:47](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:12:43):**  to train people that might get more towards like a tractor simulator or something like  that?  From what I know, I think that's very possible in the future. What I'm understanding about  the current state of virtual reality and augmented reality is that they are far enough along  to prove that it's possible, but, but still maybe have a long way to go to actually implementing  
**[0:13:01-0:13:06](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:13:01):**  to that degree in terms of sharing sheep or driving a tractor or fixing an implement or  something like that. Conceptually, I don't think we're really that far off. I could see  it happening in the future and perhaps, you know, it could be a direction that we can  take some of this, this online training. If we can really develop the core competency  of the education component and improve results from, from what we're presenting, I think  
**[0:13:21-0:13:24](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:13:21):**  that could be an exciting frontier for us and for others who want to do the same thing  because yeah, I mean, one of the limitation agriculture is geography. We can't up and  move your farm somewhere else for, you know, for the convenience of your employees. Right?  So how best can we utilize the internet to exchange knowledge? Cause so much we talk  about technology being a thing and being a product, but you know, really it's, it's the  
**[0:13:40-0:13:44](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:13:40):**  implementation of knowledge. And if you don't have that knowledge in your employees or your  future employees, then no amount of new equipment is going to help.  Exactly. It couldn't be more in line with stuff we talk about that you actually need  the foundations first and then the technology can help it. It's not a silver bullet solution  in itself. I wanted to ask about the perceptions of ag tech jobs and I've seen a bit of hesitation.  
**[0:14:01-0:14:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:14:01):**  Like yes, there's a lot of people who are really keen to get into this space old or  young and really see the potential of it. Want to have an impact, want to bring a different  skill set in, but there's also maybe some challenges around, no, just go get a job at  a bank or go get a job at a large agribusiness corporate and don't worry about this ag tech  stuff. It's a bit silly. Are you seeing any kind of social pressure to either get in or  
**[0:14:21-0:14:25](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:14:21):**  out of ag tech? Yeah, I am. And I think one downside to a  word that likes to get thrown around him is companies that label themselves as disruptors  who, you know, vocally claim we're going to come out to the ag industry and turn everything  on its head. You know, some people get really excited by that. I think it's a little bit  harder to motivate some of the traditional ag employees to that bent, but taking it more  
**[0:14:43-0:14:48](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:14:43):**  generally to ag tech, I haven't seen lately. I think maybe when I first started recruiting,  which would have been back in 2015, I saw some of that sort of like, well, I don't know.  I, you know, I kind of want to just work for the co-op and I don't know if it's what the  farm economy has done in recent years or what the reason is, but it seems like maybe there's  more interest in ag tech in general or, or maybe it's just, we're seeing maybe some more  
**[0:15:05-0:15:11](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:15:05):**  of the benefits. So I'm starting to see generally more willingness to explore ag tech as a career  option for cultural, traditional agricultural folks where there still is maybe that line  in the sand of, I don't know that I want to be a part of that is sort of like, you know,  do I really want to be a disruptor because maybe not everybody thinks that this industry  needs to be totally disrupted or can be in the way that's being touted.  
**[0:15:26-0:15:31](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:15:26):**  Totally. Yeah, I agree with that. So while I have you, Tim, I want to do some maybe rapid  fire advice and tips for people both on the hiring side and the job searching side. So  any common mistakes that people looking to recruit in this space would make, so your  clients and trying to hire, like what's something that they kind of do wrong that you have to  coach them or help them to not do because it's just not going to set them up for success.  
**[0:15:51-0:15:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:15:51):**  Being transactional is the biggest mistake. So posting a job, having a defined close,  taking what you have and hiring one. It would be great if the world could work that way,  but if you really care about getting the right people, it's, it's extremely important that  you're constantly, constantly cultivating these types of relationships. I'm sure you've  talked about in this podcast before, kind of like raising money and you know, investment  
**[0:16:09-0:16:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:16:09):**  and how a lot of the advice is, you know, you kind of always need to be cultivating  those relationships because as much as you want to raise a series a and 90 days, it might  be tough. And I look at hiring talent the same way for everybody, for a farm that hires  maybe one person every five years, all the way up to a company that hires 50 people a  year. You've got to constantly be cultivating these relationships. And with the internet,  
**[0:16:29-0:16:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:16:29):**  you can do that at scale, be it through social media, be it through content or just be it  through individually reaching out to people on a place like LinkedIn. But establishing  those relationships are going to be pivotal in the making sure that when you do have the  need, you can find the right person.  It used to be that you could only establish relationships in person. And while that may  
**[0:16:49-0:16:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:16:49):**  still be the best way, we have so many digital tools that can help us connect. Companies  are using these tools too. My other half, David is a good example, as much as I hate  to admit it. Over the last few months, he's been making videos, selfie videos, to celebrate  his employees and show off the culture of where he works. Though I find the videos to  be well cringe worthy, they're actually pretty effective. Future hires can get a sense of  
**[0:17:17-0:17:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:17:17):**  what it's like to be on his team and what it's like to work for him before they even  apply. Tim says that companies need to invest in this kind of thing, demonstrating their  culture, having a personality, especially if they want to attract young people.  People who are our age and younger, they don't want to look at their career as one-dimensionally  as a salary. They want to look at it as a fit, a place that they want to feel like they  
**[0:17:42-0:17:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:17:42):**  can be themselves and contribute and they want to fit the culture. And they don't know  the culture from your job posting, and they're not going to take your word for it in an interview.  They want a chance to get to know you outside of that.  Such a good tip for employers. So how about a mistake that someone makes in trying to  get a job? So on the other side, what's a common mistake?  
**[0:18:00-0:18:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:18:00):**  The biggest mistake, and maybe I'm saying it as the biggest because it's happened to  me too many times lately, is if you get to an interview with a company, they are probably  already past the fact that you are qualified on paper. What they are assessing are two  things primarily. Number one, are you a cultural fit? Are you going to fit their team? Does  what you want in a role fit what they want in a role? And secondly, they want to know,  
**[0:18:23-0:18:29](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:18:23):**  are you serious? It's so easy to apply for a job right now that they really need to find  out, are you serious? Otherwise they're just kind of wasting their time with you and they're  going to go through an offer stage and you're going to be flattered and you're going to  say no because you want to stick with your current employer.  So the biggest mistake people make is they don't make it clear that they're very serious  
**[0:18:41-0:18:46](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:18:41):**  and they want the job. I have had multiple people in the last month get to the final  offer stage and not get an offer because they went with the other candidate who just seemed  more on fire for the job. So it's like the simplest thing ever, which is why I get passionate  about it because it's so easy that everyone should be doing it. It shouldn't be a mistake,  but make sure you show genuine interest. If you're to that point, that's what they're  
**[0:19:03-0:19:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:19:03):**  looking for.  It's so true. Couldn't agree more. And last question, what advice would you have for someone  who is trying to get into ag tech and is maybe worried about the skills that they have or  don't have?  I think you used the term earlier. There's no magic bullet and it's the same thing for  
**[0:19:17-0:19:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:19:17):**  getting a job. So it's the oldest trick in the book, which is networking and building  relationships. It should be easier than ever to build relationships with the tools we have  at hand. You know, use LinkedIn, you use Twitter. If you send a personalized invite in agriculture  with a compelling reason as why you'd like to connect with them, almost everybody in  this industry will connect with you. If you engage with somebody on Twitter and you see  
**[0:19:39-0:19:42](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:19:39):**  that they're at least active, almost everybody in this industry will interact with you. Don't  come in with an ask, come in with genuine conversation and exchange of value. Everybody's  going to be a little bit different about how they can handle that depending on kind of  what you have to provide, but definitely just reach out old school networking and provide  value.  
**[0:19:57-0:20:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:19:57):**  That's for sure my advice as well. The add value and the other one would be, well, there's  like follow up as well, which is common advice, but I love what you kind of hit on around  content and that you can build a brand and build these relationships online, whether  that's through the insightful or funny tweets that you post or a blog that you have or what  you're saying on LinkedIn. You can actually do that as you said before at scale as well  
**[0:20:17-0:20:19](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:20:17):**  in a way that you couldn't do previously.  Right. And I mean, it could be as simple as sharing content. You read an article that  gets set you on fire about ag tech, you know, share it with a little bit of commentary,  tag people in the comments asking for their input. You know, I mean there's, there's really  natural ways to, to engage with people and don't feel like you'll be one of millions  
**[0:20:35-0:20:39](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:20:35):**  that are doing that because the truth is very few people are doing that.  Especially in agriculture, I would say awesome, Tim. Well, thank you so much for joining me  on the podcast. Some super helpful tips for many people here, and I'm really excited to  hear about the future of ag grad and the useful skill development that you'll be doing there.  Thanks so much, Sarah. It's been a lot of fun.  
**[0:20:57-0:21:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:20:57):**  Thank you for joining us on another episode of Ag Tech So What. You can stay up to date  with the latest episodes and news at agtechsowhat.com. And as always, if you have any feedback or  other guests to recommend, we'd love to hear from you. Just hop on the website and leave  us a comment or send us a message. Finally, if you like what you're hearing and we hope  you do, please share the podcast with a friend or leave us a review on iTunes or wherever  
**[0:21:21-0:21:39](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=431525#t=0:21:21):**  you get your podcasts. Thanks again for listening. Catch you next time.  