### Agtech - So What?  (2019-31-09)
**[0:00:00-0:00:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, and welcome to the Ag Tech So What podcast. Emerging technologies are rapidly  changing the global agricultural industry. We believe that this revolution is only getting  started, but there's still too much hype out there and too big of a disconnect between  ag and ag tech. So on this show, we try to bridge that gap. In each episode, we bring  you the story of a different innovator in agriculture and try to find the place where  
**[0:00:31-0:00:43](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:00:31):**  ag and tech meet. I'm your host, Sarah Nolet. Before I tell you about today's guest, I want  to share something we've been working on for the past few weeks. You might remember that  we partnered up with Decipher to bring you four episodes on getting ag tech ready. While  we've teased out the insights and examples from those four episodes and created a free  ebook with five practical tips to help you or farmers you know, because hopefully you'll  
**[0:01:03-0:01:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:01:03):**  share it, to get ag tech ready. You can find the ebook on our website or in the show notes.  So today's guest is Victor Friedberg, an entrepreneur and investor who shares his systems approach  to investing, lessons from successes in his portfolio like Beyond Meat, and opportunities  for farmers to benefit from the trends that he's seeing in the food system. Victor started  as an entrepreneur in Silicon Valley, where he built one of the first social networks  
**[0:01:32-0:01:37](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:01:32):**  in the mid 90s, including raising money from Motorola ventures and a few other Silicon  Valley VC firms. More recently, Victor co founded S2G Ventures, a VC firm based in Chicago,  LA. We kick off our conversation with the story behind how Victor became interested  in food and ag in the first place.  Going back to 2008-2009, I was really starting to think about systems from the investment  
**[0:02:00-0:02:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:02:00):**  standpoint, but mostly is it related to energy systems and water systems and specifically  as it applied to things like off-grid micro for rural India or low-cost D-South for sub-Saharan  Africa, so really a global development perspective. And I had started a platform for investment  called Launch, which was funded by NASA, State Department, USA, Nike, and a bunch of other  corporations to tackle these big global development issues. And at the beginning of those investments,  
**[0:02:37-0:02:44](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:02:37):**  we were really investing in singular companies. And I just started to think more about how  those systems at a macro level were acting. What were their leverage points? Who were  the stakeholders? Where could capital and innovation start moving the system into just  being better? And I did a rare thing. I took a vacation at that time, which was an unusual  thing to do. And I went to Spain and I was there with my girlfriend at the time. And  
**[0:03:14-0:03:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:03:14):**  I was in Valencia and went to the central market in Valencia, Spain. And it's this beautiful  turn of the century Art Nouveau kind of building and all these different stalls with every  vendor and farmer, each with their own little specialty. And I went walking up to this one  farm and vendor who was selling peaches and all they were selling was peaches. And I could  smell the peach from almost 10 feet away. And when I bought the peach from Pablo and  
**[0:03:47-0:03:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:03:47):**  I just tasted it, it was like an epiphany. I had just never tasted a peach like that.  And it made me realize that the peaches I had been eating all my life were just shadows  of the real thing. And here I was, I was a person of means. I could shop at Whole Foods  or go to a fancy restaurant. But here at the central market in Valencia, an entire community  from wealthy to working class were having a singular food experience that was superior  
**[0:04:22-0:04:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:04:22):**  to mine. And I just wondered why. And so that made me just take a step back and come to  the realization which seems self-evident now, which was food was a system. And as I looked  deeper and deeper into that, I had the insight that that system was going to change dramatically  over the next 10 years. And from that co-founded S2G Ventures, which is a venture fund in the  United States to really put that soil to shelf systems investing pieces to work.  
**[0:04:59-0:05:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:04:59):**  My personal journey into food and ag also came about through a vacation to a Spanish  speaking country. So we have that in common, which I imagine not a ton of people do.  That's great. What's your story?  I went to South America on holiday and ended up staying for almost a year and living on  a number of different farms. And my moment, like your peach moment was a tomato moment.  
**[0:05:23-0:05:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:05:23):**  So I was living on an organic farm and pulling weeds from the tomatoes. And I grew up in  California where there was a lot of conversation around organic as the answer to all of our  problems and pulling weeds in the hot, sweaty, organic tomato farm really made me think about  whether organic made a lot of sense at scale and how technology could be used to do a lot  of these tasks that were being done manually in a way that was both sustainable and efficient  
**[0:05:53-0:05:55](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:05:53):**  and kind of breaking that trade off.  Well that's a great story. And I think for your listeners, I think the main is there  that everybody should be taking more vacations and preferably to a Spanish speaking country.  My story reminded Victor of a time when he was sitting right between the past and future  of technology in agriculture.  
**[0:06:14-0:06:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:06:14):**  So early in S2G, we were, you know, we had identified that sort of weeding was a big  obstacle in regards to conversion of conventional to organic and that if you could solve that  problem, you could begin onboarding a lot of acreage and bring more organic fruits and  vegetables and grains to market.  So we were looking at a company that was spin out of Carnegie Mellon University, which is  
**[0:06:44-0:06:52](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:06:44):**  a very globally respected and renowned robotics university. And so there was a spin out that  came out of there and I think the company's name was Robot. And the idea was to create  a autonomous weeder for row crops.  And so we were really starting to have a lot of meetings and as we were diligently seeing  it, we thought it would be good to have it at one of these Midwest farm fairs where all  
**[0:07:19-0:07:26](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:07:19):**  the farmers in the area come and look at different combines and different tools of the trade.  So we had sort of Robot come to that fair and there's a picture I took from that farm  day, which it was this autonomous robot, which was a version one, pretty clunky looking.  It had the visualization tower, it had a bunch of wheels and it was carrying a little train  trailer behind it. But you could see sort of the vision for what they wanted to do.  
**[0:07:55-0:08:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:07:55):**  And there were all of these Amish and Mennonite farmers who were all in traditional gear and  wearing their trousers and suspenders and the hats and the pipes. And they've been farming  the way they've been farming for a very long time and probably for good reason, somewhat  skeptical of technology. But it's this picture of about 14 Amish and Mennonite farmers looking  at this autonomous weeder. And I just love that photograph.  
**[0:08:29-0:08:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:08:29):**  Fortunately, Victor still has this photograph, which we've included in the blog and show  notes for this episode. One of the things that Victor is known for is taking an ecosystem  approach, looking at agriculture as a system and getting the right people around the table  for a particular opportunity. People like investors, manufacturers, policymakers, or  farmers who can really help that company to succeed. When S2G set out to raise their first  
**[0:08:55-0:09:00](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:08:55):**  fund in 2013, no one was really taking this kind of approach to venture capital and food  and ag. There are lots of venture capital funds doing  food and agriculture, but nobody was thinking about it holistically. And so you had late  stage CPG oriented growth funds. You had purely ag domain funds. You had the start of the  Silicon Valley funds getting early into food, but they were looking at it a very different  
**[0:09:30-0:09:37](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:09:30):**  way. They were looking at food as just another sector ready to be disrupted, which was an  interesting frame. And so the idea of doing the first soil to shelf systems fund and the  approach we were taking to do that, which was really to reject the Silicon Valley model.  And I think there was some, I think there was some belief that, and some credibility  behind the idea of how that was being positioned, which was instead of thinking about doing  
**[0:10:11-0:10:17](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:10:11):**  investments in 10 companies and for those 10 companies, let's not really worry about  valuation and let's not worry so much that eight or nine of them fail. The one that succeeds  or the one or two that succeeds will return all fund plus carry and everybody will be  happy. But to make that model work, you need outside returns in comparison to historical  norms and the food and agriculture business has been around a long time. And so it was  
**[0:10:46-0:10:53](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:10:46):**  pretty easy to see that there weren't going to be a lot of outsized return multiples from  that. So the approach I took was, well, let's not try to say that's what we're going to  do instead, let's solve for just lower failure rates. Let's just have less companies fail  and let's really think about how systems investing and engaging with companies post investment  and taking this more sort of holistic approach to it will just position companies better  
**[0:11:25-0:11:32](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:11:25):**  for succeeding. For S2G, a key part of this approach was bringing in lots of experts because  they appreciated that ag is a complex system and that having deep expertise in all parts  of it would be impossible. They had a saying at the time that guided this way of thinking.  There was a saying at the time, if we were the smartest people in the room, we were in  the wrong room. And that was kind of the spirit of what we're doing. We really wanted to learn,  
**[0:11:56-0:12:02](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:11:56):**  really wanted to do what's best for the companies in the portfolio and how do we bring the right  investors who understood the DNA and the aspirations of those companies and could really add value  as those companies moved through the growth. A story that illustrates this approach is  one of S2G's investments, a grass fed dairy company called Maple Hill Creamery that operates  in the Northeast of the US. At the time when S2G invested around 2014, there weren't really  
**[0:12:29-0:12:35](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:12:29):**  any grass fed dairy companies. Grass fed wasn't a brand differentiator for consumers who are  still thinking mostly about organic. S2G saw the potential for Maple Hill to define this  new standard, but they knew they needed help. So they brought in other experts as co-investors.  I personally nor did S2G at the time have any experience in grass fed as a subsector.  And so we sought out a fund called Armonia. Armonia had done, it's a dedicated fund in  
**[0:13:02-0:13:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:13:02):**  the US solely on doing grass fed work, mostly on the grass fed beef side, but a lot of those  same principles from a systems perspective apply to dairy as they did on beef. And for  Armonia, they felt getting a broader expertise on the dairy side would help them on their  beef investments. And we would benefit from Armonia's experience on understanding about  Savory Institute and diversity on soil and on the paddocks and how they're managed and  
**[0:13:36-0:13:43](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:13:36):**  the standards that the consumer are looking for and regional standards versus national  standards, all of that stuff, which as a team, we just started working together. And that  company really found its tipping point when we built up the supply from, first it was  like 20, 30 farms in upstate New York, and those could have been like retired hippies  all the way to other sort of Amish and Mennonite dairy farmers. And so you had to work both  
**[0:14:15-0:14:21](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:14:15):**  as an investor, but also most importantly, the company in finding a way to create the  first scalable, consistent, incentivized supply chain for grass fed milk in the US. And we  did all that hard work as a group and you need an investor group that really was mission  driven.  Over time, Maple Hill Creamery has become the number one selling liquid milk at Whole  
**[0:14:42-0:14:48](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:14:42):**  Foods. Another key to their success that also speaks to the system's approach has been ensuring  their strong incentives and support for the farmers that supply Maple Hill Creamery. Victor  explains how Tim Joseph, the founder, was able to think from a farmer's perspective  and how critical this was when scaling up their supply.  Okay. How about, you know, he starts with one farm and now he's got to get two and then  
**[0:15:07-0:15:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:15:07):**  he's got to get five and then he's got to get 10. Like how does he build this sort of  supply chain and get people who've been doing it all one way for so long to take a leap  of faith into a new brand and a new way of thinking about how to manage their farms.  And so he found, you know, the first farm, I think it was like a kind of retired hippie  couple in upstate New York and they really loved the grass fed approach. They wholeheartedly  
**[0:15:42-0:15:50](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:15:42):**  integrated into the farm management and they became the model. And so the incentives for  becoming a grass fed dairy farmer giving off take to Maple Hill Creamery at the time, the  dynamics were that the conventional dairy market was collapsing. There are incredible  amount of bankruptcies, processing facilities that have been doing conventional dairy up  and up the state of New York. We're all going out of business. Organic, you know, certainly  
**[0:16:15-0:16:23](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:16:15):**  it had its heyday, but from a pricing standpoint that was under a lot of pressure. And so,  you know, you had these conventional dairy farms who had converted over to organic or  farms that just started out organic and they thought that those premiums were going to  kind of go on forever, but the, there was a lot of pricing pressure put on there. So  that was starting to cause instability within the organic market in upstate New York. So  
**[0:16:45-0:16:53](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:16:45):**  here comes little sort of Maple Hill Creamery, which ultimately could sell that they were  kind of a lifeboat. And so they set up a pricing system. So I think at the time, if I remember  correctly, conventional milk was going, I don't know, $16 a hundred weight. Organic  was going for $24 a hundred weight. And some Maple Hill basically said, listen, if you  come into our network as a grass fed dairy supplier, we'll give you $38 a hundred weight,  
**[0:17:26-0:17:33](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:17:26):**  just right off the bat, which was a big carrot for change at that point, given how much pressure  all of those conventional organic dairy farms are having. And then they went one step further  and they said, okay, we're going to set the baseline at $38 a hundred weight. But if you're  a seasonal supplier, we'll give you the $38. But if you become a year round supplier, we'll  give you an extra dollar a hundred weight. If you start doing rotational grazing, you  
**[0:17:59-0:18:04](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:17:59):**  know, on your paddocks, you know, and put in fencing, we'll give you another dollar  a hundred weight. And so they kept building these price incentives that inspired farmers  to do more, to make their farms operate at a standard that allowed Maple Hill to get  consistency in their milk supply from a farm by farm by farm basis. And then on top of  that, they did something that as a small company, it's still amazing that they were able to  
**[0:18:31-0:18:37](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:18:31):**  pull this off, which is that they realized that, you know, it takes time to really approach  your farms from a grass fed perspective, even if you're coming from organic. And so if you  pledged your, your off take from your farm, you know, to Maple Hill and become an exclusive  supplier, they would then buy your organic, even before you'd become a certified sort  of grass fed supplier, they would buy your organic at sort of market price, guarantee  
**[0:19:05-0:19:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:19:05):**  it. And then they would work, Maple Hill would then work that supply to sell it off into  the organic markets for whatever period of time, whether it was six months, eight months,  a year, you know, year and a half for that farm to convert from organic to grass fed.  And that was really for a small yogurt company, you know, that was an incredible lift. And  I'm very proud of the work that they did to really reinvigorate the dairy farms in upstate  
**[0:19:38-0:19:44](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:19:38):**  New York and create a financial incentive and an upside and security for farms that  were really under an amazing amount of pressure.  Another area that Victor has invested in that has big impacts on producers is plant based  protein. Victor was an early investor in Beyond Meat, a company that has recently had one  of the most successful IPOs in history. This space is controversial for sure. But Victor  
**[0:20:03-0:20:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:20:03):**  sees that it's creating some big opportunities, including for producers, as plant based companies  look to expand their supply chains beyond just pea protein isolate and soy, which are  the common inputs used today.  There's a lot of experimentation going on now, you know, around different pulses and  sort of chickpeas and those show real potential. But those crops need to have kind of a denser  
**[0:20:32-0:20:39](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:20:32):**  protein content to it. So, you know, what can be done on the hybridization side to kind  of up the protein levels within those crops? How do you start thinking about, you know,  rotations and the like, you know, to do that? How do you think about hybridization, you  know, to do that and approach to genetics? So, you know, there's a lot of work that's  going to be done not only to just increase the volume, which I think is an opportunity  
**[0:21:01-0:21:07](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:21:01):**  right here right now for supporting the all protein sector. But then what are the new  protein sources that are agriculturally based that are going to come in to help create more  complexity in the burger, bring more, a deeper taste profile, more umami. You know, there's  a lot of things that are going to keep evolving that I think farmers can play a role in with  these companies and with these products to build a better product.  
**[0:21:33-0:21:37](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:21:33):**  More broadly than just plant-based, Victor is also watching some macro trends in the  food system that he believes are also creating big opportunities for farmers.  Maybe I'm just being the eternal optimist here, but I think the coming decades are going  to become a golden era for farmers. I think the types of crops, the focus on nutrition,  the focus on differentiation that the consumer is having, the focus on farming practices  
**[0:22:13-0:22:22](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:22:13):**  and the like, I think that is going to provide farmers with an incredible opportunity. And  the major transformation that's going to happen is that we're going to move from commodity  to identity. I think commodity as an idea has a timestamp on it. I think the entire  system for the last 50, 60 years have been, you know, on an agricultural side has been  focused on the idea of commodity, that there's a select number, you know, limited set of  
**[0:22:45-0:22:53](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:22:45):**  crops that ultimately it doesn't matter where it comes from or how it was grown, you know,  what above and beyond, you know, kind of the top level specs, you know, what's in it that's  ultimately ubiquitous, that it's used, that it's interchangeable. All of that approach  I think is coming to an end. And what's going to come next, you know, for a consumer that  actually cares is, you know, how things are farmed, what crops are nutrient dense, what  
**[0:23:21-0:23:26](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:23:21):**  soil practices have been undertaken. And if you can do all of those things right, if you  could pick the right crops and the right rotations and do farming in a way that creates more,  you know, value, there's going to be a premium that people are going to pay for that because  a commodity system in which we've bred out nutrients and we've bred out flavor and we've  bred out all of these things are now being highly valued. And that's going to move us  
**[0:23:53-0:24:01](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:23:53):**  to an entirely different approach to farming. And for the farmers who see that future and  can really curate the crops, you know, to those markets and do the harder work up front  in terms of farming practices, but ultimately, you know, like you, I share the technology  and new science are really going to help farmers make that transition to this higher value  identity preserved market.  
**[0:24:25-0:24:30](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:24:25):**  Realizing this future will be hard, really hard. But Victor says that, at least in the  US, there are market signals that it's already happening. For example, big food companies  that have scaled up organic brands have been dependent on sourcing their organic grains  from overseas. But nowadays, they're losing confidence in these supply chains. And this  is leading to change and opportunities.  
**[0:24:48-0:24:56](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:24:48):**  The big food manufacturers who have been importing all of this organic grain from places like  Turkey and Crimea, which are not the hotbeds of stability and likely aren't organic or  not always organic, but you're paying that organic premium. But you actually don't know  whether what you have is authentically organic. You're going to need a domestic supply in  the US of verifiable organic grains. And your brands and your company's market cap are now  
**[0:25:29-0:25:34](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:25:29):**  tied to your ability to make these transitions.  And so they're starting to do 6, 7, 8, 9, 10-year forward contracts, locking in premium  prices to stabilize those supply chains, to allow the growth of those brands that have  to transition to organic to do so. I'm not saying that's widespread, but it is the start  of a set of systems players in which there are shared values and shared interests and  
**[0:26:05-0:26:12](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:26:05):**  shared risks that they need to solve. They're taking a long view on how to do that. And  that is an opportunity for farmers.  Victor recently visited Australia, representing his nonprofit, Foodshot Global. Foodshot Global  is a consortium of companies that are focused on creating a food system that's more healthy,  sustainable, and equitable. I was fortunate to meet up with Victor while he was here.  
**[0:26:30-0:26:36](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:26:30):**  And I also asked him for a few reflections on his trip and the ag tech and food ecosystem  here in Australia.  I was just really quite blown away at the level of innovation that's there. I think  you have some world-class universities that are doing some important work on the R&D side.  And investor groups starting to come into that ecosystem to really help turn those research  
**[0:27:02-0:27:09](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:27:02):**  opportunities into commercial and more entrepreneurial companies. And so it's really just fascinating  for me to see a start of all of that, of the dots being connected. And from a Foodshot  Global perspective, we are seeking to help be part of that dot connecting and then also  to bring Australia into the work that we're doing on a global basis from Foodshot Global.  So as a result of that, we had some great meetings, some partnerships that are in the  
**[0:27:34-0:27:42](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:27:34):**  process of formation. So I'm hoping to get back there pretty soon to start formalizing  some of those relationships and bringing them into our protein challenge, which we'll be  launching in the next couple of months. But most importantly, just to get back to Melbourne  so I can eat some more of that food because that is a damn good food town.  I'm looking forward to Victor's next visit and to following what he's up to at S2G and  
**[0:28:04-0:28:10](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:28:04):**  Foodshot Global. Links for both of these organizations are in the show notes and on the blog. And  don't forget, if you're a producer out there that's looking to get Ag Tech ready, check  out our free ebook, The Five Tips from Previous Podcast guests, brought to you in partnership  with Decipher. You can find it on our website, agtechsowhat.com. See you next time.  Thank you for joining us on another episode of Ag Tech So What. You can stay up to date  
**[0:28:34-0:28:40](https://player.whooshkaa.com/episode?id=444059#t=0:28:34):**  with the latest episodes and news at agtechsowhat.com. And as always, if you have any feedback or  other guests to recommend, we'd love to hear from you. Just hop on the website and leave  us a comment or send us a message. Finally, if you like what you're hearing and we hope  you do, please share the podcast with a friend or leave us a review on iTunes or wherever  you get your podcasts. Thanks again for listening. Catch you next time.  