### Agtech - So What?  (2022-00-24)
**[0:00:00-0:00:06](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, and welcome to Ag Tech So What. I'm Sarah Nolet. An update for you here at the  top of the show. The Agfentik Group has been acquired. Well, sort of. We're still the same  team on the same mission, to partner with Ag Tech operators who are unlocking world  changing impact at the intersection of digitally native agriculture and climate solutions.  But now under one brand, Tenacious Ventures. For all our podcast episodes and insights,  
**[0:00:25-0:00:30](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:00:25):**  the companies we invest in and more, check out our new home at tenacious.ventures. It's  not easy to say goodbye to Agfentik, but we're pumped about our new home and know that to  achieve big things in the world, you have to be focused. And for us, that means finally  having just one brand and just one website. Okay, on to today's episode.  At the moment, commodity grain prices are looking favorable due to a shortage in global  
**[0:00:51-0:00:56](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:00:51):**  supply driven by a myriad of factors. But for future focused producers with an eye on  world markets, banking on success in the commodity casino is simply getting too risky.  With us being in Brazil and understanding how many acres that that country that are not in  the Amazon have to bring on board for production acres, over 200 million additional acres are  potentially waiting in the wings depending on pricing. It looked like something that we'd  
**[0:01:18-0:01:23](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:01:18):**  want to insulate ourselves a little bit better to just be more in the specialty category  as well. That's Amy Brooke of Cyclone Farms, an operation  rooted in eastern Nebraska. Though Amy represents the sixth generation of her family farming  operation, she's had a diverse career so far with time spent in industry as well as farming  and working to balance acidic soils in Brazil. It all started for Amy with earning an Ag  
**[0:01:43-0:01:48](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:01:43):**  Engineering degree from Iowa State, after which she took a detour farther up the value  chain. My role out of college is a systems engineer  with General Mills. And so that was really exciting to me to just get immersed into high  speed manufacturing and turning ingredients of what we grew on the farm into products  that people love. And then just working with a lot of the mechanics actually were prior  
**[0:02:08-0:02:14](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:02:08):**  farmers in their previous life. And it's just a good work environment and just troubleshooting  and solving problems and trying to make the whole system more efficient. And that's my  philosophy of just how I've approached everything in life, just finding what's broken and try  to fix it, what the root cause is and put solutions in place, whether in the systems  engineering realm within food manufacturing or now currently on my own family farm.  
**[0:02:34-0:02:38](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:02:34):**  What was a day in life like at General Mills? Like you mentioned some actual physical engineering  work. Walk me through what a day was like there.  Oh, goodness. You know, actually life in manufacturing is pretty similar to a farm. You have your  plan A starting out and then the alphabet has 26 letters because you're probably, you  know, D or E as the midpoint of the day rolls on and then something else comes up that you're  
**[0:02:57-0:03:04](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:02:57):**  not expecting. So in manufacturing where I was, we were a 24-7 facility with three shifts.  So my responsibility was to see how reliable the equipment would run over the course of  the whole 24-hour period. And there's predictive failure and then there's the reactive failure  that happens when things go wrong. And we tried to have most of what would go wrong  into something we were planning on. There's just equipment can just surprise you at times.  
**[0:03:26-0:03:31](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:03:26):**  So our manufacturing lines, they had robotics and different things like that. It's probably  pretty much daily. That's something that happened as planned. But I really valued the team effort  that everybody has a different perspective and what they bring to the table. So as an  engineer, I'd always circle the wagons with the operators that ran the equipment and the  maintenance folks that adjusted the equipment. And we'd always drive solutions with just  
**[0:03:52-0:03:59](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:03:52):**  basically several mines into the equation instead of just one thought. And that's another  valuable lesson that I bring back to the farm every day because it's just diversity of thought  is really important to drive efficiency going forward.  Tell me more about the farm now. What was the vision and tell me about the last couple  years and where things are headed for the farm.  
**[0:04:14-0:04:20](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:04:14):**  Well, that was another kind of plan D-E-F. I always thought that my husband and I, we'd  work with my father and my mom trying to drive the family farm into the next generation.  And unfortunately, my dad, he passed away suddenly and my husband and I were farming  internationally in Brazil at the time. So we made plans to come back and farm in his  honor. So in 2012, and that was a high of commodities, kind of similar to today, but  
**[0:04:42-0:04:49](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:04:42):**  there was a downturn in the commodity markets shortly after that. So we tried to make our  farm a little bit more insulated. We converted to organic production. It was a slow at first  because it was a different realm. And we had a lot of experience just balancing soils and  high productivity. And some of those philosophies held true with converting farms to organic  as well.  
**[0:05:05-0:05:10](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:05:05):**  Tell me more about your time in Brazil. Tell me about what it was like being there.  That was wonderful. I traveled a lot prior to moving full-time to Brazil. So I had a  little bit of what I was going to get into moving there, but yeah, the town that I lived  in, it was pretty remote and rural, but it was a boom town just because of agriculture.  So it was a really cool spot to be in. It didn't have a movie theater. We were about  
**[0:05:31-0:05:38](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:05:31):**  five hours away from airport or really a lot of resources. So it was pretty much just an  ag town that developed overnight. It was 700 people, I think about 15 years prior to me  getting there. And it was, yeah, like I said, about 50,000 people when I got there. So it's  just crazy. The bus would come in, everybody'd get off and nobody'd leave town. And again,  it was just due to ag. So that was really neat to see the power of agriculture and how  
**[0:05:59-0:06:05](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:05:59):**  it could transform communities. This area wasn't farmed in the past because it was deemed  really a wasteland just because it had high acidic soils. And so again, that soil balance  came into play. How do you convert wasteland soils that really couldn't support any tree  growth or any grass growth, essentially? How do you convert them into productive soils?  And that happens over time when you can understand just the keys to balancing soil. And it did,  
**[0:06:27-0:06:32](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:06:27):**  it was a slow process, but again, it can happen and it really did transform that area. So  being a part of that was really interesting. There were no street lights or stop signs  in the town that we lived in. And for 50,000 people, it was a little bit chaotic. None  of the modern conveniences that we have here. That's fine. It just teaches you to be creative.  And I don't, there was hardly any English spoken in that town and I didn't have the  
**[0:06:53-0:06:59](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:06:53):**  experience with learning Portuguese prior to getting there. So it was a lot of muscling  through every field trip was like an educational class going to the grocery store even because  you just learn so many things and so many ways to communicate. You did realize like  details matter. That one word that you'd miss in a sentence could totally change what the  conversation was about. It was a good, again, humbling experience. I think agriculture and  
**[0:07:22-0:07:29](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:07:22):**  living abroad in a rural environment with few resources is also a humbling experience  as well.  Were the other Americans there? Were there other women there? Or were you pretty unique  in what otherwise sounds a bit like a kind of wild west experience?  Yeah, it was a boom town. So there were a handful of Americans there. There were folks  
**[0:07:44-0:07:49](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:07:44):**  from Germany, folks from the Netherlands, folks from China, just all doing the same  thing, seeing opportunity and being able to be on the ground level of transitioning this  year of Brazil into an agricultural area. So everybody's pretty familiar with, I think  Mato Grosso that had been developed maybe 20 years prior to this area. I think the thought  in the trajectory of where this area could transform was known. It just took a lot more  
**[0:08:15-0:08:21](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:08:15):**  hard work, I think, to get it to the level that Mato Grosso had established itself as.  But yeah, I think it was a big melting pot. They always say the US is a melting pot, but  I would say we experienced that firsthand down in Brazil.  Ben, you mentioned before the kind of realization about soil and how important that was going  to be to the success of the project and of the area. How did you come to that realization?  
**[0:08:40-0:08:45](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:08:40):**  Did you have a background in thinking about soil or tell me more about that?  So I'm really passionate with ag and soils just based on my background and growing up,  but it was awesome to see farming in another zip code, I always say, and this zip code  happened to be an international zip code because there's things that you could relate to. And  then there's principles that you just learn because they're indicative to a certain area.  
**[0:09:08-0:09:12](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:09:08):**  So it was good to compare and contrast because it's farming is not a direct template depending  on your spot in the US or your spot in the world. But there are some, the process to  farm, I'd say is pretty similar. So understanding that process and finding your weak points  and getting those saw, they think you can move mountains in our industry.  I love the way you talk about that. And my sense is that's because you have experience  
**[0:09:33-0:09:38](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:09:33):**  in a few different areas, not just in the US and Brazil, because you moved into consulting  internationally. Tell me about that.  Yeah. My husband and I are working with the Kinsey Albrecht Soil Practices and basically  the same soil and a lot of our coursework is done in wine grape country in California  because the best soil to grow the best grapes for wines in the world is the same soil that  
**[0:09:57-0:10:02](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:09:57):**  we need to grow corn on our farms, the same soil that folks in Brazil on the sugarcane  land need as well. So once you know that equation and can balance the soil, looking at calcium  magnesium first, it really lets you work in a variety of different areas. You get that  balance set and then it takes different effort to get that balance in the different regions,  depending on if you're starting from a basic soil or acidic soil, but boiling it down to  
**[0:10:24-0:10:31](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:10:24):**  an equation really can unlock some doors and potential there. So that balance, again, it's  really for different geographic regions and different crops, so wide scale crops. So it's  allowed for us to really get into some fun situations and understanding because in the  Midwest we can only grow successfully, you know, a handful of crops. So we got exposure  to coffee and citrus and sugarcane, papaya, different crops that we don't have necessarily  
**[0:10:52-0:10:56](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:10:52):**  here in the Midwest and got to learn the ins and outs of those. But really the delivery  mechanism was that original soil balance.  And how did you think about breaking into the organic space?  Essentially kind of the same reason. It was a little bit of an evolution because if you're  thinking of your body and if you're weak generally, and we can maybe potentially relate to this  
**[0:11:14-0:11:19](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:11:14):**  with the pandemic that everybody faced, you're a little bit more susceptible to potentially  getting really sick from COVID. It's the same thing with our soils. If you don't have the  balance right, then you're potentially could get attacked more with disease and insects  if you have weak crops due to weak soil. So once you kind of solve some of your soil balances,  you realize you maybe don't need some of the assistant mechanisms, meaning some of the  
**[0:11:40-0:11:46](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:11:40):**  foliar applications of fungicide and insecticide. So we started realizing that we were needing  some of those types of products and our yields were really doing pretty well. That was the  evolution that, hey, maybe we can take it one step further and protect our yields, protect  our crops, just because we're having that soil balance that we don't necessarily need  some of the products that you can purchase on the shelf. And so it just evolved from  
**[0:12:08-0:12:13](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:12:08):**  there and then it got really interesting and challenging in a way. And there's opportunities  from a business and marketing standpoint for the crops that you grow. And then also just  with our understanding of trying to be a little bit more niche and specialty with us being  in Brazil and understanding how many acres that that country that are not in the Amazon  have to bring on board for production acres, over 200 million additional acres are potentially  
**[0:12:37-0:12:43](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:12:37):**  waiting in the wings, depending on pricing. Like right now, you could see in 2012 how  the evolution of Eastern Europe and South America really gained an acre to contribute  to commodity-based crops. It looked like something that we'd want to insulate ourselves a little  bit better to just be more in the specialty category as well.  So what was that process like? Did you do due diligence? Did you write out a business  
**[0:13:04-0:13:09](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:13:04):**  case? Did you talk to different people to get advice on it? What was the journey for  you specifically in making some of those decisions?  A little bit of all the above. I think the main driver in my mind was just being able  to see examples, professional examples that we could relate to. Because our farm, when  you have precision technology and kind of the latest and greatest tools, when you're  
**[0:13:32-0:13:37](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:13:32):**  conventionally farming, you want to make sure that you can translate some of those technology  tools to the organic industry as well. How I wanted to think of it as moving our operation  forward in that regard. We did it in our network, have a few folks that were farming and so  going onto their fields and understanding their challenges and the ways they could deliver  to their farm plan was really critical. Because once you feel like it's possible, I think  
**[0:14:00-0:14:07](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:14:00):**  you're more apt to execute a little bit. That's how I was. So yeah, you have the numbers on  your spreadsheet saying one thing, you have the philosophy with soil balance and a minimalist  on trying to use certain products is another component of it. And then just being able  to deliver that professionalism, that was a third component.  What you said there about technology, I really like, and sometimes I think there can be a  
**[0:14:28-0:14:33](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:14:28):**  perception that for organic, you maybe don't have as much technology when I think the reality  is you actually have to look at practices and technology pretty closely to be able to  farm organically. Maybe tell me a little bit about some of the insights you had or some  examples of different practices or technologies that you've found you need to use and get  benefit from.  
**[0:14:49-0:14:55](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:14:49):**  Yeah, absolutely. I know, I think that is a general thought that maybe it is a little  less technology driven, but I think that there's just a diversity of ways to farm organically.  And the pathway we've chosen is to implement a lot of technology into the equation, both  on the soil land and embarrassing our soils to deliver precision nutrients in the right  spot. Those micro nutrients, I call them micro elements, micronutrients that are naturally  
**[0:15:18-0:15:24](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:15:18):**  mined that are approved in the organic space helps to drive that good soil balance and  delivering them in the right spot based on your soil samples and approval from the certifier  is one component of technology. But another would be just some of the equipment that we  get access to and implement on our farms, just like a conventional mindset is using  multiple modes of action to handle some of your challenges, whether it be insects or  
**[0:15:46-0:15:51](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:15:46):**  weeds. We do the same thing, that mentality of multiple modes of action, but we're delivering  things like propane flamers or which propane flamers are driven through the field. We partner  with the university on some of their prototypes to help us manage weeds more effectively,  especially during rainstorms. We can get out there a lot sooner on our fields and it helps  us minimally till our soil because there's no tillage involved in implementing that type  
**[0:16:11-0:16:16](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:16:11):**  of equipment. There's weed zappers available that we've trialed and tested as well that  send 14,000 volts through a copper bar above the canopy on a soybean field to electrocute  some of these weeds. So those are a couple of good examples. In the pipeline right now,  we're not testing one, but hopefully in the near future, we will be there. There's actual  lasers, equipment that lasers are targeting weeds with 80% success. That technology is  
**[0:16:39-0:16:43](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:16:39):**  coming out. There's a lot of robotic technology coming out, just being discussed, maybe not  implemented on a commercial level yet. So those are some of the equipment that we're  working on or looking at working with. And some of our minimal soil disturbance tools  are some of what we've looked at in Europe, some of our tying meters and things like that  to just disturb the soil enough to disrupt weeds from forming. So those, I mean, are  
**[0:17:07-0:17:12](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:17:07):**  some of the actual getting the equipment and going. You do control traffic patterns too.  We need precision, just the RTK system. So we're always going in the same tracks every  time to minimize just compaction and different things like that. We're trying to draw and  pull from a lot of different ways. We have sophisticated water management systems that  we're partnering with the Natural Resources Conservation Service to implement on our fields.  
**[0:17:30-0:17:36](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:17:30):**  So really looking at the whole gamut in terms of conservation, in terms of technology, but  just deploying these systems to really reduce our footprint, our impact to our natural resources,  and then trying to deliver results and lasting results on our farms as well.  Wow. That sounds like a lot of fun getting to explore all of those different tools and  technologies.  
**[0:17:54-0:18:01](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:17:54):**  Yeah, it absolutely is. I love, yeah, just lifelong learning. And so it's nice. We're  definitely not repeating the same game plan every year. And I know a lot of farmers don't  because your conditions and your weather is totally different. But I feel like just because  we do have some hurdles to overcome in organic farming, it's definitely very challenging  that there are some resources that are maybe unconventional that are being looked at. And  
**[0:18:25-0:18:30](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:18:25):**  since you only get in the Midwest one season to farm here, there's quite a network of organic  producers sharing their learnings. Everybody's kind of cheering everybody on from the background.  And so that's been really positive as well, whether it's social media based or just because  usually there's not an organic farmer in your county. So you're going 100 miles away to  find somebody that maybe has some kind of notes to just compare and relate to. So it's  
**[0:18:51-0:18:54](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:18:51):**  a nice support network.  Do you think about conventional versus organic production as fundamentally different? You  mentioned before the mentality of you want different tools in the toolkit in conventional  and organic and they're just different tools. But do you think about them as fundamentally  different?  
**[0:19:09-0:19:13](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:19:09):**  That's a good question. I actually wish when I was conventionally farming that I would  have had access to some of these tools because I think there could have been even more variety  in our farm plans if we would have implemented a few of these techniques. I can see them  as cross functional, actually. But yeah, now there's just a more of a reliance on, I would  say technology in terms of weed management in organic production because we don't have  
**[0:19:35-0:19:42](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:19:35):**  access to the more conventional methods of weed mitigation. But I just know from a conventional  standpoint there are challenges with weeds just because of the herbicide resistance.  So I think there can be benefit actually from farmers not categorizing one tool as an organic  tool only that it can be viewed as cross-functional.  Is there an example of something that maybe hasn't gone right in your work on the farm?  
**[0:20:04-0:20:07](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:20:04):**  Something that you tried that kind of didn't pan out?  Oh, goodness. Yeah, that's where all the learnings, I think, come from. Absolutely. I just feel  like you learn a lot more from your mistakes versus your successes in a way, or that's  how I try to work on stuff. But yeah, I mean, our first year organically farming, I think  the thought conventionally farming is still want to hurt or injure any plant. And that's  
**[0:20:29-0:20:34](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:20:29):**  the whole paradigm shift with organic farming. You're actually going to have, you call it  almost like casualties. You plant a higher population because if you're not aggressive  enough, the weeds are going to take over your field. So that conversion is almost a tough  mindset conversion probably more than anything because we just are. Yeah, we were pretty  gentle, I would say our first year doing our weed management routine. And yeah, you get  
**[0:20:58-0:21:04](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:20:58):**  behind and it's weeds in our area are no joke. So yeah, it can get expensive pretty fast  and then trying to mitigate those manually with walkers and everything gets really expensive.  So that's the motivation on our end with our farm that was just let's use the money instead  of in walkers. Let's use that in terms of technology and equipment to get the right  stuff at the right time and not feel if you rain, you get behind that there's another  
**[0:21:25-0:21:30](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:21:25):**  tool like I was mentioning the zapper, the flamer that you can leverage so you don't  get behind. But it's a pretty humbling experience when you feel helpless and we felt helpless  a lot. How did you manage through that first year? And also tell me what a walker is because  I don't know. Oh, yeah, sorry. No, good. Why just manually going out and removing? Oh,  my gosh. Yeah, and it can be pretty extreme. So that that's the motivation on the other  
**[0:21:54-0:21:59](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:21:54):**  end. How do you get the right tools and technology probably with anything? How do you set yourself  up with success and be able to get to the other side without too many pitfalls? So it's  tough. And I think that's why developing the network is really important. And probably  with whatever you do, it's important. I found through our first year, reaching out to people  because again, they're not necessarily in your own county, they're people that you haven't  
**[0:22:21-0:22:25](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:22:21):**  met, but then you're instantly connected. Once you do get connected because you have  these challenging experiences that pretty much everybody's experienced going through  this. But that's why we set up a consulting network just to help producers not have that  first moment that some of us that went transitioned maybe 10 years ago experience. I don't consider  myself a pioneer in this industry because that there's some of my call my mentors that  
**[0:22:48-0:22:53](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:22:48):**  have been organically farming for 25 years. So they've just had a lot more experience  than I. You have a couple seasons and it can provide better insight to those that haven't  had any seasons. And so we developed just a program to help folks with the certification,  all the paperwork that goes along with organic farming to get your farms inspected and certified  and qualified for the USDA seal. And then yeah, all these trials and tribulations on  
**[0:23:15-0:23:21](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:23:15):**  the farm for weed mitigation and crop insurance and marketing because it is definitely a different  ballgame than what the traditional methods are.  Well, and it's not easy to ask for help, whether it's in a farming or any other kind of business.  Do you think the experiences you've had and being in some pretty unconventional places  and situations has shaped how you've been able to ask for help and then ultimately set  
**[0:23:38-0:23:41](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:23:38):**  up those networks for others to do the same?  Absolutely. I think farming is a pretty common language, but I think it is hard at times  to ask for help. But once you start that process in the right direction, then it becomes easy  because you realize that more people either have the same question as you or they have  that synergistic effect when you do reach out to people. Maybe your initial thought  
**[0:24:00-0:24:05](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:24:00):**  process or theirs is one direction and then you come together and you think of something  totally different. I think that's the case in conventional farming as well.  How do you think about planning for the future? Do you have a five-year plan or a 10-year  plan?  Absolutely, because a lot of that longer term success in organic farming is those long-term  
**[0:24:22-0:24:29](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:24:22):**  crop rotation and then your marketing plans, because that's another tool in order to mitigate  some of the weed challenges or your disease challenges is coming up with that long-term  rotation. So production-wise, we absolutely have long-term production plans and that drives  into the marketing where a lot of the organic marketing is relationship based. You have  spaces and names with your buyers and where your products are going. Ours are all food  
**[0:24:48-0:24:52](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:24:48):**  grade type organic products going into make tortillas for our corn products, our white  and blue corn and tofu for our soybeans. So it is good to have those long-term plans and  we definitely have them.  What do you think the farm will look like in, call it 20 years?  Yeah, production-wise, we have those plans. We have a lot of aspirations on where we can  
**[0:25:09-0:25:15](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:25:09):**  transform and take our farm. It's going to be an interesting equation with the food security  situation. I think the whole world is facing right now with the challenges in the Ukraine  for actual production and exports and imports and maybe the higher commodity prices and  turning on more acres in South America, like what we saw happen in 2012. It's interesting.  I think you definitely got to be on your toes in this game because the way our grandfathers  
**[0:25:37-0:25:42](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:25:37):**  and other generations farmed, I don't know had as much long-term uncertainty as what  maybe there is now. So I think it's just trying to make sure that you're as efficient as possible,  being able to be nimble as well. Satisfying, especially in niche markets, I think will  be one realm that we're always going to be a part of and trying to be as self-supported,  I guess, not as reliant on external inputs. I think is going to be important to our farm  
**[0:26:06-0:26:12](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:26:06):**  as well because you're even seeing that now with some of the fertilizer and conventional  herbicide products this year. It's just that mindset of, I think, trying to be a little  bit more self-reliant is going to be hopefully more successful than depending on the supply  chain to drive your solutions. So that'll be the trajectory we're going to try to take.  Who knows if that's the right one? You mentioned the word nimble. How do you think about being  
**[0:26:35-0:26:40](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:26:35):**  nimble in a world where you've got one season per year and is it more about the practices  or the crops or more about your mindset?  You know, agriculture is really unique and interesting because a portion of what we do  is based on tradition and a portion of what we do is based on innovation. So I think it's  just always keeping those two buckets in check and always validating your plans and being  
**[0:26:59-0:27:03](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:26:59):**  open to new changes that come down the pipeline for sure.  Do you think that your mindset sets you apart from other farmers and the experiences that  you've had in pretty unconventional areas, whether it's engineering or Brazil?  I've been really blessed to be able to see ag from many different sides. So I'm really  thankful for that. And I just know there's always stuff that can happen and just trying  
**[0:27:23-0:27:29](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:27:23):**  to weigh in what we can control and what we can't. So I try to be pretty grounded. It's  good to be that way, I think, in our industry, because, again, there's just so many variables,  whether you're organically farming or conventionally farming or farming in a foreign country, there's  just so many variables you can't control. And just know that the sun will come up tomorrow.  That's what my dad always say. And just have a clear head. If you get mad, you forget to  
**[0:27:48-0:27:52](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:27:48):**  think. So it's just trying to be grounded and level and process the information you're  given and make a plan according to what you have at the time. And it's really hard in  our game to be a Monday morning quarterback because you never have what you need at that  moment. You just have to act on what you have and go forward.  It does sound like that thinking is part of your competitive advantage. Do you think about  
**[0:28:10-0:28:15](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:28:10):**  cultivating or how do you think about having that mindset on your team, like helping the  rest of your team be nimble and think differently?  My husband and I love building out teams and love our team on our farm. It's a lot like  family. But again, it goes back to like there's 26 letters in the alphabet and there's always  something you can do. It might not be what you were originally thinking you can do, but  
**[0:28:31-0:28:38](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:28:31):**  there's always a window or a way through a situation. You just got to find it. So I developed  this actually in basketball in high school. The coach said you can always play defense.  Maybe your offensive game isn't there, but you can always take care of business. So I  think we're pretty level team and dynamic is probably a good term for it. Just open  to change, open to new things, but holding true to the family roots and good grounding  
**[0:28:59-0:29:01](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:28:59):**  morals to chart our course.  Is there an element of, and I know I've experienced this when you want people to really take in  that new information and think for themselves, but that does lead to mistakes and I guess  you have to be accepting that there's going to be mistakes and that's sort of part of  the journey or you're going to get things wrong and have to have a bunch of people go  
**[0:29:16-0:29:19](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:29:16):**  out and pull leads because that's part of the journey too?  Absolutely. You know, that's just life and you're only on this planet for so long. And  again, I think we learn a lot better with our mistakes than our successes. And we were  paying for an education. We'd have several letters behind her name after this point is  from all the tuition, quote unquote, that we've paid from some of the mistakes we made.  
**[0:29:39-0:29:42](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:29:39):**  And that's a part of life, but that's a part of the conversation. I think that's really  crucial for both conventional farming and organic farming is that network. So you can  live through other people's experiences too and collectively get further ahead in the  process because one season a year, it is tough to really get all those earnings, capture  those earnings and then apply them for the next year. So it's good to pull several seasons  
**[0:30:01-0:30:06](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:30:01):**  of different people involved. In Brazil, we had two seasons of farming depending on the  crop and the geographic location. In Florida, where we farmed for a period of time, we had  two seasons to learn. So having a couple of seasons was great. My dad didn't get that  in the Midwest, but he had his greenhouse that he developed and grew plants there in  the off season to try to see how we could stress them to be able to yield more or yield  
**[0:30:26-0:30:30](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:30:26):**  less and you learn that way too. So yeah, I think there's a different variety of ways  you can accelerate the practical knowledge and get it implemented the next season, even  outside of mistakes too.  How do you think about the organic landscape among other kind of sustainable ag ideas,  whether carbon markets and nature-based solutions and regenerative agriculture and do you see  
**[0:30:48-0:30:50](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:30:48):**  that changing?  I'm actually on the National Organic Standards Board. And so the organic program is really  important to me. And there's a term right now that's being thrown around or discussed,  I should say called climate smart agriculture. And I would say organic farming, the structure  and the framework has been around for decades now. So it's ready to try to be that original  
**[0:31:09-0:31:17](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:31:09):**  solution that some of these programs are saying to be. So I'm real supportive of what's happening  in the organic space. And I think that's being able to tell the story a little better because  we are a systems-based approach. We're not just a practice-based approach. So I think  putting that all together, there's a good story to tell there that some of these programs  are working to fill up a way that maybe doesn't exist.  
**[0:31:38-0:31:42](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:31:38):**  Going to farmers is truly one of the coolest parts of this job. And Amy did not disappoint.  I was left chewing on a few of her points long after our conversation ended. First of  all, I admire Amy's drive to find a niche, a competitive advantage, even in what seemed  to be an inevitably commoditized business. Amy's unique life experience obviously contributed  to her ability to do this. But it seemed to me that the most impactful lesson Amy learned  
**[0:32:01-0:32:06](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:32:01):**  while farming in another zip code was a fundamental appreciation for the risk of playing in an  undifferentiated commodity space when, at any moment, circumstances well beyond her  control could upend prices, inputs, or markets for years. Seeing some of those 200 million  Brazilian acres firsthand seems to have been a powerful motivator to differentiate and  to create a business that couldn't be so easily reproduced around the world. I also  
**[0:32:26-0:32:31](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:32:26):**  appreciated the lessons that Amy shared about soil health and how balancing soils can lead  not only to carbon sequestration, but to meaningful crop benefits. Amy discussed her experience  with increased pest and disease resilience and improved crop development, which is pretty  impressive to achieve on tropical soils previously described as wasteland. This resonates with  our understanding of the opportunities around nature-based solutions in particular. Finally,  
**[0:32:49-0:32:55](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:32:49):**  I really enjoyed Amy's thoughts on the organic sector. From debunking the myth that organic  means no technology to her argument that the existing organic standards in the US offer  a meaningful on-ramp to more so-called climate-smart farming. I think Amy added a lot to a discussion  that has been heating up lately with the entrance of trendy but usually less defined ideas like  quote, regenerative and quote, sustainable. It'll be interesting to see what the future  
**[0:33:14-0:33:19](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:33:14):**  holds for all of these schools of thought and whether technology can help us shift from  prescriptive practices to achieved outcomes. So that's it for another episode of Ag Tech  So What. Thanks to our guest, Amy Brooke of Cyclone Farms, and thanks to Carrie-Anne Coker  from Vitale for recommending her. And of course, thank you for listening. For more information  on any of the resources mentioned in this podcast, please visit our new website, tenacious.ventures.  
**[0:33:40-0:34:09](https://tenacious.ventures/podcast-episodes/amy-bruch-organic-farming-technology-commodities#t=0:33:40):**  I'm Sarah Nolette. Catch you next time.  