---
title: Bonus 10 Jason Wrich Take Some Self Accountability
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### Ranching Reboot  (2022-12-16)  
### Author(s): Red Hills Rancher  

**[0:00:00-0:00:11](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:00:00):**  Hey gang, welcome to a special Friday bonus episode. I haven't done one of these in a long time,  and there's a bunch of ideas on the production side that I've wanted to try out.  I'm joined today in the studio by my friend and neighbor Brendan Wheelock.  
**[0:00:11-0:00:27](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:00:11):**  Thanks to all my amazing patrons on patreon.com forward slash redhillsrancher. I upgraded my  studio mic a couple of months ago, and upgrades mean that I have extra equipment. Brendan's had  several questions about bitcoin and blockchain and crypto, and with the events concerning FTX  
**[0:00:27-0:00:42](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:00:27):**  and several other crypto funds collapsing, I had some questions too. So I got in touch with my  friend Jason Rick with the Beef Initiative. Jason is a previous guest on the podcast. He was  featured way back in episode 54 at the beginning of March 2022. He's going to give us a recap on  
**[0:00:42-0:00:57](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:00:42):**  the Beef Initiative's four summits they've had, including the recent one in Nashville during the  US Cattlemen's meeting. As I said before, trying out several new things on this episode, so if you  notice something, let me know. There is a bit of background noise. I did my best. We recorded this  
**[0:00:57-0:01:25](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:00:57):**  yesterday and I wanted to get it right out. So all right, grab your coffee, put in your AirPods,  and ride along with Jason Rick as he tries to explain bitcoin.  All right, well welcome back to Ranching Reboot, Mr. Jason Rick. I had to go look. I wasn't quite  
**[0:01:25-0:01:41](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:01:25):**  sure what the number was. We're welcoming you back again. I think this, I'm not going to quote  an episode number because it'll be wrong. I don't have my sheet in front of it. The last one we did  was episode number 54 that came out back in March. So Jason, welcome back to the show. How are you  
**[0:01:41-0:02:02](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:01:41):**  man? Well, I mean we've got the most December snow that we've had in a long time here in western  Colorado and that pretty much sets the tone of my whole season by the potential of actually having  some irrigation water this year. So I'm awesome. Like are you above average on snow?  
**[0:02:03-0:02:24](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:02:03):**  Yeah, I mean the USDA has already taken us out of extreme drought and now we're just in, you know,  drought and we're going to be approaching coming completely out of drought if it keeps snowing the  way that it has. So I'm stoked. Well that's cool. I'm happy for you. I wish, you know,  
**[0:02:24-0:02:40](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:02:24):**  when you decide that you've had enough don't be afraid to send some my way because it's just  powerful dry. Well and that's all of my friends from west Texas. They're like, we see all these  snow pictures you can at least send a little rain towards us. I was like, well I would love to if I  
**[0:02:40-0:03:11](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:02:40):**  could. Yeah, for sure. So just recently you went out to Nashville for U.S. Cattlemen's. How was that?  It was amazing and we actually got to speak. We did a beef initiative micro summit at Bitcoin Park  Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and I recorded a couple of podcasts with my friends there at Bitcoin Park,  
**[0:03:11-0:03:31](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:03:11):**  Matt Odell and Marty Bent and then we got to speak at the U.S. Cattlemen's National Convention. You  know, we were fortunate enough to get invited by just an amazing family, the Millers,  and because Dr. Miller is the president or outgoing president of the U.S. Cattlemen's, his  
**[0:03:32-0:03:52](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:03:32):**  daughter and son-in-law are big into Bitcoin and so that's kind of how that connection happened.  And it was the conversations after we spoke because the questions were fantastic. I mean,  a lot of people are very skeptical about all of that stuff and so after I had the conversation  
**[0:03:52-0:04:10](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:03:52):**  with everybody and everyone that would listen and I'm like, I want to give you some free Bitcoin  just to show you how easy it is to transact, how easy it is to download a hot wallet on your phone  and then talking to some of them because a lot of them are using H2A workers that are going back  
**[0:04:10-0:04:31](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:04:10):**  with just like pockets full of cash back to wherever it is that they're working. That's not  great. Living, you know, which is like scary to me and I'm like because the reality is you could  take your whole year's worth of earnings, put it on your phone or better yet send it to a Bitcoin  
**[0:04:31-0:04:54](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:04:31):**  address to Peru or El Salvador or Argentina or wherever they're going back to and not have the  liability of getting mugged on the way. And so they were very interested in the potential of that,  not only the safety for their workers but also the security for their the wealth of their workers  
**[0:04:54-0:05:12](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:04:54):**  and their families and so that was a lot of fun like trying to troubleshoot and break down  the barriers of so much of what the... Unfortunately, there's just a lot of fear  mongering in everything we do and to be able to talk to someone who transacts in it and  
**[0:05:12-0:05:33](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:05:12):**  understands it a little bit better who's also a cattle rancher kind of helped calm down a lot of  their fears. And I think that there's a lot of misconceptions or misunderstandings  about, you know, between the different cryptocurrencies and what that entails as far as  
**[0:05:33-0:05:54](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:05:33):**  personal risk. And we can kind of get into that later. So for the folks that didn't catch your  previous episode, can you tell us a little bit about the beef initiative and what the beef  initiative is? Yeah, so it was started by Texas Slim as a way to... I mean his mission statement  
**[0:05:54-0:06:12](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:05:54):**  originally was to save children's lives through nutrition because right now, I mean, we feed so  many kids in this country a bunch of crap of processed foods, grain-based diets, you know,  and then some of these states like New York are doing the meatless Mondays in their public school  
**[0:06:12-0:06:32](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:06:12):**  systems and all of that stuff and it was it's just a travesty between obesity and diabetes.  You know, we're trying to get people back onto eating more animal protein and so he started this  organization with that in mind and it's kind of evolved into connecting consumers directly with  
**[0:06:32-0:06:56](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:06:32):**  producers and giving the ranchers a voice again. We've been so... we've been silenced by big either  national beef organizations or international packers and feeders to just be quiet, do your job,  and let us, you know, make all of the policy that dictates whether you live or die as far as your  
**[0:06:56-0:07:16](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:06:56):**  business and so we're trying to undo that and we have over 110 producers that are part of the beef  initiative on the website, on our website as far as this building out this catalog of like-minded  individuals who are also still have all of their independence like so many of us cattle ranchers  
**[0:07:16-0:07:39](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:07:16):**  have but it gives them an opportunity to connect to consumers who are listening to what we're doing,  watching what we're doing, and then seeking out a regional or a local producer to them to try and  direct purchase beef from them or even better yet a pay for a farm tour or agritourism.  
**[0:07:39-0:07:57](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:07:39):**  Whatever it is that you're trying to do as parallel revenue streams to your ranch to help  with your family's financial viability and so we've done... we did four summits. We did... the first one  is in Kerrville, Texas. The second one was at our ranch here in Crawford, Colorado. The third one was  
**[0:07:57-0:08:16](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:07:57):**  at White Oak Pastures in Bluffton, Georgia. I mean the Harris family is freaking phenomenal. I mean  getting to pick their brains on what they do and why they do it and all the pain points that they  have had through the evolution of their business was so refreshing and invigorating that it can be  
**[0:08:16-0:08:37](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:08:16):**  done. Just keep after it. And then our last one was there at Bitcoin Park in Nashville and they  were all just extremely well attended. The feedback that we got from attendees was just...  I'm... of course I'm a little partial to the one that we had here at our ranch because you can't  
**[0:08:37-0:08:58](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:08:37):**  beat the venue. I mean the scenery is amazing and like being on the ranch with a lot of local  ranchers and food producers who came as well as the Bitcoiners as well as the speakers and  educators you know as well as you know local media. I think we had 14 states and two three  
**[0:08:58-0:09:20](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:08:58):**  countries represented here at our ranch and I think there was like 96 adults and I think  probably the thing that I loved the most was all of the kids just running around being able to be  kids on a ranch obviously from the city and being able to just throw rocks in the pond and run  
**[0:09:20-0:09:38](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:09:20):**  around and just play with the piglets and you know and just enjoy this life that we take  for granted. For sure. So how does the beef initiative... I want to say how does it work?  Well you have producers that provide beef and then you connect the platform helps connect them  
**[0:09:38-0:09:58](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:09:38):**  with consumers that want to pay in Bitcoin. Do I have that kind of right? That is correct and  so there we have two producers who are a large enough operation that you can actually  buy beef boxes on the website. It's KNC Cattle, Cole Bolton and his family and then Holy Cow Beef  
**[0:09:58-0:10:18](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:09:58):**  Ann and Weldon Warren and they're both in Texas and you can have beef shipped directly to your door.  Whereas all of the other producers are trying to feed their communities like you know we  we provide beef all over the state of Colorado, Eastern Slope, Western Slope  
**[0:10:19-0:10:34](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:10:19):**  and so that was our goal and that's still our goal is to feed our region and that's the goal  and that's the goal of a lot of the other producers that are part of the beef initiative as well is  feed their communities first. And I think that's you know I'm all about it. I noticed  
**[0:10:35-0:10:55](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:10:35):**  on a lot of your social media you've been saying meet your rancher and you know I guess podcast  fans know what I'm probably about ready to say shake the hand that feeds you and it's it it's  the same thing it kind of really is the same thing and that that relationship you know that  
**[0:10:55-0:11:16](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:10:55):**  that face-to-face relationship between producer and consumer I think is very valuable and it  helps generate a lot of trust and so bear with me here here's kind of the angle that I'm going.  Currently trust in let's just say the fiat dollar economic system there's more and more people  
**[0:11:16-0:11:39](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:11:16):**  starting to distrust that system. Now on the other hand we also have everything that's blown up in  the last couple of months with FTX and this SBF guy and his crypto exchange imploding. Now  I get I get how bitcoin is different from you know the FTT tokens and all the you know the speculative  
**[0:11:39-0:12:02](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:11:39):**  derivative crap that Alameda was allegedly doing with not there with customers money. So maybe you  can explain a little bit how bitcoin is different from some of those let's call them shit coins or  alt coins or meme coins that that don't really have anything backing them in reality. So let's  
**[0:12:02-0:12:26](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:12:02):**  just start with the beginning so after the financial crisis of 2008 a designer with the  pseudo name Satoshi Yagamoto built this algorithm based on a highly complex mathematical equation  and this algorithm that is looking for specific series of numbers and when it has successfully  
**[0:12:26-0:12:50](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:12:26):**  finds this series of numbers it mines a block on the blockchain and that system is what is the  backbone of bitcoin and so this has been happening for 14 years now and as you can imagine any  wealthy country wants to break something that they can't control. So from its inception they  
**[0:12:50-0:13:13](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:12:50):**  have been attacking it trying to break this nearly unbreakable system because when you can exchange  value peer-to-peer with no third parties and no actual traceability because it's completely  anonymous and it is also completely transparent like I can log on to meme pool and I can trace  
**[0:13:13-0:13:39](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:13:13):**  every bitcoin transaction all the way back to its inception in 2008. So you have infinite  scarcity you have infinite traceability you have infinite  security which is completely different than any other cryptocurrency because there was none of  
**[0:13:39-0:13:59](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:13:39):**  them to begin with when they mined block number one block height number one that was the first one  and as soon as you stacked another block on top of it you would have to unravel the algorithm of  block two to get to block one to change the code to do anything with it whereas on every other  
**[0:13:59-0:14:20](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:13:59):**  token or stable coin or whatever they're calling them they typically mine 75% of them up front so  the owners and the and the and the operators and the developers already had 75% of them and then  they released the rest of them out on the market to be bought sold traded so they already have a  
**[0:14:20-0:14:43](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:14:20):**  big chunk of the kitty and at any time they can move the goal post they can literally put something  in it that's going to change how transactions work no matter what whereas with bitcoin you would  literally have to unstack every block all the way back to you know it's like 777 000 whatever to  
**[0:14:43-0:15:06](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:14:43):**  change it to make the end result any different so that that's one of the the biggest strongest  things there's it is financially and nearly physically impossible to to screw it up the  other thing too is just like the us dollar the value of it is based on  
**[0:15:08-0:15:34](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:15:08):**  consumer confidence right because we are no longer on the gold standard we had undid that in  71 then we were operating on the petro standard right where we were selling u.s  debt to other countries based on the value of their oil reserves and how oil energy runs the  
**[0:15:34-0:15:53](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:15:34):**  whole world economy well as soon as russia starts making deals with middle eastern countries to buy  oil for rupees or whatever happens to be as soon as japan starts looking at well maybe we won't  transact in dollars anymore maybe let's transact in something else as soon as that starts to happen  
**[0:15:53-0:16:16](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:15:53):**  consumer confidence in the u.s dollar starts to get a little shaky and then what we do you start  just print more money let's crank print more money whereas bitcoin very similarly to gold  has a a finite amount right the only difference is bitcoin will only ever have 21 million coins  
**[0:16:16-0:16:36](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:16:16):**  mined ever whereas when the value of gold goes up we just get more innovative and we find  places to to extract more gold out of the ground so that is the biggest difference  where you have scarcity and a real understanding of value but a lot of gold bugs once you have the  
**[0:16:36-0:16:54](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:16:36):**  opportunity to talk to them about bitcoin and how it works and why it works they kind of have the  aha moment is like as far as a diversified portfolio it makes good sense and then if you  look at the trajectory of the value of bitcoin from its inception to today and sure it has these  
**[0:16:54-0:17:13](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:16:54):**  four year cycles of havings where you mine it at a certain hash rate it gets to a certain point  and then in the next four years you're going to mine half as many so therefore the difficulty  rating goes way up so you have this cycle but never has it dipped below the previous low it's  
**[0:17:13-0:17:32](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:17:13):**  consistently throughout the 14 years always been higher than the previous low and our last big high  which of course was the world record high with over 68 000 a coin which i had bought it 20 000  and was riding that up and i could see that we weren't going to make it to where everyone was  
**[0:17:32-0:17:50](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:17:32):**  speculating we would but i found an opportunity to buy a skid steer which i'd wanted for forever  so i sold some at the very peak literally paid cash for a skid steer and so now i have the skid  steer that bitcoin bought and it's probably the handiest tool in my whole tool arsenal  
**[0:17:50-0:18:09](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:17:50):**  but so of course hardcore bitcoiners like you should never sell it you should never do this  unit it's like well i'm i'm worried about the circular economy that's why i accept  beef payments in bitcoin if i have opportunities to buy stuff with bitcoin whether it's wine from  
**[0:18:09-0:18:28](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:18:09):**  peony lane wines a friend of mine whether it's coffee from satoshi coffee whether it's my  start nine node that i run whether it's bitcoin miners that i'm using as space heaters to heat my  shop whatever that happens to be if i can transact in bitcoin and continue to build that circular  
**[0:18:28-0:18:49](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:18:28):**  economy it just makes sense because a lot of people buy bitcoin they do a dollar cost average  to buy more bitcoin whereas i i'm lucky in the opportunity that i can accept bitcoin for payment  for beef and some people do it on a platform like strike where they can literally take their bank  
**[0:18:49-0:19:10](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:18:49):**  account take fiat put it in there transact to me in bitcoin and then i can either sweep it into  cold storage or i can turn around and deposit it in my bank account as a fiat to pay the diesel  bill the hay bill whatever happens to be and so um that i mean that's like my stick on bitcoin  
**[0:19:10-0:19:29](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:19:10):**  and how that works for me and how i really see the value in it awesome so my friend brendan's  here and he's been sitting in and i he kind of he's almost bouncing he acts like he's got a  couple of questions over there you okay buddy yeah it's uh enjoying it i  
**[0:19:29-0:19:54](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:19:29):**  i've studied enough to be in trouble but to be perspective of the people that are listening that  are listening that don't understand uh so you're saying the other coins essentially are syndicated  out while the person that created them is maintaining controlling interest  
**[0:19:55-0:20:16](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:19:55):**  and that sets it apart largely from no controlling interest or syndication on the bitcoin  how do you say that the bitcoin is not trust-based though instead of asset-based  i i think what he's i think what he's kind of asking uh is maybe the difference between  
**[0:20:16-0:20:37](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:20:16):**  proof of stake and proof of work to use the crypto terms am i do i have that  it's correct absolutely so bitcoin is the only one that's based on proof of work and and when  we say proof of work it is the amount of electrical energy and computing power required to successfully  
**[0:20:38-0:21:01](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:20:38):**  fulfill that series of numbers in that algorithm to be then get rewarded for for a successful block  being mined whereas all of the rest of them it is simply transactional like the energy of them  the energy of them is the transaction of it being bought or sold that's the only thing that really  
**[0:21:01-0:21:24](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:21:01):**  drives it there is no hard work there is no pain felt and you know so for bitcoin miners it's  paying the electric bill the amazing thing with so many of the bitcoin miners that i  talk with and work with they're building their mining operations on stranded energy sources so  
**[0:21:24-0:21:44](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:21:24):**  you're in a city where they took the industry out and the electric company has this big three-phase  transformer that they're having to maintain in an industrial park somewhere and just the energy loss  from the humming of the transformers costing them hundreds of thousands of dollars in lost wasted  
**[0:21:44-0:22:03](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:21:44):**  energy right and so these guys are going in there negotiating a reasonable amount for cost of  electricity and putting their their mining rig in that old industrial building or they're going out  to farms and ranches that have stranded gas wells or defunct oil wells and where they had either just  
**[0:22:03-0:22:22](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:22:03):**  been capped pressurized low pressurized capped wells or they were flaring the gas off of them  they're going in there setting up a generator capturing that gas using it to generate electricity  to then mine bitcoin that way and either paying the rancher a cash lease on the land or if they're  
**[0:22:22-0:22:42](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:22:22):**  progressive cattle ranchers who are interested in that diversifying their portfolio they're paying  them in percentage of bitcoin mined and that's that's the amazing thing for me is like i was  an underground coal miner for 15 years and so we free vented or pumped methane out of the mine to  
**[0:22:42-0:23:01](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:22:42):**  make it safe for the miners underground and that would just go into the atmosphere is whole  unbroken up methane where now you can get on those wells and you can run it into a generator and  mine bitcoin and because you know co2 and water which is essentially what's released when you  
**[0:23:01-0:23:16](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:23:01):**  burn methane is way better for the environment than straight methane going to the atmosphere  and so it's a it's a win-win-win it's better for the environment it's better for the coal company  because someone else is maintaining all of that infrastructure and then you have you know market  
**[0:23:16-0:23:36](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:23:16):**  cap or market venture capitalists that are paying for the initial installation of that the equipment  that are making money as well and so it's really it's a win-win-win so that's the thing with  bitcoin what sets it apart from anything else is it is actual truly proof of work based on the  
**[0:23:36-0:24:06](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:23:36):**  electric electricity required to mine more bitcoin okay very cool so as a store of energy  as energy gets more expensive that lowers the value doesn't it doesn't lower the value it makes  the incentives smaller so our miners have to get more and more and more creative in finding other  
**[0:24:06-0:24:29](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:24:06):**  cheaper sources of electricity because the the block reward gets can get bigger depending on how  much what what the the value of bitcoin is so for instance at 68 000 block reward was huge  but there was such a huge backlog in the production of the actual mining rigs due to  
**[0:24:29-0:24:48](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:24:29):**  covid and all of those factories the the chip you know computer chip factories in china shut down  and all of that stuff yep that there was this huge scramble right well now that the lot lag is caught  back up the block uh reward is much smaller so there's some miners who just turned all their  
**[0:24:48-0:25:14](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:24:48):**  miners off because electricity is more expensive than the block reward is or they're working harder  to find more and more free sources of electricity there's a an outfit that's putting micro hydro  turbines in irrigation water pipes that then are going to mine mine bitcoin seasonally as their  
**[0:25:14-0:25:30](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:25:14):**  irrigation water is running through the pipes and then they just turn them off when you run out of  irrigation water i think he's talking about gravity flow irrigation like out of ditches  down to side rolls and stuff in colorado yeah he's not he's not talking about like pumping it up with  
**[0:25:30-0:25:45](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:25:30):**  the natural gas engine from 600 feet of the ogalala and then sticking one of those in the in the  center pivot i i that's not what you're talking about is it jason that's totally accurate you  know here in in the mountains where we have lots of uh head pressure that that's where we're talking  
**[0:25:45-0:26:08](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:25:45):**  but but this is actually in somewhere in south africa is where i was reading about that where  they're actually going to do that put micro hydro in their um irrigation piping gravity flow  for two things number one help electrify small villages farming villages all of those things  
**[0:26:08-0:26:27](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:26:08):**  and then as well as you know venture capital going down there to set up mining rigs to use any of the  excess because you know there they pretty much only need use electricity for light and or to  connect to like get the news from the world what's happening and so their usage is is not very  
**[0:26:28-0:26:45](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:26:28):**  regular and this gets an opportunity like at night or during the day or whatever they're  when they have zero demand they can just flip a switch and and mine bitcoin with it  you mentioned miners as heaters and i imagine that's kind of a more of a thing out in colorado  
**[0:26:47-0:27:05](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:26:47):**  and i was thinking about that and you know yeah i i guess you can build those mining rigs where  they do put off a significant amount of heat like almost as much as a small space heater right  so we we have s9s and when they're actually tuned down it's like 1300 watts so they can actually get  
**[0:27:05-0:27:22](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:27:05):**  on the computer and get on them and ramp up the operating system that's on the miner because it's  just an asic computer is what it is a bitcoin miner and so you can actually ramp up energy  usage clear up to where it'll run 1700 where it's like clicking like it's going through the  
**[0:27:22-0:27:41](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:27:22):**  algorithms way faster faster faster trying to find coins faster or you can tune it down which  it uses less electricity but it's not going to be nearly as efficient for mining but nevertheless  it's literally like a space heater because it's got two huge fans on it that are blowing  
**[0:27:41-0:28:03](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:27:41):**  air through the hard drive of this computer and the big heat sinks so yeah it's literally just  like a space heater except instead of just paying an electric bill it is looking for bitcoin and  i'm getting a reward from the from the mining pool from brains when we successfully mine  
**[0:28:04-0:28:24](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:28:04):**  a bitcoin in this pool so i'm making a note to myself so if i buy bitcoin mining rigs to write  them off as space heaters absolutely it's a total 1099 and they're cheap right now i mean you can  buy them for like 200 bucks shipped to your door really yeah i didn't know they were that cheap  
**[0:28:25-0:28:45](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:28:25):**  well the the small s9s which are like the previous generation so when i'm when i'm mining  seriously we're running uh asic s19s um they're probably around three thousand thirty three  hundred dollars currently of course when i bought it it was when there was a huge shortage of them  
**[0:28:45-0:29:04](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:28:45):**  and i paid almost ten thousand dollars for it then um and it's subsequently mined me  i think 2300 were the bitcoin um since we plugged it in you know a few months ago  i guess it's been about 10 months ago but still how many dollars worth of electricity a month does  
**[0:29:04-0:29:26](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:29:04):**  something like that eat running based on what you pay for electricity you know we have a 98  usage solar array on our house and so we pay the standard connection fee plus about between seven  and nine dollars a month and when i plug that s9 in just for a test we're gonna pay about  
**[0:29:26-0:29:51](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:29:26):**  nine in just for a test i think it was like seven seven additional dollars  for the month that i had it plugged in just as a test so sorry on your solar in colorado they let  do they buy your overage back to the grid or you and it's based on like a quarterly average  
**[0:29:51-0:30:10](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:29:51):**  so you like have this rolling average of usage versus what you sell back and and a lot of that's  based on a lot of it was um state and federal subsidies that helped pay for it so we paid like  half of it out of pocket and then they paid for the other half um and of course we actually paid  
**[0:30:10-0:30:33](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:30:10):**  a little bit more because we decided to go with the industrial grade panels and inverters um  just because their manufacturer warranty was five years longer than the other panels and so  even if you just did basic um basic math on what that would cost to have to replace them at  
**[0:30:34-0:30:54](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:30:34):**  25 years versus 30 it was a no-brainer so it cost us about two thousand dollars more to do that but  i i think in the long run it'll be well worth it i guess i asked the wrong question but the question  that i guess more what i wanted to know is like how many kilowatt hours a month does one of those  
**[0:30:54-0:31:14](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:30:54):**  things eat and if you don't honestly i honestly don't know i mean you you can go on brains and  they can give you like a a cost generator like to help give you an idea of like if you're going to  run x what is the actual electric bill going to be because i honestly don't know what our current  
**[0:31:14-0:31:35](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:31:14):**  kilowatt hour cost is um because i'm just doing it for fun whereas the guys that are hardcore  mining they know exactly what their roi is going to be what the cost is going to be  there was a big um wafer board plant louisiana pacific wafer board plant  
**[0:31:35-0:31:59](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:31:35):**  in montrose colorado it's about an hour and 20 minutes from me and a bitcoin mining company came  in and installed 68 acres of solar panels grid tied solar panels and then have that plant is  just stacked full of racks of bitcoin miners so they're selling a bunch of electricity back when  
**[0:31:59-0:32:19](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:31:59):**  the sun's shining and they're they're all on rotators followers that follow the same  rotators followers that follow the sun to make most efficiency and then at night they're buying  a bunch of electricity from the grid which works out for demand use you know um and i'm not sure  
**[0:32:19-0:32:49](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:32:19):**  what they negotiated but it's forgetting out how many mining rigs are in that building  i wanted to say like 3 000 but it might be more than that and depending on what size of rigs  they're running it's it's significant like literally 2 300 watts per rig so 68 acres of  
**[0:32:49-0:33:08](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:32:49):**  solar panels is not a small solar farm by anybody's imagination no it's not and it was when they  started putting them in i'm like they're literally going to put them on every open piece of dirt on  this hole because i think the whole lot's 80 acres and they put it everywhere other than the road and  
**[0:33:08-0:33:35](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:33:08):**  the parking lot pretty much wow so so back to this ftx fiasco so we've kind of talked about how  we've kind of talked about how bitcoin is nothing like any of these other exchanges um and nothing  and not like these other coins and bitcoin it's backed by the work that's gone in to verify  
**[0:33:35-0:33:57](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:33:35):**  all of the math and that's you know um i mean other than saying proof of stake which that's  what it is or the proof of work is your stake instead of just saying that you know okay now  there's all these ftt tokens that are in existence i'm going to have this many of them this is what  
**[0:33:57-0:34:21](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:33:57):**  they're worth here's the rest for sale it's like it's almost like they try to create just a bunch  of nothing or a bunch of something out of literally thin air and they had no accounting for  where any of it went that's totally accurate and when you start looking at his family and their  
**[0:34:21-0:34:44](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:34:21):**  political connections and contributions and it's that it gets really dark really fast  but what one thing that we preach in the the bitcoin space if it's not your keys like if you  don't hold your own private keys your 12 word seed phrase or your 24 word seed phrase if you don't  
**[0:34:44-0:35:10](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:34:44):**  hold that yourself it's not your coins and so anybody that's on an exchange all you actually  own is an iou for your bitcoin those are like uh like if you go like if you buy crypto on paypal  or on venmo or on some of these other platforms that you can't transfer it off so you can't  
**[0:35:10-0:35:30](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:35:10):**  transfer it off but you have to do kyc you know know your customer where you have to have you  hold your passport and do a selfie and send it to them to verify and then put verify your bank  account and all of that stuff whereas if you are if you are having the personal responsibility to  
**[0:35:30-0:35:53](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:35:30):**  hold those coins yourself on your own hardware device and maintain those seed phrase yourself  you have them yourself like i can pull up my signing device and put my passcode in put my  seed phrase in use my double backup take a picture with my phone take a picture with my signing  
**[0:35:53-0:36:13](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:35:53):**  device and i can tell you how many coins that i have and what their current value is as of today  whereas if you're buying them on coinbase or paypal or anything else that's an exchange  it's literally like well for instance when the um trucker strike in you know what trudeau did  
**[0:36:13-0:36:35](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:36:13):**  in canada everybody was donated money to those guys well not only did they shut that money off  they shut off the bank accounts of all of those people that donated as well it's exactly the same  so you buy all of this um bitcoin wrap uh ftx token and you spend a bunch of money and they  
**[0:36:35-0:36:56](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:36:35):**  decide to turn it off because of all of the terrible stuff that they did you're out zero zero  repercussions you're done you just have nothing nothing left whereas if you hold it yourself  and that's you know we i spent a lot of time educating coaching helping in whatever whether  
**[0:36:56-0:37:19](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:36:56):**  it's regenerative ag whether it's cattle genetics whether it is you know what to plant and why you  plant it there just across the board but the thing that i that most people um kind of migrate to is  store of value and generational wealth because everyone's worried with what the dollar is doing  
**[0:37:19-0:37:38](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:37:19):**  and how the fed is just printing more money and this inflation hyper inflation um how your  purchasing power is less and less and less all the time they're like well how can we  how can we insulate ourselves as much as we can from that and so i'm like you know call me crazy  
**[0:37:38-0:38:02](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:37:38):**  but here's this harry potter money that you can store and it's going to be yours no matter what  happens no matter you know in the world and then i talk about the people who can take their  bitcoin put it on the network take their phone stomp it into the dirt throw it in the trash  
**[0:38:02-0:38:24](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:38:02):**  get on a plane fly to a new country pick up a new phone their burner phone log on to your account  enter in your seed phrase boom you have it back hang on hang on i'm taking notes on how to fake  my own death and leave the country and take my money with me this is not legal advice this is  
**[0:38:24-0:38:48](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:38:24):**  this is not legal advice this is not financial advice disclaimer disclaimer fair enough uh  so um but of course the question oftentimes is well what happens if the internet  dies well i i remember when the internet internet came out when i was still in school and it was a  
**[0:38:48-0:39:12](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:38:48):**  passing fad right it will never work it's it's it's it won't ever have any energy it won't ever  have any legs and now i mean how we're talking is via the internet i mean pretty crazy you you can  get on a you know people can get on my website and dm me directly and order beef for me and transact  
**[0:39:12-0:39:30](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:39:12):**  in bitcoin and i can you know say okay i'll be there to deliver it and how it whenever just all  on the internet and so they understand if we have some kind of apocalyptic type event that it all  goes away but what is the likelihood of that because that would be the only way that you  
**[0:39:30-0:39:53](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:39:30):**  couldn't truly take your bitcoin with you anywhere look if the internet turns off we've got a lot  bigger problems than everybody's bitcoin wallets getting wiped out honestly it the internet is  going to continue for a good long while but if it stops it's so tied into everything every bit of  
**[0:39:53-0:40:10](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:39:53):**  commerce you know electricity production petroleum production and movement if the internet goes down  everybody's bitcoin getting wiped out it's gonna be the last everybody's worry but if the internet  does go down and you've been mining bitcoin and you've been taking self-custody and self-storage  
**[0:40:10-0:40:30](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:40:10):**  and you have your keys theoretically if there's ever any sort of connectivity at in like past the  point where we go dark if things start you know coming back online and working again theoretically  you'd still be able to access that store of value correct well and not theoretically in reality  
**[0:40:30-0:40:52](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:40:30):**  literally like my my seed signing device my storage device it doesn't it's not connected  to the internet i took my bitcoin off of the internet off of it and put it on it so those  numbers are there so in total reality the the it's going to be there no matter what  
**[0:40:53-0:41:17](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:40:53):**  if the internet is down i may not be able to sell it or exchange in it necessarily until i can get  back on to the internet and back onto the the system to number one see what the actual valuation  is in whatever modern times are because i have how many bitcoin i have on that wallet no matter  
**[0:41:17-0:41:41](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:41:17):**  what so that would be the that would be the only thing and now that we have verifiable transactions  peer-to-peer using a you know your code on your phone it's it's pretty easy to do i mean it is  literally like open up the camera i'll make an invoice you take a picture it charges you say yes  
**[0:41:41-0:42:06](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:41:41):**  verify click the transaction happens instantaneously so that's a a lot of retailers are really looking  into it because number one the fees are nominal literally you can have a five hundred dollar  transaction and it can be like a 27 transaction fee whatever the transaction fees when it gets  
**[0:42:06-0:42:31](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:42:06):**  batched is what you're going to pay plus no 10 cent every transaction fee on top of that whereas  if you're using square or a card reader you know you're two to three and a half percent  plus 10 cents every single transaction and um whereas this like literally i gave away i don't  
**[0:42:31-0:42:51](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:42:31):**  know i think 120 or 140 dollars worth of bitcoin and i think total transactions of those five  six six guys that i gave bitcoin to total transactions were under a dollar and so i mean  you're you know that you're under a percent total for all those different separate transactions  
**[0:42:51-0:43:08](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:42:51):**  that's that's not a bad place to be it doesn't sound like right and so that was you know we  were talking to one retailer that pays thirty thousand dollars a year in transaction fees  by using um and i don't remember what the operating system was but you know i was just like  
**[0:43:09-0:43:27](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:43:09):**  bitcoin i mean bitcoin really i mean you're gonna put thirty thousand dollars back in your pocket  and that's just the reality of that so well you know there's people that say the bankers got to  eat too the lenders got to eat you know the the people that the check clearing houses they got  
**[0:43:27-0:43:48](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:43:27):**  to eat too but at some level those are just other other layers of organization that were put into  place by legislation in attempt to regulate quote an economy and absolutely we could say the same  thing about the middlemen in the in the meat industry right like our friends from brazil got  
**[0:43:48-0:44:08](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:43:48):**  to eat you know whatever and i'm like no thanks i'm gonna be a little bit more serious about  that but i'm like no thanks i'm gonna i'm gonna feed my cows grass and i'm gonna take them to the  local butcher and i'm gonna feed my local um i'm gonna feed my local economy right because i spend  
**[0:44:08-0:44:27](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:44:08):**  all that money locally and i'm gonna feed my local community at the same time and that's that's the  beautiful thing with bitcoin as well is you can literally build this circular economy transacting  that you transact with anyways peer-to-peer speaking of brazil what happened with the  
**[0:44:27-0:44:49](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:44:27):**  uproar that was being taught and pushed about deforestation it went away and we started attacking  our own in our own country but the deforestation was making the cheap ag economy down there that  we're having to compete with on the global scale now well and that's just it it's called hush money  
**[0:44:49-0:45:08](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:44:49):**  and it's a big deal i mean when you have the two brothers who are the big wigs and one of those  big multi-national meat packers can go to prison for you know what they were doing paying their  local regional politicians it's easy to to tell everyone to just be quiet and mind their own  
**[0:45:08-0:45:26](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:45:08):**  business um and when we have so many people in this country that spend so much energy running  the entire country and they're just like a fire like chicken little the sky is falling  versus actually producing anything they can steer the narrative wherever they want  
**[0:45:29-0:45:46](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:45:29):**  yeah and they've got the money to have a big mouth  and they don't have to work they are not out chopping ice on stock tanks they are not out  logging in the woods so we can build houses they are not out fueling up their you know 18 wheelers  
**[0:45:46-0:46:03](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:45:46):**  sitting behind the computer running their mouth on stuff that they literally know nothing about  but whatever the latest headline on the news is like oh my gosh we got to do something about this  and it's just like uh-huh good job where did that disconnect come from because their parents worked  
**[0:46:03-0:46:22](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:46:03):**  to allow them that freedom of mouth that's exactly what the disconnect was they're working too hard  to teach them my drill instructors at boot camp always would say the mothers of america is what  made you kids soft they provided you anything and everything that you needed and you never had to  
**[0:46:22-0:46:44](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:46:22):**  sweat for it you never felt pain they didn't ever let you touch the stove and um that's why i raised  my kids the way that that i have is uh i want you to go out and be leaders in the world and knock  heads when necessary because we have too many kids that have been given everything i mean my daughter  
**[0:46:44-0:47:07](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:46:44):**  is a senior in college and she's home from college for the holidays and she has friends who have never  cooked on a stovetop don't know how to put gas in her tank either i've you know wild my daughter as  soon as she started to drive is like get your tire tools out we got to know how to change a tire uh  
**[0:47:07-0:47:23](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:47:07):**  drive the car up on ramps you got to know how to change the oil this is your baby you got to know  how to take care of it um change an oil change tire jump start it those were like those three  things were definitely included in driver's ed when i taught krista how to drive like she knew  
**[0:47:23-0:47:42](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:47:23):**  how to do all three of those things when she went to go take her first driving test to get her like  to get her farm permit and absolutely i was i was looking through photographs of my daughter  at 11 years of age driving the stick shift ranch truck so i could pick up hay right like we've got  
**[0:47:42-0:47:57](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:47:42):**  coats stuffed behind her so she could even come close to reaching the steering wheel and the  pedals you know and my son was like four and he's standing up in the seat you know watching as i'm  throwing bales on the on the trailer and everyone's just like oh my god you know how could you do that  
**[0:47:57-0:48:17](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:47:57):**  i was like how can i not it was either me running back and forth back and forth i'm going to train  my my daughter to do it and she was just so happy to be part of it right i empowered her to have  like a real positive impact on what we were trying to do i mean she was on cloud nine for days after  
**[0:48:17-0:48:36](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:48:17):**  that you know it's just like there's so much more to that than just helping out on the ranch you  know it's like you're tough you can do whatever you want you can do whatever you put your mind to  here's the tools to do it yep for sure and you know as as a lot of our kids and families you  
**[0:48:36-0:48:54](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:48:36):**  know moved to town over the last few decades a lot of young people grew up without the chance to be  in an environment to do something like that you know to go to go help dad with a task you know  putting out hey yeah it's not that big of a deal but sometimes just have a one person with you  
**[0:48:54-0:49:19](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:48:54):**  to open a gate or to drive the truck saves so much time and just so much just so much messing around  well and that's the thing with with ranch kids is they they have the opportunity to do  real problem solving right that they can apply like the cows are out we got to figure out how  
**[0:49:19-0:49:38](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:49:19):**  to get them back in and what we materials we have to fix the fence to keep them in right  whereas like my daughter she was she was out with some friends they had a flat tire and her friends  were just having a meltdown right like and she's like whoa everybody needs to calm down right  
**[0:49:38-0:49:54](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:49:38):**  number one there's four of us we're college students you would figure we'd be smart enough  to take care of whatever it was so she asked the girl with the flat tire do you have roadside  assistance as part of your um insurance because really we don't even have to get our hands dirty  
**[0:49:54-0:50:09](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:49:54):**  if you do because your folks are already paying for insurance that has roadside assistance  well i don't know let me call your dad ask him he'd probably know she says i know that i do  because it's right here on my insurance card right but we're not in my car and so i mean it was just  
**[0:50:09-0:50:25](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:50:09):**  like she knew like when the shit hits the fan if you throw yourself down in the snow and do snow  angels it's not going to get any better because you're going to be wet and cold and you get back  up and like well shit that didn't fix anything right sure enough triple a came changed the tire  
**[0:50:25-0:50:42](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:50:25):**  they were back on the road no big deal they're like you were so calm under pressure lexie and  you did such a great job and she's like because if i tried to do that shit with my dad it had been  game over didn't matter whether i was his little baby girl or not that didn't fly you know what i  
**[0:50:42-0:50:58](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:50:42):**  mean and that's just the fact of the matter like there ain't time for hysterics on the ranch like  that that doesn't work getting upset throwing your hands in the air screaming why does this always  happen to me i don't know what to do that's not going to solve anybody's problem  
**[0:50:58-0:51:18](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:50:58):**  no it's not you know i i've got a couple stories about uh krista helping krista jump starting boys  vehicles um got a couple of good those good stories um there was one one time she left her  lights on in her little pickup that she learned to drive in little uh mid 80s s10 with a four  
**[0:51:18-0:51:36](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:51:18):**  cylinder and a five speed like probably a whopping 93 horsepower out of that you know that mighty  iron duke two liter four cylinder um but she left the lights on and the battery died and i'd already  showed her how to you know how to pop the clutch going down a hill and she got her started without  
**[0:51:36-0:51:52](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:51:36):**  having to you know have anybody jump start it it was awesome that's a proud dad moment right there  yeah every time i get a story about you know that you know that she's changed the tire for somebody  or giving somebody a jump start for their car it's kind of like a little bit of a  
**[0:51:52-0:52:10](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:51:52):**  jump start for their car it's kind of like yeah i taught her that i taught her that  makes me feel pretty good so um we talked a little you've mentioned your cows a little bit so how's  how's this year in beef marketing been going for you been uh been having pretty good success  
**[0:52:12-0:52:34](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:52:12):**  so supply is way less than demand uh i actually spent quite a bit of time on the phone yesterday  kind of explaining the seasonality of our beef business and how we're looking at going into like  a csa model where you make a quarterly payment with your fall delivery of your quarter or half  
**[0:52:34-0:52:56](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:52:34):**  or whole beef or whatever to help with cash flow um the the be that that is one thing the beef  niche has been good for us for is people just get on there and you can search by the time you  buy state region zip code whatever you know and they're like hey we're in colorado but we're here  
**[0:52:56-0:53:12](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:52:56):**  or we're there it's like well we deliver to the front range once a month um so it's been really  good for that and everyone that i've talked to that's newly signed up on the beef initiative  have said the same thing where you know it didn't cost them anything it just took them 10 or 15  
**[0:53:12-0:53:32](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:53:12):**  minutes to fill out their bio and so the beef market has been really good um  and that's so this summer was some of the best grass that we've ever had it was dry  but we had timely rains especially in our cattle that were in the mountains  
**[0:53:32-0:54:05](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:53:32):**  to where we weaned the biggest calves we have ever weaned and our we only had one open cow  out of 113 cows and so and that's pretty typical for us uh is one maybe two and oftentimes they're  14 13 you know 15 old old old cows or a cow who had had a problem she'd had a bad foot  
**[0:54:05-0:54:24](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:54:05):**  you know what i mean or whatever happened to be so more than likely  sloughed a small calf early embryonic loss and then um by then the bulls oftentimes are  think they're done so those start to go batch out and lay in the shade or maybe they she had a  
**[0:54:24-0:54:43](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:54:24):**  long-standing infection in that bad foot or that bad eye or whatever happened to be and never could  get back to where she was effectively cycling there's always been some sort of  outside influence on those cows that come in open i and we decided to try and keep all of our steer  
**[0:54:43-0:55:09](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:54:43):**  calves and feed them for beef because that beef program is so strong and so i took the three  smallest dinkiest looking steers to the sale barn because i had a bill i needed to pay and um  they were 703 713 and 726 which i was like well that's the smallest dinkiest kind of just real  
**[0:55:09-0:55:30](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:55:09):**  narrow fronted real narrow backed kind of gangly looking calves um i wonder what the heaviest ones  were so i sorted them off and ran them over the scales and we had a a handful over a thousand  pounds um granted their moms are big cows i mean the moms when we preg checked her the one mom was  
**[0:55:30-0:55:57](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:55:30):**  1512 pounds the other mom was 1496 and i don't remember the other thousand pound calves mom  but she was she was up there over 1300 pounds so she was a little bit more than a thousand  calves mom but she was she was up there over 1300 pounds um but i mean they look like finished calves  
**[0:55:57-0:56:22](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:55:57):**  practically i mean it just it just so i'll be able to butcher them much earlier than that 18 19 months  that we typically do on the other cattle but the other thing that we've started doing is stacking  our really strong mountain genetics back on those cows and um it's like it's like the magic sauce  
**[0:56:23-0:56:48](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:56:23):**  and um so that's one thing about concentrating on our cattle not on the bull of the month  not on the most promoted carcass bull because i've used some of those carcass bulls because we do  still do quite a bit of artificial insemination and uh those carcass bulls how do they do on grass  
**[0:56:48-0:57:09](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:56:48):**  they're high energy genetics well and and yeah and so it's like it's like half and half like i don't  know where they came up with the numbers half of them like i can't get them to finish like they get  so huge that i can't even get them to finish like they're going to be pretty lean at 24 months the  
**[0:57:09-0:57:28](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:57:09):**  other ones are like miniature they're like low lines almost like i'm like okay well you're going  to grow into it you know you're going to grow into it the next thing you know they're just  roly-poly fat but they're still only 650 pound hanging weights and if you look at you know those  
**[0:57:28-0:57:48](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:57:28):**  little rib eyes people are like well what is this you know like the marketability of those little  rib eyes that are just slightly bigger than a normal fillet  um doesn't have the marketability because for us oftentimes i can take a grocery store  
**[0:57:48-0:58:05](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:57:48):**  ribeye and put it right next to one of my grass fed and grass finished rib eyes  and most people can't tell the difference it's that perfect white fat marbling and you know  that intramuscular fat with that beautiful little fat cap on them um and that's why we're going  
**[0:58:06-0:58:28](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:58:06):**  so far that way as far as paying attention to our genetics raising all of our own bulls and doubling  down versus and we we still sell a few registered angus bulls and so i'm still playing in that game  as far as the numbers some but the guys that have been buying our bulls for eight years  
**[0:58:28-0:58:47](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:58:28):**  continue to buy our bulls and more of them are keeping their own calves that are selling into  their own small markets direct to consumer markets and they're seeing the benefit of that  because nobody really knows how big their cows are until they haul their cold cows to the sale barn  
**[0:58:47-0:59:06](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:58:47):**  and i'll be sitting next to them in the sale barn and i'm like so at our bull sale you're telling me  you're like 1300 pound cows and that really skinny cow 1685 pounds i mean so when she was in good  flesh she was two grand probably yeah i think there's a lot of guys that say that they've got  
**[0:59:06-0:59:24](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:59:06):**  oh my cows are 1200 pounds i when was the last time you had one of them suckers on a scale  that's that's my question like i don't weigh i don't weigh mine very often but you know the  ones that i have weighed you know i i got one that's uh i got a 10 year old cow that's about  
**[0:59:24-0:59:52](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:59:24):**  550 pounds that that's she's pretty good cow could could be a little bigger so i have a i have a third  calver which is one of my son's cows she was the last heifer born um 2018 last calf born 2018  so she was little right she was little she was late and i was like well we'll keep her  
**[0:59:52-1:00:23](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=0:59:52):**  we'll expose her for a short time we'll see if she gets bred she weighs 900 pounds bread right  so so when we preg check she weighs 900 pounds this year she weaned uh 790 790 pound steer calf  so literally when this calf was sucking on her when we were getting ready to wean his back was  
**[1:00:23-1:00:43](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:00:23):**  two inches taller than her and so that's that's the that kind of genetics that we're then stacking  these terminal cross bulls they're still calving ease because i'm not going to turn those little  cows inside out trying to calve them but they have this hockey stick exponential growth that  
**[1:00:44-1:01:06](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:00:44):**  gets us there and it's going to get us to butcher those good hanging weight calves at 17 18 19 20  months of age completely on grass and um i mean in perfect small bag probably a little smaller  feet than i like just she's small i mean she's everything about her is small um but she has  
**[1:01:06-1:01:30](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:01:06):**  enough milk to feed a huge calf and breed back um so we have quite a few of those that are now  bred heifers for this go around that are similar size you know a frame score of four four and a  quarter um but as wide as they are tall as they are deep and um bred back to a really nice carcass  
**[1:01:30-1:01:52](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:01:30):**  bull that was raised by a local friend of ours who's a breeder so i'm i'm excited to see those  calves they should start coming here first week of january so we'll see very cool how long is your  breeding breeding cycle this uh this year so it should have only been 45 days um but two weeks ago  
**[1:01:52-1:02:14](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:01:52):**  before we went to nashville or before i went to nashville i went up to check on the quality of the  grass move those cows do a new pasture and i look out and i see a calf and so i get back in my phone  and i scroll back and i was like uh mountain program our top bull got out and i was like  
**[1:02:15-1:02:44](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:02:15):**  oh so anyways i went out and checked he he he got out and was out for about three hours  and i have seven calves a month before we were supposed to start i don't think you need to get  him tested so well and he's he's he's a 2014 model so he's a old bull it's a bull that we've sold  
**[1:02:44-1:03:08](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:02:44):**  interest in to multiple ranches i've collected him sold semen all over the west and um  he gets the job done as a matter of fact he's had a friend of mine breeding all of his fall  calving cows right now and um the guy his numbers are fantastic his docility he they were complaining  
**[1:03:08-1:03:28](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:03:08):**  about having to move him and he wouldn't go to where they had to twist his tail and push him  along at over 2 000 pounds to get him to the next i said well honestly you could take a grain bucket  empty just a bucket he's like oh yeah i know what that is you know and he'll follow that bucket  
**[1:03:28-1:03:46](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:03:28):**  wherever you want to go and then he'll try and stick his giant head in there  and be totally disappointed but he'll go wherever you want him to go so  seven calves in three hours yeah i that's that's a good bull that's a good bull well and so i i  
**[1:03:46-1:04:04](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:03:46):**  mean i was wondering like so was he out longer than that but because because what we had done  is we were going to pen breed you know what i mean i have these cows i'm going to use this bull with  this these cows i'm going to use this bull with these cows i'm going to do this bull you know use  
**[1:04:04-1:04:26](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:04:04):**  this bull on to try and even out some of the stuff i'm trying to do and i had all the bulls pen  together and um i went to town everybody was in i came back and all the bulls are standing at the  fence bellowing at him and i see he's just mountain cows i was just like oh my gosh so of course as  
**[1:04:26-1:04:42](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:04:26):**  soon as i show up he's like a kid doing something he's not supposed to do you know he's like oh i'm  sorry dad and i raised my hand up and he puts his head down and walks to the gate so i can put him  back in and then i took all the bulls and moved them a whole pen over so there's two fences you  
**[1:04:42-1:04:59](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:04:42):**  know panel fences between them and i was out there trying to see because you know oftentimes when a  cow gets bred she's walking around like yeah you know she's been bred so i was writing their ear  tag numbers down like do i lutilize them and then kick them out i mean i'm ready i don't want to do  
**[1:04:59-1:05:21](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:04:59):**  that because are they going to be able to recover within this 30 days where i actually want to start  breeding you know all of this stuff and i was like i'll just leave them and we'll deal with them  later and then i forgot about it um so there was 16 cows in that pen and he bred seven yeah seven  
**[1:05:21-1:05:45](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:05:21):**  so unfortunately it wasn't the cows i wanted him to breed inevitably but uh nevertheless  never cuss and rain or a baby calf amen amen amen  so what do you where do you want to go next uh you want to talk about your bees or you want  
**[1:05:45-1:06:06](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:05:45):**  to talk about your pigs um i don't know we can talk about anything so i decided this year on the  bees that i was going to go all natural just like with our cattle okay everyone else around me uh  uses some sort of treatment for mites and what i've been doing is i just split the colonies that  
**[1:06:06-1:06:25](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:06:06):**  survive so i build out you know the the problem with bees is it's not like cattle because when  a virgin queen flies out she may get mated by up to 50 drones so you'll have semen from 50 drones  and you don't know whether they were commercial bees that are always treated whether they're  
**[1:06:25-1:06:45](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:06:25):**  wild bees all of those things so you can't have that replicatability necessarily i learned this  just the other day there was a brendan i told you joe rogan was going to come up but this isn't the  one i thought it was right um so erica thompson was on joe rogan just the other day and she's  
**[1:06:45-1:07:07](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:06:45):**  i guess a beekeeper down in austin and i think she went viral with viral with a couple videos  of like 40 50 million views of her like getting these bee colonies and i didn't know that that  that the queen that a young queen would leave a hive and go find uh what they call a drone swarm  
**[1:07:07-1:07:26](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:07:07):**  like they're these areas 100 150 feet up in the air where these drone bees know to congregate  at just the right time and they're just hanging out just waiting for a female to come cruising  somewhere in the general area and then they're all going to go try to mate with her i just thought  
**[1:07:26-1:07:43](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:07:26):**  that was that was wild and then and then she mates with them and then goes and makes a hive  and never has to mate again because she's carrying all the genetic material she needs to fertilize  every egg that she's carrying already like yeah that's wild well and that's the thing and then  
**[1:07:43-1:08:08](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:07:43):**  the drones die yeah immediately after after they deposit their semen they and fall to the ground  dead so it's you know chip chip cheerio one shot one kill but um i'm glad i'm not a bee yeah so um  so that's what we're doing with with bees with so much traveling in the beef initiative and  
**[1:08:08-1:08:33](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:08:08):**  speaking events that i've been going to all over the bees have not been getting the tension that  they probably need but that's also what i find with my cattle i raise a lot better cattle and i  and i um make my decisions based on the reality of good cattle and genetics and and all of that  
**[1:08:33-1:08:54](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:08:33):**  when i'm not babysitting them because you can feed fertility in and you can babysit calving problems  but the reality is is the cows that can't have a live calf on their own  they get a one-way trip to freezer camp if i lose a calf for whatever reason whether it's my fault  
**[1:08:54-1:09:15](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:08:54):**  or their fault their moms go away because it might have been their mom's fault and i don't need to  and i don't need to potentially replicate it in keeping a heifer out of a cow that has  has a calf that has a problem and what i'm finding is we have we have practically no  
**[1:09:15-1:09:38](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:09:15):**  problems practically no sickness just by doing it the way nature intended like not calving in the  same pastures and building soil first and then just letting the grass express whatever its  potential is and then moving the cows accordingly um our mountain property that we lease typically  
**[1:09:38-1:09:59](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:09:38):**  had been grazed june 1 all the way through till the cows so the grass got too short or the snow  got too deep and what we did this year is because i picked up another pasture we stayed until the  middle of august and i let all of that native grass and all of that improved grass that got hauled up  
**[1:09:59-1:10:22](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:09:59):**  in the rumen of a cow go completely to seed and and then turn the cows in on it so you had this  standing forage that once they mowed we got a timely rain and we got regrowth because it cooled  off it was just like and the and the land responded very well and then the performance of the cattle  
**[1:10:22-1:10:47](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:10:22):**  completely paralleled that also and so that's it's it's it's amazing that when you get out of the way  when you need to get out of the way how mother nature does what she was meant to do  um and then of course you inject yourself just in time to move them off of a place or build fence to  
**[1:10:47-1:11:07](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:10:47):**  keep them out of a riparian area or whatever it happens to be whatever little thing that you need  to do to be the predator to protect this you know delicate ecosystem and or to just move them on  and then let the recovery happen on its own and how much more feed that you can grow and how the  
**[1:11:07-1:11:27](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:11:07):**  plant diversity comes in and then the wildlife i mean a lot of these properties that i'm on  they were purchased by wealthy folks as private hunting properties but they want to have cattle  on them so they can stay in ag for tax purposes and um working with them is is pretty fun  
**[1:11:27-1:11:43](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:11:27):**  pretty interesting because the way they think about things is completely different for me  because i'm like trying to figure out how to survive and oftentimes their approach to life  is like well we've made our millions now we're trying to figure out how to protect it how to protect these assets  
**[1:11:43-1:12:02](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:11:43):**  um and make connections with people who we want in our tribe you know mean to be part of  their tribe as the tribe is the cowboy and the land steward and all of those things and  being introduced to their friends and family and and co-workers and all of that stuff is just  
**[1:12:02-1:12:25](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:12:02):**  it's been fantastic for me to be able to tell my story to those people and then listen to them  explain their stories of how they got where they are and why they do what they do and why they  prioritize what they prioritize for sure so i i want to circle back to this whole crypto thing  
**[1:12:25-1:12:52](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:12:25):**  and you know ever ever since i've been watching this ftx and crypto meltdown over the last couple  of months i can't help but grab my tinfoil hat and think up all kinds of stupid things so  like i guess the conspiracy theory that i want to spin right now is um is this whole  
**[1:12:52-1:13:19](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:12:52):**  ftx binance crypto meltdown is this kind of in either being engineered or being allowed to happen  so that they've got they being governments have some sort of backing to start trying to regulate  and issue a central central back digital currency absolutely in in my opinion so elizabeth warren  
**[1:13:19-1:13:45](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:13:19):**  just um wrote a piece of legislation and it essentially guts all of alternative currencies  cryptocurrencies bitcoin all of that stuff essentially making mining holding investing  in speculating in everything illegal and um she wants to make felines illegal too and that's not  
**[1:13:45-1:14:08](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:13:45):**  working either well and that's what we're finding is all of the um incentives are broken in so many  of these systems and it's completely dictated by who pays the biggest um lobbyists the biggest  lobbying dollars and so because bitcoin for instance is like is totally a grassroots effort  
**[1:14:08-1:14:28](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:14:08):**  right you if you look at the systems built on the back of it you have a whole bunch of  like-minded sovereign individuals not necessarily huge high net worth individuals and what happened  with fdx from my point of view is you had a whole bunch of speculation so you had  
**[1:14:29-1:14:48](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:14:29):**  you had a group of young people that were super smart and they figured out a system to be able to  make a big yield generator which is what they were doing and so then they started down the  path of like invest in us or or store your bitcoin with us and then we will turn around and make  
**[1:14:49-1:15:09](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:14:49):**  huge loans and generate revenue essentially hedge funds for this and that and that and this with  absolutely no oversight any any of their friends could call them and say hey we need a loan for  this new thing that we're developing can you give us a loan so what do they do they make this  
**[1:15:09-1:15:31](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:15:09):**  token and then they immediately turn around so the token has no value right it's literally like  fairy tale and then you take that token and you get an evaluation on the business model of that  token and let's say it's 10 million dollars so then you turn around and use that 10 million  
**[1:15:31-1:15:52](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:15:31):**  dollars as your 20 percent down payment so it's not even real 10 million dollars so you're not  not even real 10 million dollars you use that as a as your 20 down payment on a loan to then turn  around and take out a 60 million dollar loan which then you take and buy a house in the Bahamas  
**[1:15:52-1:16:14](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:15:52):**  buy a plane buy a fancy car take that cash use that as a down payment on another huge bit of  leverage or you support another project that's happening and when project a goes under and calls  on their cash and you try and call on another transaction and they don't have it and then you  
**[1:16:14-1:16:34](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:16:14):**  try and call is the whole thing just is a house of cards that folds in on itself and that's the  problem is it looks to me like there was no oversight by anyone at all whatsoever so you have  huge amounts of monies billions of dollars with no government oversight at all right because  
**[1:16:34-1:16:52](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:16:34):**  it was like oh it there this just kids having fun it'll be fine you know this is my son and  and I'm the chairman of this organization of the government and and you know our friends help fund  this campaign and it'll be okay um and now you look at it you know a 30,000 foot view and you're  
**[1:16:52-1:17:10](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:16:52):**  like those people should go to jail those people should go to jail those people should go to jail  those people should go to jail those people should go to jail those people should go to jail and a  whole bunch of those are big names in certain political parties um and also with very specific  
**[1:17:10-1:17:30](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:17:10):**  goals having proclaimed this is what we think should happen this is what we think should happen  this is our priorities and you're like well that aligns exactly with letting this whole thing blow  up so then you can jump in and regulate the guts out of it yeah well it is it is it  
**[1:17:30-1:17:51](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:17:30):**  is it is it conspiracy theory is there something driving it or are they just maybe had an idea  where things might go and position themselves to take advantage of an opportunity i i don't know um  i am like the possibility of centralized digital money of programmed money that they can just turn  
**[1:17:51-1:18:06](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:17:51):**  off whenever they feel like it or you know like if you've reached your carbon allowance for the  month you're not allowed to go buy that cheeseburger like that's the danger of  centralized digital currency um and i get that this is something that hasn't come to pass yet  
**[1:18:07-1:18:22](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:18:07):**  but how would bitcoin protect you in something like that because because you can have your own  cold storage on your telephone or other device and you can walk up to somebody and execute a  transaction right there and it doesn't have to go through the central control bank because it's  
**[1:18:22-1:18:44](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:18:22):**  verified on the entire distributed computing power of the blockchain that's exactly right and it is  completely peer-to-peer and it's anonymous so that that's the other thing too is so it's just  a series of letters and numbers of the transaction and so you don't know who that is the thing that  
**[1:18:44-1:19:06](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:18:44):**  that we as bitcoiners are working on is what's called a like a mixer because if you look at it  from the triangulation standpoint of how you trace cell phone signals or how you trace emails is  you're like we know it left this point and it went to this point and then we were able to pick it up  
**[1:19:06-1:19:30](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:19:06):**  on this point well eventually and they're working very hard right now all of the governments are  working on this with their top programmers is how to trend how to triangulate these digital  transactions to a physical point so that way you know okay well that guy holds 10 million bitcoin  
**[1:19:30-1:19:48](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:19:30):**  himself and so we can trace all of these transactions that are happening to him so right  now there's there's a couple of programs that it's like a mixer like you could put your transaction  in and it will generate an anonymous code from another pool to then put that in your cold storage  
**[1:19:49-1:20:08](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:19:49):**  to try and circumvent that because inevitably it's all about regulation it's all about control  so right now let's say like i'm taking bitcoin for coffee everybody knows like okay well there's  four thousand five dollar transactions at this one particular retailer so we know he's got x  
**[1:20:08-1:20:25](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:20:08):**  amount of dollars of bitcoin because that's what was transacted in there over the last 24 hours  whereas then he could take that all of those small transactions and mix them put them into  one big transaction and move them somewhere else to then break that chain of custody  
**[1:20:26-1:20:47](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:20:26):**  to limit the traceability okay okay i get what you're saying and where i'm maybe kind of confused  on the whole hardware wallet self-custody because you know i have one i've got kind of like 12 sats  or something um but you know i do have my passphrase my key you know my 12 12 word key  
**[1:20:49-1:21:05](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:20:49):**  and  what the crap am i saying i'm not even sure what i was trying to ask um but you know i  but you know i i only have 12 sats that you need to send me a bitcoin address so i can send you  
**[1:21:05-1:21:26](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:21:05):**  more i have a few more than that um okay so i i have my hardware i have my hardware wallet where  my bitcoin are stored that's accessible through my 12-word key phrase okay and the ledger's public  and transactions are traceable but what there isn't is a central ledger that ties wallet  
**[1:21:26-1:21:46](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:21:26):**  addresses to a to a person correct that's correct so whereas on an exchange when you have to do kyc  your wallet address and your physical address are tied together and oftentimes so is your bank  information because that's how you're making transactions in and out is through your bank  
**[1:21:46-1:22:07](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:21:46):**  and so whenever any of those exchanges has a data leak and you you shoot out this  email or this spreadsheet or google document that has a hundred thousand names physical addresses  and how much bitcoin was stored on their exchange on there i mean you could see your high level  
**[1:22:07-1:22:29](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:22:07):**  individuals should be nervous well let's go take that guy break his legs get his seed phrase and  steal all of his bitcoin um that's why it's not your keys it's not your coin and that's why having  that those you know 12 or 24 words your seed phrase or your seed code written down like  
**[1:22:31-1:22:48](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:22:31):**  probably not a good idea to have that written on a legal pad and stored with a rubber band around  the hard drive that your bitcoins are stored on i'm guessing that's that's a bad idea yeah so  yeah so there's a company that makes a because that's like a sign check right that's exactly  
**[1:22:48-1:23:04](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:22:48):**  right there's a company that makes a little metal block and you can put them in it you know stamp  it with the metal block there's another one that you can put a washer in and use your die stamp  and do like the first letter or the second letter first and second letter of you know because  
**[1:23:05-1:23:24](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:23:05):**  honestly it will help you generate when you're going to type in you know because it's a lot of  short words they want to make it easier for you to remember um and then you can get into multi-signature  so you have three devices that two of which have to be together to make a transaction and they're  
**[1:23:24-1:23:45](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:23:24):**  stored geographically in different places like for instance i have some close friends and family  who who were storing different multi-sig devices in different other people's proximity so like  if the shit ever hits the fan they have something stored here you know that's safe you know if their  
**[1:23:45-1:24:06](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:23:45):**  house burns down or whatever happens where they are and so that's like the next level is is the  multi-signature um which there's some some great um companies that do that specifically they do  like the white glove concierge service as is part of their business okay  
**[1:24:06-1:24:34](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:24:06):**  okay okay and so so for me i see bitcoin not only as a store of value but also as a media of exchange  and it is it is seamless in transactions i mean i like to do most of my transactions on chain  and so that means it actually goes out onto the network gets verified and then it goes out  
**[1:24:34-1:24:55](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:24:34):**  and it takes a little bit of time depending on how much traffic there is that's happening on chain  but then you can also transact on the lightning network which is a network that's built on the  back of bitcoin and it's that's how most um retailers because it's instantaneous transactions  
**[1:24:55-1:25:14](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:24:55):**  just like if you swiped your card or tapped your card with a tap signer it's instantaneous  remittance and so but it is kyc  which is know your well your customer know your customer and that's the that's the actual verified  
**[1:25:14-1:25:40](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:25:14):**  verification that ties but can tie a personal identity to a bitcoin wallet you got it absolutely  yep and so then at the end of the day those um vendors because vendors are not going to be able  to do that um vendors can then take that kyc and then sweep it you know into their own um  
**[1:25:41-1:26:02](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:25:41):**  oftentimes you put it on an exchange and then buy the actual bitcoin off the exchange  or however it works we use um ibex pay which is a web-based um company they're they're fantastic  they walked me through it they've walked many ranchers through how to set it up and the great  
**[1:26:02-1:26:22](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:26:02):**  thing about it is if you go to a farmer's market you can set up the code to where whoever your  employee is can't access the funds all they can do is access the um transactions and so you can set  it up to where they put their code in you know their name is connected to their code they can  
**[1:26:22-1:26:39](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:26:22):**  scan all the transactions but they can't can't actually see how much money you've made and they  can't access it until you tell me as the owner can log in and see how many transactions were through  the further day um and then i can either choose to sweep it into fiat to pay bills or i can sweep  
**[1:26:39-1:26:58](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:26:39):**  it into cold storage for long-term storage and i i can be on any device whether it's an ipad whether  it's a cell phone whatever you can put it on any device i can see how how maybe it could solve some  problems for for some folks you know i would have a lot of reservations sending somebody  
**[1:26:58-1:27:16](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:26:58):**  that i didn't trust completely with a couple thousand dollars worth of cow to a farmer's  market to accept payments either on you know a square device or paypal or whatever um but the  way you just described with the customers coming up paying at bitcoin i can see you know the money  
**[1:27:16-1:27:35](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:27:16):**  goes right to my bitcoin wallet the person i hired they just need to have access to see the  transactions there once the transaction is there okay paid boss here's your cow goodbye and you  don't have to worry is that person gonna skim a 10 or a 20 here off the cash or did every transaction  
**[1:27:35-1:27:53](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:27:35):**  they put in my little square reader or did maybe one of them they put in their square reader you  know absolutely well so that's the other thing too is now we're there's a couple of companies that  are building inventory on the back of that as well so you can literally have inventory built  
**[1:27:53-1:28:14](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:27:53):**  on the back of that so you have a qr code on a package you scan it you pay and you automatically  get an alert like there's only one package of ribeyes left or there's you know there's only  five pounds of of ribs left or whatever it happens to be um so you know when it comes back and you  
**[1:28:14-1:28:38](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:28:14):**  look at your inventory list and you're like well we're short two packages of new yorks like where  did they go um and so that's another thing because it's all digital you're the possibilities are  endless for innovation for sure for sure so um we kind of need to wrap up here um what are some  
**[1:28:38-1:29:00](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:28:38):**  what are some resources that you'd like to leave people with some maybe a couple a couple good  links um that we can send people to to learn more about bit bitcoin and and self-custody we're gonna  have i'll make sure we get beef initiative in there um is there i don't know maybe is there  
**[1:29:00-1:29:25](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:29:00):**  somewhere you want to send people to uh research miners or self-mining maybe so um matt o'dell  uh he's on twitter but his podcast is called citadel dispatch is amazing he is a fantastic  educator he actually came here to our ranch onboarded 52 people with their very own wallets  
**[1:29:25-1:29:47](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:29:25):**  on their phones and then we transacted over a thousand dollars worth of transactions  in 14 minutes so matt o'dell citadel dispatch he's fantastic he and marty bent do one a podcast  together called rabbit hole recap so essentially it's like they they um dissect the week's news  
**[1:29:47-1:30:14](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:29:47):**  in bitcoin they're great um i've been on both of those podcasts um for home mining a fantastic one  is the econo alchemist he was a speaker at our conference here at the ranch he is actually a  colorado-based guy he was a former railway worker and um when the plandemic and all of that happened  
**[1:30:14-1:30:37](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:30:14):**  he uh um decided that he wasn't going to comply started doing his own thing so he's actually doing  home mining he's a huge security nut um you can find him on bitcoin tv that's where most of his  um stuff is and then of course as you said uh beef initiative.com we have a couple of websites  
**[1:30:37-1:30:53](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:30:37):**  which i do a terrible job keeping up but hopefully that's going to change i have a couple of  business partners that are going to come and help us with our digital presence as well as our  business um building out branding and that thing so that's rickranches.com and then we have a rick  
**[1:30:53-1:31:18](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:30:53):**  ranches google website um so those are fantastic i would also like everyone i mean our calf is  is fantastic that's an actual real voice of the the ranchers hey i'm an arkpea member  yeah and i'm a member uh us cattlemen's is another great one um  
**[1:31:21-1:31:40](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:31:21):**  i'm also a member of them and and we were able to speak to so many of their people  essentially you know everybody needs to get out and shake your rancher's hand  you know hashtag know your rancher and and vote with your dollars buy stuff from the people that  
**[1:31:40-1:31:58](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:31:40):**  are doing things the way that you want it done who align with you and your ideals your goals  and your morals um there's so much stuff online that you don't need to buy it's a bunch of crap  you don't need and in the grocery store all of those middle aisles it's the same thing it's a  
**[1:31:58-1:32:25](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:31:58):**  bunch of crap that you don't need if you source good animal protein beef pork chicken eggs raw  dairy i mean having raw cream and your coffee in the morning with your own home raised honey there  isn't much better way to start the day um i would agree 100 percent i don't have bees i want i want  
**[1:32:25-1:32:46](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:32:25):**  i want i am i empower everyone to take some self-accountability for your life for your health  for your family's health and for your local communities get out and get involved i mean  some of those board of director seats are being filled by people who are trying to kill rural  
**[1:32:46-1:33:05](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:32:46):**  america and if those of us that you know really uh prioritize our rural living and us being able  to do what we want to do where we want to do you want to be able to go and step off the back porch  and take a pee you got to uh got to make sure that your neighbors can encroach on that and so  
**[1:33:06-1:33:24](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:33:06):**  you know get out and get involved so that's that's really my mantra i preach that everywhere i go  great stuff and i don't find a whole lot to disagree with just a little semantic of  shake the hand that feeds you um so brendan you got anything you want to close out with man  
**[1:33:25-1:33:49](https://anchor.fm/ranching-reboot/episodes/Bonus-10--Jason-Wrich-Take-Some-Self-Accountability-e1sb01s#t=1:33:25):**  love it learned a lot well it was fun having you here and um i guess we'll let everybody go  cool thanks so much brian good to meet you jason take care it's  great to talk to you again jason and uh we'll see you next time awesome  