### Farm Gate  (2022-30-21)
**[0:00:00-0:00:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to Farmgate. I'm Finnlow Costayne, the Chief Executive of Farmwell and founder  of the Food and Global Security Network. Many governments see farm expansion and aggregation  as the future for agriculture, but there's a grave risk that this will simply embed the  structural inequity and external social and ecological costs inherent in today's food  system. Instead, we need diversity in terms of production, cropping, distribution and  
**[0:00:30-0:00:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:00:30):**  diet and of course diversity in terms of farm scale, output and business structure.  Small farms play a critical role and who better to tell us why than Chris Smage, the author  of A Small Farm Future, published by Chelsea Green. Chris is a social scientist and a small  farmer himself who studied global economic systems and specialised in peasant studies.  Chris, welcome. Let's go straight in for the big one. What's your vision of a small farm  
**[0:00:56-0:00:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:00:56):**  future?  Hi Finnlow. Well, yeah, thanks very much for having me. When we talk about a vision, I  guess one aspect of my book is that this is not necessarily what I want to see, but what  I think is going to happen. I mean, as you were saying, there's all sorts of good reasons  to have diversity and smaller farms and so on within the existing landscape. You know,  
**[0:01:16-0:01:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:01:16):**  I think there are some sort of big crises that are kind of pushing us in a very different  direction. And I think to get to your question, you know, what do I think the future will  look like? I think, you know, we've got huge problems with climate and water availability.  It's going to be a future with less easy energy availability. I think that's going to push  people, you know, we're going to see more people living in the countryside relative  
**[0:01:42-0:01:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:01:42):**  to the cities. So I think more people sort of trying to create a basic livelihood locally,  more gardening relative to arable or livestock farming, more job rich sort of focus on creating  basic food and fibre commodities locally, more small holding. So yeah, a more, a kind  of more peopled rural landscape with more of a focus on producing a diversity of food  and fibre crops locally for people's immediate needs. And you know, in many ways, I think  
**[0:02:15-0:02:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:02:15):**  that is quite an enticing vision, but I'm under no illusion that it's also a challenging  one that's, you know, a lot of the things that we take for granted and particularly  the kind of easy availability of energy that's going to be less available and that's going  to have huge implications.  So for you, small farms and home farms, home allotments, if you like, and short supply  
**[0:02:36-0:02:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:02:36):**  chains are essential to reset a societal balance and to fill economic and perhaps ecological  gaps that can't be addressed by large retailers and corporations. Why do you think that this  sort of farming is so undervalued by governments?  Well, I mean, it's partly that obviously we've sort of been through this, you know, whole  historic period of great sort of centralisation of government power and productivism as a  
**[0:03:01-0:03:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:03:01):**  result basically of the availability of cheap energy and cheap capital. So, you know, governments  tend to sort of think big, you know, they don't want to be dealing with some kind of  smallholder in Somerset like me, you know, they want to be dealing with Sainsbury's or  the COP26 meeting, you know, you get Bill Gates and Jeff Bezos there, you don't get  the likes of me. So there's that kind of massification sort of centralised element to it. I mean,  
**[0:03:27-0:03:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:03:27):**  you know, with a more political hat on, I'd say also governments actively don't want people  like me. There's a whole set of structures that are designed to stop people like me getting  hold of a small bit of land and being self reliant, you know, because that doesn't suit  governments for all sorts of reasons. But you know, also there is...  Why is that though? Why is that? Why are these structures in place? And you mentioned COP26.  
**[0:03:47-0:03:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:03:47):**  And while you're right, the likes of Sainsbury's will have, you know, very significant lobbying  power there, not least because they're well known brands and they have the money to make  sure that their lobbyists are ever present. But at the same time, there are people like  you at COP. There are indigenous populations that get represented at COP increasingly,  but at the same time, we're still not hearing these voices or we're still not valuing these  
**[0:04:12-0:04:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:04:12):**  voices.  Yeah, I mean, well, that's right. And I think it's partly that it just, I think there is  a recognition that wider voices have to be heard and have to be somehow figured in, but  it's the somehow figuring in that is the problem. And it's partly that, you know, we've got  this model of economic growth, of financialisation, that, you know, a government that kind of  
**[0:04:32-0:04:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:04:32):**  says, no, actually, we're going to be self-reliant in our agriculture, we're going to relocalise,  we're going to, you know, just have people producing local food and fibre. You know,  that is a very hard thing to do in the context of global governance and sort of global economic  imperatives. So, you know, to be fair to them, it's not really going to happen except through  systemic breakdown, which we are beginning to see, unfortunately. It's easy to pay lip  
**[0:04:57-0:05:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:04:57):**  service to the idea of consulting wider voices and indigenous people and so on, but it's  very hard to internalise that into existing models, which are essentially about return  on investment and increasing financialisation.  Is it that they don't value you? I mean, I know the premise of my question was that they  don't, but is it that they don't value you or that they just think that that sort of  
**[0:05:19-0:05:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:05:19):**  small economy will exist anyway? And is it that instead of just accepting that it will  exist, there needs to be a strategy to actually create growth within that particular sector?  Yeah, I mean, I suppose my point of departure in my writing is that, you know, it would  be great if there was a strategy to do that, but I'm not holding my breath, you know, I  don't think that's what's driving government. So, you know, a lot of our stuff is very much  
**[0:05:45-0:05:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:05:45):**  just get on with it, grassroots, under the radar. The reality is that there's not very  many people kind of building this kind of local alternative agrarian economy. And so  it sort of becomes easy to sort of say, yeah, well, you know, it's lovely you being on your  small holding, you know, raising a few sheep and having a veg garden, but you know, that  doesn't really address the, you know, the real problems of the world. And my argument  
**[0:06:08-0:06:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:06:08):**  is that, well, you know, it doesn't because the world has gone in a particular direction  that has marginalised that, but that direction ultimately is unsustainable. So, whether we  like it or not, we are going to swing back to more of this kind of local distributed  kind of economy. And the question is whether we do that in a sort of orderly and thoughtful  way or whether it happens by default in ways that may be less appealing.  
**[0:06:34-0:06:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:06:34):**  If we look back to the Second World War and the decades beyond the Second World War, most  of the families in Britain who had any land at all would be producing at least some of  their food. Now, I wonder why that's changed. Is it that food has just become so cheap and  easy to access that we don't need to grow our own? Is it that priorities have changed  and people are more interested in leisure and having gardens and lawns or that people  
**[0:06:58-0:07:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:06:58):**  are going out to work and just don't simply have the time to produce their own food?  Well, I think there's a lot of different factors, many of which you touched on. I mean, you  know, part of what we had in the post-war period was this huge kind of global economic  growth and at the same time a huge amount of mechanisation and, you know, a lot of the  kind of modern package of farming in terms of machinery and pesticides, herbicides and  
**[0:07:23-0:07:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:07:23):**  so on. So, I think it was sort of understandable in that post-war moment to move in that different  direction, urbanisation, bigger farms, concentration, mechanisation. I think we're kind of reaping  the sort of negatives of that in some ways now and, you know, food prices are beginning  to rise for all sorts of reasons. You know, we've sort of put too many of our eggs in  one basket to use a good old-fashioned agricultural metaphor, you know, the sort of red basket  
**[0:07:50-0:07:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:07:50):**  regions like Ukraine, Russia and, you know, North America. We rely too much on, you know,  this handful of global commodity crops produced in a relatively small parts of the world.  And, you know, that all worked okay for a brief period and we had this huge sort of  global industrial growth. I think that's all beginning to unravel now. And, you know, the  sort of thing about work and leisure is interesting. There are many more leisure opportunities  
**[0:08:16-0:08:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:08:16):**  nowadays but there is also this, you know, very rigorous emphasis on work. You know,  we've got to be working all the time, we've got to be earning, you know, and it's very  different from the sort of rhythms of a, you know, of a garden or a small farm or a small  holding. There's a strange coalition emerging of politicians  and environmentalists both pushing for corporate ownership of food. The UK government seems  
**[0:08:37-0:08:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:08:37):**  entirely content with big farms gobbling up ever larger parcels of land. And then people  like George Monbiot appear to fantasise about the end of agriculture itself with real food  produced by synthetic lab-grown nutritional nuggets that are almost certainly produced  by the same corporations that have been intensifying meat production all these years. So this is  clearly the antithesis of the small farm. But I wonder in your vision of the future,  
**[0:09:04-0:09:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:09:04):**  in your idea of what's going to take place, what's going to be necessary, do larger farm  businesses and food corporations exist at all?  I mean, it depends, I guess, on how, you know, how far we project this vision into the future.  I mean, my, there is a case for larger farms and businesses, certainly at the present,  but I think the politics that are driving my analysis are a kind of grassroots bottom  
**[0:09:30-0:09:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:09:30):**  up local politics. Certainly we have to collaborate with each other locally and beyond locally  and kind of build up collective institutions, you know, co-operative skills and so on. You  know, there's all sorts of ways that we can frame that.  So those are larger businesses. It's just that they're not necessarily the big corporations  that we have now.  
**[0:09:50-0:09:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:09:50):**  Yeah, yeah. And I think we need to take a much more long term vision. I mean, I, you  know, I don't think the notion of the corporation, the sort of big transnational business that  is basically very much bound up with government as well, you know, there's this sort of, you  know, we still have this slightly romantic notion of the private sector as, you know,  some kind of wily entrepreneur who comes up with this great idea and it catches on and  
**[0:10:17-0:10:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:10:17):**  they make money. But, you know, basically corporations have always been in with government,  you know, it's been sort of two sides of the same coin. And, you know, I think I don't  really see that as being the way forward long term. I mean, it's funny you mentioned George's  book, you know, another book I read recently was called Sand Talk by an Australian Aboriginal  thinker Tyson Yunkaporta. And I mean, it's amazing. And his book is kind of how indigenous  
**[0:10:43-0:10:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:10:43):**  wisdom can inform, you know, our thinking today. And it's amazing reading his book where,  you know, you think of this Aboriginal culture that survived for 10s of 1000s of years in  Australia. And we don't, you know, it's just having that mindset of, you know, is this  idea that I have now, is this going to be a good idea when we look at it 30,000 years  down the line? And I kind of think we need a little bit more of that kind of time framing  
**[0:11:08-0:11:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:11:08):**  rather than, you know, is this going to make some money or is this going to immediately  solve some problem that we have, you know, right now this year? And I think if we take  that more, that kind of longer term perspective, I mean, who knows, obviously, what you know,  what kind of institutions will be over that timeframe, but I don't think the existing  large scale corporate business that's wrapped up, you know, as you were saying earlier,  
**[0:11:30-0:11:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:11:30):**  with COP26 and all that, I don't really see that as providing the answers. I think the  answers are going to come from people locally sort of building bottom up, you know, working  with other people and kind of innovating at that level.  Jason Vale,  It seems to me that it's almost this kind of illusion of the Adam Smith ideal, which  
**[0:11:56-0:12:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:11:56):**  is almost fetishised, which often is misrepresented and misunderstood. And the idea that if the  customer can see a range of different products all competing with each other in the marketplace,  then they can make an informed choice, the invisible hand of the market will guide. But  actually, that doesn't exist. If it ever existed, it doesn't now because the marketplace is  so ordered by these corporations, so ordered by government.  
**[0:12:23-0:12:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:12:23):**  Yeah, absolutely. And I mean, I, you know, I talk a little bit about Adam Smith in my  book and some of the other sort of pioneering economists who, you know, in some ways, I  think Smith, he saw the world that was coming and he, you know, in many ways, he didn't  particularly like it and was, you know, he offered some pretty trenching criticisms of  the direction that it was going in. But he also kind of theorised it in ways that kind  
**[0:12:48-0:12:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:12:48):**  of no longer really seem appropriate. But you know, one thing he did do, you know, he  was quite grounded in the idea of kind of well established local economic development  rather than global trade and financialisation, which of course, in his day was minuscule  compared to what we have now. So Adam Smith was talking about what he called unnatural  development, which was kind of an over reliance on financialisation, speculation, commerce,  
**[0:13:18-0:13:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:13:18):**  rather than building a stable agrarian and to some extent, industrial base, you know,  so I think we need to, you know, we need to be thinking about building that base in a  different kind of way to how we've been accustomed to in recent years.  I want to come back to George Monbiot because he has such a large and influential platform.  And Monbiot is a person who appears to set academic science on a pedestal, while at the  
**[0:13:43-0:13:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:13:43):**  same time hugely undervaluing the lived experience of farmers. Now, your background is part academic,  part pastoral. And in your book, you say, I don't think a commitment to science as transcendent  truth will end well. What do you mean?  Well, yeah, George is a good example. I've just, I've just finished reading his book,  actually. And it's a case in point where he talks about the degree of urbanisation as  
**[0:14:06-0:14:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:14:06):**  a matter of mathematics, he kind of says, you know, you can't argue with arithmetic.  We all live in cities a long way away from where food is produced. So you know, we all  this kind of local agriculture stuff is a lovely idea. But you know, it's not going  to work in the face of the arithmetic. My argument is, well, it's not about arithmetic,  it's about politics, economics, social history. And you can, you know, you can absolutely  
**[0:14:32-0:14:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:14:32):**  argue with the way that's turned out. And that's kind of what I mean about science as  a transcendent truth. I mean, I'm not arguing with the scientific method, you know, you  can, you can do a bunch of experiments and prove that the that the earth is round, you  know, I'm not questioning that. But I think we've got into this whole way of thinking  about science, which is not actually a scientific way of thinking. It's a science as this kind  
**[0:14:56-0:15:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:14:56):**  of cultural artifact. It's all bound up religious artifact. It is it is, I mean, it is a kind  of form of, you know, people talk about scientism rather than science as a kind of modern religion.  And it's bound up with cultural notions of progress of new technologies being kind of  good in and of themselves. And what I'm arguing is that that, you know, if we I mean, again,  you know, George's precision fermentation thing is a case in point, if we say, well,  
**[0:15:22-0:15:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:15:22):**  you know, these clever scientists, they've got this, they've got the food system all  worked out, they can produce this food, it's not going to have any ecological impact, we  can just eat it. It's this is scientific, this is modern. I think that's going to lead  to all sorts of problems that is not really going to deliver the kind of society you want.  It's going to, it's going to deliver people who are very much alienated from being a living  
**[0:15:45-0:15:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:15:45):**  breathing organisms in the world. And it's, you know, and as you say, it's going to deliver  more power to corporate and government sort of top down ways of thinking. So it's in that  sense that...  Jason Vale... And of course, if you're talking about ecological  impacts, or if George is, then, a, we don't know what the ecological impacts of scaling  
**[0:16:03-0:16:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:16:03):**  that type of vat-produced food really is. But at the same time, there's a huge knock  on environmental impact of undermining the way that the countryside is organised and  taking a living out of the countryside so that suddenly there's, there's nobody left  to manage it. And seeing as so much of the degradation has been actively managed over  the course of the last hundred or 200 years, we need to actively manage the restoration  
**[0:16:29-0:16:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:16:29):**  and regeneration of the countryside.  I mean, I certainly think we need to put ourselves back into the landscape and be that's one  of the arguments for localism, I think is that, you know, if you go to the shop and  you go to the agrarian economy, you know, you're much more immediately faced with the  circumstances and the consequences of your production. And you can see, you know, if  
**[0:17:06-0:17:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:17:06):**  you sort of financialise the agrarian system globally, and you know, there's loads of interesting  studies of this, you know, shrimp farming in Bangladesh, for example, you know, if you  kind of financialise it as a way of developing or as a way of adapting to, you know, particularly  changing ecological circumstances, you know, if you're doing that in a global context,  the local consequences of that can be really disastrous. And then if you add, add all those  
**[0:17:34-0:17:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:17:34):**  local consequences up globally, that's where we, you know, you get into the mess that we're  in. So actually, re-emplacing ourselves in the landscape, you know, that's a really critical,  you know, argument or basis of this argument for localism is that, you know, if you were  a farmer, if you are producing your livelihood, you know, you have to do that in a thoughtful  long term way. And it kind of overcomes. I mean, you know, I'm not saying that it's perfect,  
**[0:17:58-0:18:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:17:58):**  and everyone then becomes, you know, kind of wonderful ecological steward, but that's  kind of the direction we've got to go in rather than just offloading the responsibility onto  somebody else, onto scientists or governments, you know, to sort of do that thinking for  us.  So in terms of the balance between science and lived experience, it's not necessarily  
**[0:18:17-0:18:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:18:17):**  that science should be seen as less important, but that the lived experience of individual  farmers should become better valued?  Yeah, I mean, I think that, you know, it's a tremendously difficult thing to be a farmer,  well, all throughout history, but certainly, nowadays, you know, you've got, you know,  you're expected to have a business that stacks up at some level financially, you're expected  
**[0:18:41-0:18:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:18:41):**  to produce cheap food that the consumer wants, and you're expected to look after the environment  and you know, you can't really do all of those things within the way it's framed. So yeah,  you know, I think we do need to value farmers' inputs and farmers' experience. And I think,  you know, the way historically there's, I think we've thought about farm extension in  better ways than we now do. It's almost like extension has been outsourced to big corporations,  
**[0:19:07-0:19:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:19:07):**  you know, trying to sell, you know, whatever their sort of agrochemicals or agri products  are. And then there's quite a lot of regulation, you know, it's quite top down, you know, you  mustn't do this, you must do that. So, you know, again, I'm always arguing the case for  sort of bottom up grassroots, what we need is farmers to be helped and to help each other  to be better farmers, you know, to value their experience and to try and make it easier for  
**[0:19:33-0:19:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:19:33):**  them to do all of those things, you know, to produce good food, to live a viable lifestyle  and to look after the environment.  Jason Vale And to value these things at all scales as  well, because, you know, I think that there is a degree to which farmers who've got a  couple of hundred acres or maybe 500, even 1000 acres, don't necessarily think of the  
**[0:19:51-0:19:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:19:51):**  small farmer with, you know, three acres and a cow in the same category. And actually,  a lot of the knowledge, even though there's a different scale, a lot of that knowledge  sharing is relevant in both directions.  Ian Marber Yeah, I mean, part of my shtick, I think,  is to sort of try and break down that distinction between, you know, the farmer, the sort of  
**[0:20:10-0:20:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:20:10):**  stereotype of the farmer as, you know, like this huge farm with just one or two people  sitting in a big tractor and more amateur, you know, amateur growers, you know, I like  to say, you know, you've got a few herbs on a, you know, in a pot on a window ledge in  a high rise, you know, you're a farmer, you know, I mean, let's, let's all be part of  this process of producing food. I mean, I think there is a problem, there's a kind of  
**[0:20:32-0:20:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:20:32):**  missing middle, you know, it's, it's relatively easy, you know, like, I occasionally raise  a couple of wieners on my holding here. And then, you know, there's a pig farmer down  the road, he's got a couple of thousand, you know, but there isn't, you don't tend to have  someone who's raising kind of one or 200 pigs for the local market. And obviously, there's  sort of issues there about fodder production and so on, you know, but yeah, you know, I  
**[0:20:54-0:20:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:20:54):**  think we need to embrace all scales and be talking to each other across those scales.  But we, you know, going back to some of your earlier questions, you know, the way that  the economics have driven this is that there isn't all that much between big scale mechanised  farming and sort of amateur gardening or small holding and we sort of need to be stitching  all that back together at different levels, I think.  
**[0:21:16-0:21:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:21:16):**  Jason Vale-  One of the key themes in your book is the political economy, the idea that the economy  and the way that we order society is the result of political choices. Now, I know we've touched  on this a little bit already, but could you tell us a bit more about that?  Richard Clark- Yeah, I mean, it's, again, it's a little  
**[0:21:33-0:21:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:21:33):**  bit like the discussion we just had about science, you know, we nowadays we tend to  talk about the economy as this, almost like this force of nature over which we have no  control, you know, the science dictates that we do this, the economy dictates that we do  that. And really, the point of talking about political economy is just to emphasise that  this is a human artifice that we've created, and we have choices and control over it, which  
**[0:21:59-0:22:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:21:59):**  you know, going back to that discussion about the likes of Adam Smith and David Ricardo,  they were much more aware that what we call the economy emerged from social conflicts  or classes, social forces within society, landowners, industrialist workers, and so  on. I mean, that's only one framing you can put around it. But it's, you know, the idea  is that the economy is not something out there over which we have no control, but emerges  
**[0:22:26-0:22:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:22:26):**  from the political choices that we make.  Jason Vale,  You know, you talk there about economy being seen as a almost a force of nature. And we  think in terms of the laws of nature, you know, sort of basic things like gravity, but  when we're taught economics, economics also has its own laws. So, is all economics political?  
**[0:22:51-0:22:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:22:51):**  Or are there still some fundamental laws governing things like supply and demand and price rises?  Adam Smith Great question. I mean, I would say yes,  all economics is political, but that doesn't necessarily mean that it's only political.  I mean, supply and demand is an interesting one. You know, as I studied anthropology,  and it was a big debate in anthropology some years ago. You know, if you look at societies  
**[0:23:16-0:23:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:23:16):**  that are very different from our own, you know, like in sort of New Guinea or somewhere,  you know, does market supply and demand operate in the same way? I think really, the answer  is no, it doesn't. And, you know, modern people trying to reform economic thinking now, like  Kate Raworth, you know, she says, once people have learned to sort of, you know, a supply  and demand graph, they're sort of lost, you know. So, I kind of think, you know, it is  
**[0:23:39-0:23:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:23:39):**  very deeply political. But having said that, you know, you talked about laws of nature,  I think in as much as there are economic laws, they're actually the points at which human  society interacts with the natural world, which is why farming and food is so critical,  I think, because that's exactly where society meets nature. You know, there are certain  things that we can't just kind of politic our way out of. So, you know, obviously, at  
**[0:24:03-0:24:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:24:03):**  the moment, the big story is fuel prices, you know, so sure, the government could say,  okay, petrol is going to be 50p a litre instead of two quid, but that will have consequences,  you know, you can't, it's not a matter of politics, just in that, you know, you can  sort of wave a wand or say by fear, you know, this is how it is. And obviously, you know,  you could say there are laws of supply and demand in as much as we have this huge complex  
**[0:24:28-0:24:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:24:28):**  social structure, kind of institutional structure built around a certain way of thinking about  commodities and trade and money and so on. So, although ultimately, I would argue that  is a political choice, you know, there's a kind of path dependency, so you can't just  kind of abolish it by, you know, by passing a law in the House of Commons, you know, but  ultimately the things that are really driving it, you know, they are things like energy,  
**[0:24:54-0:25:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:24:54):**  water, soil, you know, some of these more fundamental natural forces are the things  that are going to drive change because you can't just kind of conjure energy out of nowhere,  you know, if you strip your soil bare, you can't then farm it next year, you know, those  are the real laws of nature that I think, you know, we have to pay attention to.  Mason So, you've got laws of nature and then built on top of that are these assumptions rather than laws that we make about economics.  
**[0:25:21-0:25:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:25:21):**  I'm really interested, I'm really pleased to hear you talking about the way in which  different cultures and different places around the world have a different understanding of  supply and demand because I can remember, you know, my GCSE and when I tried to question,  you know, the basic laws of supply and demand and say that it was more complicated and that  society, you know, kind of got in the way of some of these economic theories, I tell  
**[0:25:42-0:25:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:25:42):**  you, it really didn't go down well.  David Yeah, it's very entrenched, very entrenched  that way of thinking. It's almost like this kind of recursive model where we kind of set  up a certain way of doing things and then we, you know, we describe how it works in  terms of these kind of law like generalisations, but you know, which sort of work, you know,  
**[0:26:03-0:26:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:26:03):**  because we've chosen and set up these institutions that operate in that way, but the economic  historian pioneering economic historian, Carl Polanyi, you know, he talked about land, labour  and money as the fictitious commodities, because we treat land as if it's something that  you can just buy and sell, but actually for a whole bunch of reasons, you know, you can't  really do that long term. In my book, I talk about problems of the symbolic economy, you  
**[0:26:30-0:26:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:26:30):**  know, humans are great at inventing, we sort of, we're brilliant at inventing all these  ways of relating to each other and money, you know, is an amazing thing which generates  this huge amount of activity and interaction. But ultimately, it does meet these, the way  you framed it, these real natural laws, you know, you can't produce more food than you  can produce, you can't conjure energy out of nowhere. And so ultimately, there are other  
**[0:26:54-0:26:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:26:54):**  realities and there are other ways of thinking about those things, you know, going back to  someone like Tyson Yoonka Porter, you know, these much more long term ways of thinking  about how we emplace ourselves in the landscape that I think are important.  And it's interesting, actually, that even the markets in land and, you know, the buying  and selling of land have changed, or are changing at the moment with this idea of natural capital  
**[0:27:18-0:27:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:27:18):**  and the way in which, you know, land is more than just a place, it is a bundle of ecological  outcomes and potentially social capital outcomes as well.  And also, you know, a big problem with land is, you know, the old Mark Twain joke that,  you know, buy land because they're making it anymore, you know, it's, you know, you  can't just keep producing more land. And that has all sorts of implications in terms of  
**[0:27:43-0:27:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:27:43):**  the demand, you know, the price for land, which sort of inflates it beyond, and housing  too, you know, that inflates it beyond what a lot of people can afford.  You know, it's really fascinating that you bring up the quote from Mark Twain there,  that the thing about land is they're not making it anymore. But actually, when I talk to regenerative  or agroecological farmers around the world, it's one of the things that they, they actually  
**[0:28:04-0:28:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:28:04):**  contest. They say, you know, what they are doing is creating more soil. And so, although  that horizontal amount of land is not expanding, what they're doing is building it. And then  they talk in terms of vertical real estate, where you're growing taller grasses because  your land is functioning better, therefore you're getting more volume of grass and swab  out of the same parcel of land. So that's a really interesting dichotomy as well.  
**[0:28:28-0:28:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:28:28):**  No, I mean, I'd go along with that. I mean, I think sometimes people can over press that  argument and sort of say, you know, that we can sort of produce infinite amounts of food  or whatever from tiny areas. But nevertheless, I agree that, you know, people are effectively  creating more land. And that's, you know, partly through knowledge and sort of practical  skills, science, if you like, and also through labour, you know, through, you know, through  
**[0:28:53-0:29:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:28:53):**  bringing more considered complex human labour to bear, which is, you know, one reason why  sort of big scale mechanisation, which tends to, I think, oversimplify, you know, we need  to be complicating the ways that we produce things. And that involves sort of bringing  people back into the picture. And actually, yes, it's not just even human  labour, but, but the labour of humans, recruiting nature as, as a farm worker in itself and  
**[0:29:21-0:29:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:29:21):**  using livestock. So you've got, you know, labour coming from many different sources,  all integrating to sort of create this additional capacity or to restore the original capacity  of the land. Chris, in your book, you outline 10 existential crises from climate and soil  to economy and culture. And we've touched on a few of these. We don't have time to go  into all of them, but the first crisis that you write about and that we haven't talked  
**[0:29:45-0:29:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:29:45):**  about yet is population. Are there too many people?  Right. I'm going to channel my inner politician in trying to answer that question by not saying  either yes or no. I mean, one of the funny things is that some people raise this issue,  oh, there's too many people, but you know, you can't wish people away except in sort  of, you know, fairly draconian and wicked ways. And I think the reality is that most  
**[0:30:09-0:30:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:30:09):**  people agree that, you know, what we need is voluntary control over our fertility. The  flaw in that line of thinking is if we could just have fewer of us, then we could carry  on sort of doing the things that we're doing and it would be easier. The reason that the  world is so heavily populated is part of the same reasons impelling this kind of, you know,  what I've called the symbolic economy, you know, certain ways of organising ourselves,  
**[0:30:36-0:30:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:30:36):**  ways of producing food. So it's, you know, we need to sort of get at the underlying structure  of that, you know, so population, you know, it might be a problem in some places, but  it's a kind of proximal problem and we need to get at the underlying problem.  Jason Vale And increasingly there's research that shows  that if we amend the diets that we have, if we reduce the extractive activity on the land,  
**[0:30:59-0:31:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:30:59):**  then actually we can feed perfectly easily the nine, 10 billion people that are forecast  if we waste less, that it's about resources and it's about the way that we manage the  land that we have.  Yeah, I mean, I think it's, you know, you hear these figures that we're going to need,  you know, 50% or 70% more food, which is odd because it's not, there's not going to be  
**[0:31:18-0:31:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:31:18):**  that many more people and, you know, actually population growth rates are reducing. So yeah,  I think, you know, it's not really a problem of total food supply. I mean, I don't dispute,  you know, the argument of someone like George is that we do have this enormous agricultural  footprint on the planet and, you know, I don't dispute that, but it's not a matter of like  having to extend that, as you say, you know, there's, there's all sorts of ways we can  
**[0:31:43-0:31:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:31:43):**  be smarter about how we produce things, what we produce that begin to reduce that footprint.  It's interesting, isn't it? That people seem to look at this trajectory of increasing numbers  of humans on the planet as if they need to provide for them in precisely the same way  they'd be provided for and not question the choices that they make. And so there is this,  this sort of notion that if we're going to have 3 billion more people, then we have to  
**[0:32:10-0:32:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:32:10):**  produce the same sort of food in the same sort of way for those 3 million people, rather  than addressing the issues of waste, rather than addressing the issues of what people  are choosing to eat. And that has always seemed to me, I mean, crazy.  Maybe it's a tall order, but we need to move away from this notion of consumerism, where  there's the sort of notion that people should demand whatever they demand. And then we need  
**[0:32:34-0:32:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:32:34):**  a structure of economic production to meet that demand. Now, I think we need to move  more towards producerism, you know, people as producers of their own livelihoods in kind  of development studies, there's a notion of livelihoods and how poor people kind of stitch  together a complex livelihood through sort of pragmatic means. And we need to sort of  start thinking about all our livelihoods in that sort of way, you know, how can I live  
**[0:32:58-0:33:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:32:58):**  a good life on the basis of the renewable resources that are available to me, and I  think that will push us in a different direction and more towards, you know, where we came  into this discussion, you know, what does the future look like? It looks like having  more people on the land thinking through the constraints that the land imposes on them  and sort of how to generate a good livelihood out of that. And that will include the things  
**[0:33:22-0:33:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:33:22):**  you were just talking about, sort of agroecological, you know, regenerative forms of farming, where,  you know, people can be really creative in terms of how they do that, but they kind of  need to be on the land doing it, thinking about it. And, you know, that's why I argue  for a small farm future.  Jason Vale,  
**[0:33:38-0:33:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:33:38):**  So that's, you know, at the heart of that is a land appropriate food production. And  part of that is a more land appropriate national diet. And of course, you know, in many of  the poorer societies around the world, their diets are already fairly land appropriate.  So really what we're talking about is kind of, you know, large Western economies remembering  to start eating the sorts of foods again, that are appropriate for the land and the  
**[0:34:02-0:34:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:34:02):**  landscape that they come from.  Richard Clark,  Yeah. I mean, I think, you know, we definitely need to develop local food cultures, which,  you know, in some places, there's been more historical continuity than in others. I mean,  I think in the UK, because we sort of industrialised and urbanised very early, you don't sort of  
**[0:34:19-0:34:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:34:19):**  get that, you know, that sort of terroir kind of idea or that, you know, I mean, obviously,  we do have our sort of local foods and so on. But, you know, it's quite weak. And the  reality, you know, as I said earlier, we've got, you know, something like 75% of global  cropland is devoted to just 10 crops, you know, six of which are cereals, two of which  are legumes. And, I mean, obviously, we grow, you know, wheat, rice and maize, obviously  
**[0:34:42-0:34:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:34:42):**  being big ones. And, you know, we grow those crops, you know, because they're great crops,  and, you know, in many ways, and do a lot of things we want, but you know, you can have  too much of a good thing, you know, and that's why, you know, again, I argue for horticulture  for a more sort of integrated approach rather than just wheat, soy or whatever, you know,  that sort of, you know, it ticks the sort of macronutrient box. And so, let's produce  
**[0:35:03-0:35:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:35:03):**  as much of it as we can and then kind of package it in endless fancy ways in the supermarket,  you know, we, you know, we need to embrace a more diverse local food culture.  Jason Vale-  Another thing you talk about is a future demographic and sociological shift away from the economic  dynamism that brought people into cities and back towards rural areas where people will  
**[0:35:28-0:35:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:35:28):**  start to live more simply, perhaps, and grow more of their own food. Now, surely, the big  challenge here, particularly in Western economies like the UK, is land ownership. Are you expecting  some sort of return to a society of peasants and gentry? And if not, do we need a revolution?  Richard Clark- I'm going to have to channel my politician  again and sort of try and answer sort of neither of the above. I mean, no, no, God help us.  
**[0:35:54-0:35:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:35:54):**  I don't want the society of lords and peasants. So yeah, there does need to be land reform.  I mean, you know, it's an interesting one because I think land ownership, people often  say, you know, you want to take us back to a sort of feudal society, but we don't have  the structure of certainly, say, contemporary Britain. I don't think there's a kind of feudal  society waiting in the wings. Like, feudal societies were based on kind of warrior aristocracies,  
**[0:36:18-0:36:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:36:18):**  you know, which we don't have, although we do have kind of incipient warrior aristocracies.  So we need to sort of nip that in the bud, I think. And I think partly that's going to  happen through pressure on land, through migration, you know, through the need to access land  for all the reasons we were talking about earlier. As to a revolution, I mean, I don't  know, where I am here is sort of the heartlands of the Pitchfork Rebellion that didn't turn  
**[0:36:43-0:36:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:36:43):**  out all that well for the rebels. But then not too many years after the end of it, James  II was out on his ear and some of what the rebels had wanted happened anyway. So I kind  of think, I do think we need land reform and we need to confront injustice. You know, we  need a bit of civil disobedience and a bit of kind of rattling the cage. You know, I  don't sort of think that the examples of revolution that are available from recent history, which  
**[0:37:12-0:37:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:37:12):**  kind of were all peasant revolutions, ultimately, sort of at moments of the kind of introduction  of modernization and a monetary economy, I don't think they have many lessons for where  we are right now in a country like the UK. But we do need land reform, we do need partly  just housing, you know, there's a sort of intergenerational injustice, we need young  people to be able to access housing, but we also need wider access to land for sure. So,  
**[0:37:37-0:37:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:37:37):**  you know, we do need some quick thinking about land reform.  And of course, revolution is a societal response to political failure, ultimately, isn't it?  And so yeah, yeah, it is. And it's, you know, part of the problem is, I don't think sort  of saying, you know, the sort of present lot in government are awful, let's kick them out  and, you know, we'll start governing, and it will all be better. I think the sort of  
**[0:38:00-0:38:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:38:00):**  historical lessons there that the people that start governing in their stead, you know,  not necessarily any better, you know, part of the problem is government itself, not the  particular flavor of the people who are in government. So, you know, I think there's,  I mean, I'm not saying that that means we shouldn't vote, you know, vote for better,  better candidates rather than worse and engage in all of that political process. But ultimately,  
**[0:38:23-0:38:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:38:23):**  it's not really about, you know, who's pulling the strings in central government, you know,  it's about a sort of deeper kind of economic and political transformation.  And ultimately, if politicians were far sighted enough to see the sorts of changes that we're  expecting, and to understand the importance of land reform, then there's no reason why  we can't have a land use strategy where there aren't incentives for landowners and farmers  
**[0:38:51-0:38:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:38:51):**  to actually set aside parts of their farms so that the general citizenry can use that  and take advantage of that land. And there could be financial incentives from government  to farmers to allow that to happen.  Yeah, I mean, you know, it would be great if there was a kind of real push for land  reform. I mean, I think, you know, England, you know, if we're just talking about the  
**[0:39:10-0:39:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:39:10):**  UK, I think England is behind the game in turn, you know, relative to say Scotland or  Wales, you know, but yeah, it would be great to do that. And there are, you know, there  are sort of initiatives and the Land Workers Alliance are doing stuff about bringing small  scale horticulture into the mix on larger scale farms. So, you know, there's loads of  kind of good things that can be done on the ground. But ultimately, I think there are  
**[0:39:33-0:39:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:39:33):**  these obstacles of the larger economic system and, you know, the way that land is financialised.  Chris, in terms of this conversation, the conversation we've just been having, the conversation  more broadly throughout this programme, and through the book, you're presenting people  with a choice. We can choose a dystopia in which we pick through the debris of disaster,  or we can choose to reconstruct our political economy and pre-adapt to the ecological insecurity  
**[0:40:00-0:40:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:40:00):**  we're facing by creating a new and perhaps more egalitarian society, one that you suggest  would be more resilient to ecological change.  Absolutely. Yeah. I mean, I think that frames it very well. You know, I'm not, I'm not sort  of presenting a future utopia saying, oh, you know, it'll all be lovely if we just have  our, you know, our gardens and small holdings. But, you know, I think if we don't, if we  
**[0:40:24-0:40:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:40:24):**  don't confront some of these big crises and structural obstacles, it could be pretty bleak.  The key is to make the best of the reality that we confront. And I think that does mean  more fairness, less inequality, it means more people living and working in reinvigorated  countrysides and it means, you know, all the things we were talking about earlier, it means  creating local food cultures of which, you know, of which we're all a part rather than,  
**[0:40:52-0:40:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:40:52):**  you know, just consumers sort of down at the store.  Just finally, in your chapter from religion to science and back, you imagine a new agrarian  society developing, more in tune with the rhythm of the year, where there are seasons  of carnival and excess tempered with periods of Lenten restraint. Now, we still of course  have festivals in the countryside. And this mid-summer, I was at the Philly loo in Ash  
**[0:41:17-0:41:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:41:17):**  Moor in Dorset with drinking and games centred around the village Dew Pond, the highest bit  of land in Dorset and the evening culminating at sundown with a haunting and sombre horn  dance. But these are just faint echoes of the past. Are you looking forward to a new  period of medieval excess?  Yeah, well, it's an interesting question because I think, you know, we sort of tend to have  
**[0:41:41-0:41:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:41:41):**  this view of the past as being sort of incredibly grim and, you know, everyone knows to the  grindstone and, you know, there is an element of truth to that. But there was also all of  that, you know, the carnival excess. You know, one of the issues, as I said earlier, you  know, in modern times, we've got very focused on work and hard work, you know, the sort  of classic political slogan of hard working families and I think, you know, people in  
**[0:42:05-0:42:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:42:05):**  the past to some extent may have had a bit more wisdom than we do now on, you know, there  being times for hard work and times for play, you know, so.  I mean, the winter festival would last for weeks, wouldn't it?  Yeah, yeah, yeah. I mean, I think we forget how, you know, how much the emphasis on financialisation  and accumulation sort of, you know, keeps us chained to the office or the tractor or,  
**[0:42:32-0:42:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:42:32):**  you know, whatever it might be. So, you know, I don't want to, you know, you always get  this sort of accusation that you're romanticising the past or wanting to go back to some image  of a golden age. And I think, you know, we need to get beyond that, you know, we need  to, you know, we're not trying to recreate anything from the past, but we can, if we  sort of get over our own sort of modernist arrogance, we can learn from the past, you  
**[0:42:54-0:43:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:42:54):**  know, and definitely sort of reevaluating work and play is something we need to do.  Chris, thanks so much. That's all we've got time for.  I'd like to thank my guest, Chris Smaige, author of A Small Farm Future. Chris's website  is smallfarmfuture.org.uk. If you've enjoyed listening, please come back and listen to  more. Tell your friends, like us, review us and share our links. Farmgate is funded by  
**[0:43:18-0:43:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/A-small-farm-future-e1lgv7i#t=0:43:18):**  San Calpa and you can join the conversation on Twitter by searching for Farmgate Podcast.  I've been Finnlow Kustain. Bye for now.  