### Farm Gate  (2021-01-15)
**[0:00:00-0:00:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to Farmgate, I'm Finnlow Costayne. This is the first of two programmes investigating  the rise of vegetable and cellular meat alternatives. In the second episode, I'll discuss the ethics  and business implications of meat alternatives, but today I'm talking to Rachel Santo, a  senior research programme coordinator at the Johns Hopkins Centre for a Liveable Future,  where she works on sustainable diets, local food policy and urban agriculture. She was  
**[0:00:31-0:00:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:00:31):**  recently the lead author of a review article published on the website Frontiers in Sustainable  Food Systems called Considering Plant-Based Meat Substitutes and Cell-Based Meats, a Public  Health and Food Systems Perspective. I started by asking Rachel if she'd explain why the  research behind this paper was necessary.  Sure, so thanks for inviting me to the programme and happy to be here. So our centre is based  
**[0:00:55-0:00:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:00:55):**  at a school of public health, the Johns Hopkins School of Public Health. And so we approach  most of our work with an interdisciplinary public health and food systems lens. When  we were looking at the existing research on meat alternatives, we noticed that the majority  really focuses on the technical aspects, the production processes or the consumer perceptions  of whether they would be willing to eat them. And there was far less on this bigger picture  
**[0:01:18-0:01:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:01:18):**  view of what happens if we were to scale meat alternatives production up and consumption  up. What would that mean for the health of consumers or for the environment or for animal  welfare considerations? So we wanted to look critically at the claims that these products  are being sold under and highlight the complexity of the issues at hand and really identify  where more research is needed.  
**[0:01:37-0:01:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:01:37):**  You talked about the way in which Johns Hopkins always takes this sort of public health and  food systems lens, but why are those lenses so important?  I think it's important to think systematically about issues when we're looking, when we're  considering introducing any new technology, but any product really is we can't focus on  one lens. We have to look at the whole picture. And so when you're talking about the nutrition  
**[0:01:57-0:02:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:01:57):**  of a product, you also need to be considering the environmental impacts of a food and also  the implications for producers and for consumers who are eating those products, the economic  impacts, the socio-cultural impacts. So I think it's just important to look beyond one  field and make sure that you're really understanding how introduction of new products, especially  new products that have never been on the market before, will interact with all these different  
**[0:02:16-0:02:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:02:16):**  features of our current food system.  And does that link into sort of public policy in a way? You know, the way that food products  usually come to market is that, you know, customers want them or they don't want them.  It's very market led. If consumers like something, then they'll buy it. Is there a degree to  which you're hoping to influence public policy around these products so that consumers, so  
**[0:02:37-0:02:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:02:37):**  citizens or policymakers feel that they should be providing additional support for particular  products and less support for other products?  That's a great question. I mean, our research was really focused on the science that currently  exists. So we weren't looking at the bigger picture of the policy changes. That said,  I mean, one of the big areas that we identified is that a lot of the existing research that's  
**[0:02:57-0:03:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:02:57):**  been published on these products is funded or commissioned by the company selling those  products. And, you know, this isn't unique to meat alternatives. This happens in other  food industries, like throughout the food industry, throughout other industries, too,  the pharmaceutical and medical. And I think it just poses that we need more research that's  independently funded and really can rigorously analyse the potential benefits and limitations  
**[0:03:17-0:03:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:03:17):**  of different products. So, you know, whether it's food safety related or the environmental  impacts, we really want to make sure that our decisions are made based on science. And  ideally that science would be independently funded. So to the extent to which we can get  more government support for independent research, that would be one area in particular that  I think would be really beneficial to have policymakers weighing in on.  
**[0:03:34-0:03:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:03:34):**  And so to turn to the study itself, was there new research that you were undertaking here,  or was it a review, a synthesis of research that was already out there in the public domain  in one way or another?  Yes, it was a review of existing research. We did a database search of three major academic  data journal databases to pull out studies related to meat alternatives. And specifically,  
**[0:03:54-0:03:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:03:54):**  we were looking at both plant based meat substitutes and also cell based meats. And we wanted to  look at studies that had anything to do with the public health impacts, the environmental  impacts, animal welfare considerations, socio economic considerations for both producers  and consumers and also policy implications. So our policy side was focused primarily on  US policies. And so we looked at over 150 articles and of those about half had some  
**[0:04:17-0:04:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:04:17):**  relation to one of those issue areas that we were looking at.  I'm wondering what proportion related to cell based meat alternatives?  Surprisingly, way more than I thought, considering that cell based meats haven't actually well,  they just recently were announced in Singapore, there's a company that got approved to sell  sell based meat, but there were I think probably 50 articles, 50 to 60 articles related to  
**[0:04:37-0:04:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:04:37):**  cell based meat, but because they haven't been on the market up to the point of when  we were doing the research, a lot of the research is all based on hypothetical scenarios, whether  it's looking at the environmental impacts, they're all hypothetical scenarios of modelling  different potential inputs, but nobody actually knows what these companies are using, because  it's all proprietary right now.  
**[0:04:53-0:04:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:04:53):**  What was the reason for differentiating between these, you know, if we if we're talking about  alternative meat products, then we have meat, and then there's there's not meat. So, you  know, why why why make that differentiation in the first place?  So, depending on the consideration we were looking at, I mean, in some cases, whether  it's plant based or cell based, it wouldn't really make a difference if it's, you know,  
**[0:05:12-0:05:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:05:12):**  overall driving changes in conventional meat production, you know, the difference would  be the same, but for a lot of the other impacts we're looking at, whether it's environmental,  in particular, we found some notable differences, or even health impacts, it's cell based meat  in theory is supposed to be biologically equivalent to meat. So if you're trying to, in some cases,  they're planning to add or enhance the meat to have nutritional benefits. But at this  
**[0:05:33-0:05:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:05:33):**  point, that hasn't come to market. So it hasn't been proven yet. But in theory, that could  have much different health implications than a product that's derived from processed plant  based ingredients.  So when we're talking about plant based, just to define, you know, what that means, I'm  guessing that what we're talking about here is, you know, stuff that you could get in  
**[0:05:49-0:05:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:05:49):**  a kind of a high end sort of deli type restaurant, which is relatively unprocessed, you know,  it's beans that have been kind of pressed together, but that's sort of almost the limit  of the processing right up to stuff that's a sort of fungus or pea based formulation,  which is sort of created into a burger style thing. What is cell based? Just can you define  that for us?  
**[0:06:10-0:06:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:06:10):**  Yeah, great question. Actually, I'll jump in before and go to the plant based. So we  actually only looked at plant based substitutes that are intended to mimic meat entirely.  So that excludes other plant based products that can be used in similar ways, but aren't  intended to exactly taste like meat. So things like tofu, tempeh, seitan, or even just like  bean burgers, none of that was included as part of our plant based substitutes, because  
**[0:06:33-0:06:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:06:33):**  they're there. Those are other types of plant forward protein foods, but they're not exactly  intended to mimic meat. So we're really looking at the I don't want to name names of big companies,  but you've heard of Impossible Burger, the Beyond Burger, a lot of the Morningstar Farm  products, a lot of the different, very highly processed plant substitutes. So that's that  was one end. And for the cell based meat, so this is sometimes called lab grown meat,  
**[0:06:54-0:06:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:06:54):**  or no kill meat, but meat that's grown from animal stem cells in a laboratory using techniques  similar to how we tissue engineer in human biomedical research too. So that these products,  the cell based meat products are not intended to actually imitate meat, but they're intended  to be meat, just grown in a lab.  And they come from animal cells, they are derived from animals. And actually, there  
**[0:07:14-0:07:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:07:14):**  are some pretty key animal welfare issues associated with the harvesting of those cells.  Correct. Yeah. So there's two potential ways that you could grow the cell based meat. But  right now, as far as we know, everyone is primarily using adult muscle stem cells. So  they take it through a biopsy from a living animal, or I guess you could take it from  a dead animal too, but from a from adult animal, there are hopes that they could take embryonic  
**[0:07:36-0:07:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:07:36):**  stem cells and have a perpetual line. But right now, the industry standard is to use  muscle stem cells.  So are we seeing embryo cells being used? Or is that just something that's talked about?  It's talked about as a potential to, in theory, eliminate any need to have multiple inputs  of stem cells, because at some point, the stem cells can't perpetuate indefinitely.  
**[0:07:56-0:08:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:07:56):**  So they will have to do biopsies. And the frequency of those biopsies, how much is needed  to produce different amounts of meat, it's very unknown. We weren't able to find any  estimates really of how many animals are even required for the biopsies to produce the various  amounts of cell based meat. It's really, there's a lot of unknowns there.  If I could ask you maybe about the key takeaways in terms of the health impacts, and it's  
**[0:08:17-0:08:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:08:17):**  in terms of the environmental impacts, perhaps that's the easiest way of getting into some  of the detail.  Sure. So from an individual health perspective, and I think the health, I'll break it into  both individual health and then like the bigger picture public health considerations. So from  an individual health perspective, there are still a lot of unknowns about these meat alternatives.  
**[0:08:34-0:08:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:08:34):**  I mean, yes, we've had some in the market for 10 to 15 years, but some of the newer  ones, especially we don't know that much about. And there are a lot of questions that even  though these products are derived from legumes, like soybeans and peas, which are quite nutritious,  and which have been proven to reduce certain diseases. We don't know whether the highly  processed versions of those legumes will yield the same benefits for people's health. And  
**[0:08:55-0:08:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:08:55):**  there are even more questions about cell based meats just because they're not yet on the  market.  I'm looking at the broader public health picture, there's even more unknowns. So we really,  as a public health center, wanted to kind of look into the questions around antibiotic  use and cell based meat production. There have been claims that you can virtually eliminate  
**[0:09:12-0:09:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:09:12):**  antibiotic use from cell based meat production. And that's probably not true, but it's probably  probably would require less than the current industry standard in the field because it's  so large, but there really has been no research showing potential antibiotic use scenarios  in cell based meat production, or even just concerns with worker safety and community  health implications. Some of those bigger picture concerns just haven't been analyzed  
**[0:09:34-0:09:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:09:34):**  in the data yet. But that was part of the reason we did this study was to highlight  where we need future research to be directed towards. And that's kind of what we're hoping  for. We tried to look into, you know, have there been studies modeling potential economic  impacts on producers of conventional meat or alternative meats, but there's really been  very limited research. I actually, I think some current research is being done in the  
**[0:09:54-0:09:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:09:54):**  US, at least on this topic, but it's all it's all very new. And that's part of the reason  we wanted to highlight is, you know, you have to look at the big picture when you're talking  about these products, you can't just expect that they're going to be a silver bullet solution  to addressing one problem, but then they might actually cause unknown consequences or maybe  unwanted consequences in other areas of the food system if you don't consider those other  
**[0:10:14-0:10:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:10:14):**  producers in the community.  Jason Vale, Director,  I think one of the challenges of of studies where we're taking us sort of a standard value  outdoor extensive and regenerative beef production.  So that's, you know, the huge sort of variance there.  
**[0:10:58-0:11:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:10:58):**  And I wonder how you take account of that  in the work that you do.  Yeah, it's a great question and a very valid point.  So we decided because of the limits of the paper  and the challenges of condensing all of this information  
**[0:11:10-0:11:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:11:10):**  into a synthesized product,  that we would primarily focus our comparisons  to conventional meat.  And, you know, maybe this is some of our US bias,  but the vast majority of meat in the US,  
**[0:11:20-0:11:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:11:20):**  especially in a lot of industrialized countries now,  comes from really industrialized systems  that do rely heavily on antibiotics  that require pesticides and fertilizers  and the inputs into the feedlot beef and other meats too.  
**[0:11:31-0:11:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:11:31):**  We didn't just look at compared to beef,  but that said, we did highlight throughout  where the comparisons would look different probably.  So for instance, with fertilizer use or pesticide use,  while our comparisons were with conventional meat,  
**[0:11:44-0:11:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:11:44):**  we did highlight that, you know,  if you're looking at a system that is more regenerative  or that is more agroecological,  those comparisons are likely gonna look a lot different  and might actually put the regenerative beef in favor,  
**[0:11:54-0:11:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:11:54):**  but we don't know because the data is really,  is actually quite limited in that area.  So I wonder if you can talk about  the environmental impacts more specifically.  Big picture, I would say,  
**[0:12:03-0:12:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:12:03):**  whether you were looking at plant-based meat  or cell-based meat, both types of meat alternatives  will likely have lower environmental impacts than beef.  And that's just because with few exceptions,  conventionally farmed beef  
**[0:12:13-0:12:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:12:13):**  has the highest environmental impacts  in almost every comparison you look at.  So if that's your point of reference,  almost any alternative will look sustainable.  It's when you start comparing these other meats  
**[0:12:22-0:12:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:12:22):**  and protein foods that it gets more complicated.  So in the case of plant-based substitutes, for instance,  the environmental benefits are there  compared to a lot of other types of meats,  whether it's pork or poultry or some types of seafood,  
**[0:12:32-0:12:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:12:32):**  but the benefits are less pronounced than replacing beef.  In the case of cell-based meat,  the existing research is so speculative at this point,  but from the two studies that do exist,  the potential environmental impacts  
**[0:12:43-0:12:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:12:43):**  are actually pretty comparable  to other farmed meats and seafood.  So there are not necessarily going to be  this catch-all solution to fixing problems  with all types of meat.  
**[0:12:52-0:12:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:12:52):**  And I will add to that,  when you're talking about using the global values,  it is true that we did use a systematic review  that included values from all over the world.  That said, we didn't just compare  
**[0:13:02-0:13:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:13:02):**  to the average or the median value.  We also tried to include the range.  So you could see that the range of production,  because beef especially is,  all beef is not equal, as you know,  
**[0:13:11-0:13:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:13:11):**  and the range can be so drastically different.  So if you look at the lowest end of the range on beef,  it's still pretty substantially higher  than the highest potential range  of the plant-based meat alternative.  
**[0:13:21-0:13:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:13:21):**  So the cell-based is tricky  because the range on that is actually quite large  because there are so many unknowns.  I'm definitely not the expert  on all the different potential metrics you could use  
**[0:13:30-0:13:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:13:30):**  in life cycle assessments.  I've seen attempts at trying to quantify  more than just greenhouse gas impacts  per kilogram of protein or a hundred grams of protein  or whatever metric you're using.  
**[0:13:41-0:13:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:13:41):**  I think the challenge is  there are so many potential variables you can look at  and so many potential units of comparison.  And so when you have, especially with our study,  which is trying to be a review of existing studies,  
**[0:13:51-0:13:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:13:51):**  we're basically limited to what already exists in the data.  So to the extent to which future research  can start incorporating other ways of looking at  and measuring potential environmental impacts,  social impacts, health impacts,  
**[0:14:03-0:14:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:14:03):**  and accounting for these different considerations,  I think then our more comprehensive reviews,  comparing products to one another  could also be more nuanced and more complicated.  But I guess in our case,  
**[0:14:13-0:14:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:14:13):**  we were just limited to what was already there.  And that was, even with the environmental data we had,  we were actually quite limited.  There were only a few studies  that even looked at water footprints or land footprints,  
**[0:14:21-0:14:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:14:21):**  very few that looked at pesticides or eutrophication.  So some of the big questions we had  were actually kind of hard to look at  because the research is still so limited in that area.  We had a conversation recently with White Oak Pastures.  
**[0:14:33-0:14:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:14:33):**  Some of the criticism that I've seen on Twitter  is centered on the fact that it takes two and a half times  more land to produce the food,  which is again, going back to this efficiency point,  but that kind of misses the point  
**[0:14:43-0:14:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:14:43):**  that there are really sound public good benefits  from the farm there, 170 people employed  versus a feedlot farm where you'd have many fewer people  managing a lot more animals,  at the same time as then having superb environmental  
**[0:14:58-0:15:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:14:58):**  and social and community economic outcomes  associated with that.  So there's so much more to bring into this  than simply the nutritional value of one versus another.  Very true.  
**[0:15:09-0:15:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:15:09):**  And yeah, that's one thing that we try to highlight a lot  in our research is that we don't want to hyper-focus  on just the climate change impacts  and miss this bigger picture.  I mean, it's important to talk about,  
**[0:15:19-0:15:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:15:19):**  we have to urgently address climate change.  We have to really consider how we can bring down  our emissions in all sectors of the economy.  We also need to talk about biodiversity,  farmer autonomy, animal welfare,  
**[0:15:29-0:15:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:15:29):**  the community health impacts of living next to  industrial animal production facilities.  So there's really all these other considerations  that you can't put down to one metric.  Can I ask you a question,  
**[0:15:39-0:15:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:15:39):**  which is about the role that scientists and academics have  in broader communications to the public?  Because when we have this conversation,  we can get into the nuance.  We can talk about the way in which, you know,  
**[0:15:51-0:15:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:15:51):**  there is a difference between the way beef is produced here,  the way it's produced there,  the differences between different types  of cell-based proteins, et cetera.  But that message often is lost  
**[0:16:00-0:16:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:16:00):**  in terms of the mainstream media.  And I wonder how much responsibility you think  academics have for making sure that those messages  aren't just simplified and reduced  to the lowest common denominator.  
**[0:16:11-0:16:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:16:11):**  Oh, wow.  This is a great question.  I'm glad you asked it.  Because this is a debate we have a lot internally,  both at the center with colleagues and with others,  
**[0:16:19-0:16:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:16:19):**  is, you know, a lot of the complicated mess  of trying to solve these issues  comes down to really, really nuanced decisions around,  you know, what metrics you choose here,  how you present this in data.  
**[0:16:30-0:16:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:16:30):**  And so many people want to distill it to one sentence,  so like a tweet or, you know, a headline.  And you can lose all the nuance,  all the variability in your data  if you try to simplify it too much.  
**[0:16:41-0:16:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:16:41):**  And I understand that for the most consumers  or media readers,  that they don't necessarily want all this nuance.  But I do feel that if we're making decisions  that are based on the science,  
**[0:16:52-0:16:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:16:52):**  we need to make sure that,  we need to trust that people can get more nuanced,  can start to learn the differences  in why it's important to make sure  that you're considering different variables.  
**[0:17:02-0:17:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:17:02):**  I don't know, even just comparing per serving,  per amount of protein, per kilogram of product,  you can come up with totally different interpretations  of data depending on which of those units  you use in your comparison.  
**[0:17:12-0:17:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:17:12):**  And so you end up with these studies that say,  lettuce is, you know, way worse than bacon or something  if you're looking at a per kilogram comparison.  And if you're looking at per serving comparison,  it looks a lot different.  
**[0:17:23-0:17:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:17:23):**  And so I do really think that,  I believe that people, the average person,  could understand a lot of this data and this nuance  if we trust that they will  and that they won't just read tweets  
**[0:17:32-0:17:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:17:32):**  or that they want to learn more.  I believe that people can learn that  and can be willing to engage  in that type of deeper conversation.  So how does it work?  
**[0:17:41-0:17:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:17:41):**  Do you have a communications team  that every time there's a paper put out,  you'll have a conversation with the comms team  and you'll work out what are those key lines  or is it just the, you know,  
**[0:17:49-0:17:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:17:49):**  paper gets published and peer reviewed  and it's just kind of out there in the ether  and waiting for people to pick it up  and get in touch with you?  So we do have comms team  
**[0:17:57-0:17:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:17:57):**  and we do have those discussions  and kind of trying to distill down  what are the key messages.  And, you know, sometimes there are debates  even internally amongst the authors of a study  
**[0:18:04-0:18:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:18:04):**  what the key messages are  and what we want people to take away from a study  because it's all in the framing, right?  I mean, you can have the exact same study  and two different people can describe  
**[0:18:12-0:18:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:18:12):**  the exact same study results in completely different ways.  And so I think that's part of the challenge  of being in academia is trying to find out ways  to communicate and I think it's an area  that we could all do better at, including myself,  
**[0:18:22-0:18:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:18:22):**  and trying to find ways to be nuanced  but also to get a lot of people interested in your topic  and make sure that they understand  what you're trying to say.  It always strikes me that land use is the big opportunity  
**[0:18:34-0:18:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:18:34):**  to solve so many of the world's crises  than the crises in nature that we're facing.  We can solve climate change if we get land use right  at the same time as producing highly nutritious food,  restoring biodiversity, but it all comes down to land use.  
**[0:18:48-0:18:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:18:48):**  And so that kind of puts a lot of responsibility  not just onto you, but to scientists and academics  working across this area to make sure  that their work isn't taken out of context  and allowed to be used in some sort of reductionist way,  
**[0:19:03-0:19:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:19:03):**  but it contributes to a much broader  policy development overall.  Yeah, for sure.  And I mean, even with just the land use debate,  there's just so much there because it really depends  
**[0:19:11-0:19:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:19:11):**  on where you're located.  And if you're in a country that's importing a lot of meat  because you can't produce enough of it on the current land,  your situation is gonna look a lot different  and you might need to really have conversations  
**[0:19:22-0:19:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:19:22):**  around what is the most effective or efficient way  to use our land if you're consuming a lot more  than what you're able to produce  in your space.  And I think that those conversations are starting to happen  
**[0:19:33-0:19:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:19:33):**  and I'm glad to see these debates are getting more nuanced.  And I also think that it speaks to a broader picture  that we have to be less polarized  in terms of our discussions.  Like you can talk about the merits of regenerative grazing  
**[0:19:45-0:19:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:19:45):**  and more sustainable beef production  while also talking about the need to reduce consumption,  not eliminate it, but the fact that like the science  is clear that we need to urgently reduce,  especially in highly industrialized countries  
**[0:19:57-0:19:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:19:57):**  where we already eat a lot of meat and dairy,  a lot more than what is recommended for health reasons  and for other reasons.  Like we can have that conversation that we need to reduce,  but we can also recognize the benefits for agroecology,  
**[0:20:08-0:20:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:20:08):**  for consumers, for producers  of having those systems still in place,  just maybe people are consuming less of it  so they can get it from better sources.  What do you see as the main promise and benefit  
**[0:20:18-0:20:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:20:18):**  of the growth in alternative meat products?  Yeah, so I'd say one of the biggest benefits I see  is just that they can be a good gateway food  for people to begin experimenting  with more plant-based proteins.  
**[0:20:29-0:20:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:20:29):**  I mean, ideally from an environmental,  from a nutrition perspective,  we should all be eating less processed legumes  as more of our diets.  Yeah, so there's another question.  
**[0:20:36-0:20:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:20:36):**  Yeah, do we just want to replace one processed product  with another or do we actually just want to eat  more fruit and veg?  Yeah, I mean, and it's not just fruit and veg either.  I would also add in legumes.  
**[0:20:45-0:20:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:20:45):**  Cause actually if you look at the stats  of what we should be eating more of,  like we need to be eating like six times more legumes.  And you know, so I think the emphasis should probably be  on like legumes, vegetables, and then fruits  
**[0:20:54-0:20:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:20:54):**  from like a nutrition,  but also from an environmental perspective.  And yeah, ideally from like, from a health perspective,  it would be the least processed version.  But when you get into reality, like one,  
**[0:21:03-0:21:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:21:03):**  a lot of people have never cooked  with lentils or beans before.  They don't know how to necessarily make them taste good.  And so that's where one area that I see,  I hope that these products are introducing people  
**[0:21:12-0:21:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:21:12):**  to the concept of like, oh,  I like something that has peas in it, you know,  and just acknowledging that these can taste different.  I also am a little concerned that the emphasis  has shifted so much towards meat alternatives  
**[0:21:23-0:21:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:21:23):**  that we forget this bigger picture that we're not just,  that it is not a dichotomy, that we don't have just a choice  between conventional meat and meat alternatives,  but that you can have really healthy and tasty alternatives  like chickpea salad sandwiches or tempeh Reuben tacos  
**[0:21:37-0:21:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:21:37):**  or dolls with, you know, with a whole grain.  I think that the way that restaurants  and the food service industry seems to be really hyper  focused on these, like it makes sense  from a capitalist perspective,  
**[0:21:46-0:21:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:21:46):**  but from a health perspective,  from a diversity of our diets perspective,  I would love to see more of these less processed legumes  and entering menus and kind of helping us open up  our palates and diets to these other options.  
**[0:21:58-0:22:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:21:58):**  Do you have any particular concerns,  having sort of looked at this in detail,  about specific sorts of plant-based alternatives  or cell-based alternatives as these things begin to scale up?  The biggest concern I have, and because the data's so new,  
**[0:22:14-0:22:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:22:14):**  it's still a challenge to really grapple with,  but I mean, from the cell-based meat perspective,  the environmental impacts don't look that much better  than most meats.  These potential model scenarios,  
**[0:22:24-0:22:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:22:24):**  which again are potential model scenarios.  So again, we really need the real data,  but it doesn't look that much better than poultry, pork,  like all these other alternatives.  And so why are we spending billions of dollars  
**[0:22:35-0:22:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:22:35):**  to shift this industry when the actual alternatives,  less processed plant-based alternatives  are really where we probably should be spending our money?  Why can't we put some of that money  into helping diversify our diets,  
**[0:22:45-0:22:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:22:45):**  finding interesting ways to incorporate  these other foods into our menu?  So that would be one area that I see is,  and maybe again, the data will turn out a lot different  once cell-based meat production comes to scale,  
**[0:22:54-0:22:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:22:54):**  and I'll have to completely change my view.  And just what I've seen so far is like,  it does not look like a silver bullet solution  to solve a lot of these problems.  These products are being sold  
**[0:23:04-0:23:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:23:04):**  by multinational meat processing companies.  So there are concerns,  or protein processing companies, I should say,  a lot of them are invested  in some form of alternative meat now.  
**[0:23:12-0:23:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:23:12):**  And so some people are concerned that,  this is just gonna continue to perpetuate  the consolidation of our food industry  and really continue to remove autonomy  from the food producers and from the consumers  
**[0:23:24-0:23:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:23:24):**  to make decisions over the system.  So the extent to which further research can look into that  to kind of, you know, to challenge it.  I mean, there are people saying that in theory,  you could produce cell-based meat at like a micro scale.  
**[0:23:35-0:23:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:23:35):**  I've seen some suggestions about that.  I have questions about the extent to which  like proprietary information,  like all of these things are gonna be behind closed doors.  And some people are calling for government funding  
**[0:23:44-0:23:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:23:44):**  to help make it so it's more accessible.  So you could have kind of like micro breweries  or fermenting labs or something.  That is one proposal being offered.  I don't know if it's the solution either,  
**[0:23:54-0:23:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:23:54):**  but just that like we need more discussion  around the inequitably distributed concentration  and our consolidation in our food system,  and also how these are even gonna affect  other really big challenges  
**[0:24:04-0:24:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:24:04):**  in our overall global food system  related to the affordability of healthy diets  or who can even access these foods to begin with.  Rachel, it's been fascinating talking to you.  Thanks so much.  
**[0:24:15-0:24:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:24:15):**  That's all we've got time for.  I'd like to thank my guest, Rachel Santo  from the Johns Hopkins Center for a Livable Future.  Our second meat alternatives episode  will be available soon.  
**[0:24:24-0:24:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:24:24):**  If you've enjoyed listening,  please come back and listen to more,  tell your friends, like us, review us, and share our links.  Farmgate is a partnership project  for Farmwell and FAI Farms.  
**[0:24:34-0:24:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/ALT-Meat---A-health--food-systems-perspective-eqek94#t=0:24:34):**  We're funded by San Calpa,  and you can join the conversation on Twitter  by searching for Farmgate Podcast.  I've been Finn Loke Steyn.  Bye for now.  