### Farm Gate  (2021-52-05)
**[0:00:00-0:00:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to Farmgate, I'm Finn Logue Costayne.  In 2013, for the first time, more seafood was produced globally in aquaculture systems  than from wild caught fisheries. This statistic has become a trend with continuing rapid growth  in the aquaculture sector. The farming of fish in cages in coastal areas has come with  costs in terms of pollution, protein sourcing for feed and disease. But as a relatively  
**[0:00:30-0:00:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:00:30):**  young industry, aquaculture has followed a steep learning curve and efforts are continuing  to address these challenges. My guest today is Tony Wall. In 1995, he founded the Fish  Vet Group, which provides strategic health management advice for the aquaculture sector.  But even before this, Tony had dedicated his working life to fish health, particularly  in aquaculture systems. He helped to put fish sentience on the map, is an expert in fish  
**[0:00:56-0:01:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:00:56):**  ophthalmology, and today he's going to help me understand where aquaculture came from,  how it developed and how the industry can overcome its current challenges. Tony, hello,  welcome to the programme. Thanks Finn Logue, yes and thanks for having me here. I think  it's going to be an interesting hour. Well, let's start with some history if that's okay.  Aquaculture hasn't just emerged from nowhere, has it? So just how long have people been  
**[0:01:18-0:01:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:01:18):**  farming fish and what sort of systems were being used historically? It's certainly an  awful lot longer than the recent salmon farming acceleration. People have been farming fish  since prehistory and it was well known in Asia that there were ponds that were both  freshwater and saltwater. In the medieval period, a lot of monks had ponds both in Europe  and in the south of England where they kept carp and these fish were fed on a grain-based  
**[0:01:46-0:01:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:01:46):**  diet and I think even some scraps were given to them. In the 19th century, there were Danish  ponds which were used for rainbow trout and other kinds of trout. More recently, we've  got an explosion of the industry in Atlantic salmon. The difference is, Finn Logue, salmon  have been relatively easy to grow because they've got big eggs and so that they can  actually be cultured all the way through so they can retain brood stock and they can fertilise  
**[0:02:14-0:02:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:02:14):**  the eggs and they can grow them on from there. In prehistory, often the farming methods were  just capturing lots of very small tiny fish and closing them and then growing them on  from there.  Mason, I think you've got a lot of questions. I'm going to ask you a few more questions.  I'm going to ask you a few more questions.  
**[0:02:28-0:02:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:02:28):**  Interesting. Now, bringing us up to date, when I think of aquaculture today, I tend  to think of fish, probably salmon as we've talked about, in big round cages in Scottish  sea lochs or Norwegian fjords. Is that essentially what modern aquaculture looks like? If so,  when did this kind of industrial scale fish farming first start to appear?  It is a picture that we do have, isn't it, of large cages, square and round, but mainly  
**[0:02:53-0:02:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:02:53):**  round these days in sea lochs and in Norway in fjords. This is only part of aquaculture  though. If you look at parts of Southeast Asia and China where they grow immense numbers  of fish of different species, we've got to remember that the fish that are grown in Asia  are a large part of the aquaculture industry. It's just that we don't see it. The bits that  we do see fenlo is shrimps and the prawns that come over, and these often come over  
**[0:03:20-0:03:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:03:20):**  from Asian countries and Thailand. Now these have been farmed, nearly all the little shrimps  and prawns that we see are farmed animals. You know, this is a large part of the aquaculture  system.  So, when we're thinking about aquaculture, worldwide, I suppose really, you know, what  are the major fish species that we're talking about?  
**[0:03:39-0:03:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:03:39):**  Well, crustacea is one of the big ones, but yes, pangasius and tilapia is a very important  species. It is, to a large extent, the species that's grown is tailored to the environment  very much so. You must remember that fish are cold-blooded animals. They're not the  homeotherms that we are, you know, man's adapted to live anywhere really. Fish aren't. They  have very specific temperature requirements. That does preclude them from being farmed  
**[0:04:05-0:04:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:04:05):**  in lots of places.  I guess, you know, for a lot of this podcast, we're going to be concentrating on the sort  of fish that we see in the Scottish lochs or in the Norwegian fjords. I wonder, you  know, when we're thinking about the challenges in these sorts of systems and in terms of,  you know, fish welfare, is it possible to categorise the issues as being similar for  
**[0:04:24-0:04:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:04:24):**  fin fish and then similar for all shellfish? Or are they very much more species specific  than that?  This is an area that's quite close to my heart really, because in some ways it can be classic.  There are commonalities without a doubt. You imagine broiler production or even pig production.  Both of them are intensive systems, but the environment is very carefully controlled.  
**[0:04:47-0:04:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:04:47):**  The humidity, the temperature, the movement of air, the disease risks, you know, there's  a very intense biosecurity. Now that's only partly obtained in aquaculture because again,  we have intensive systems, but unfortunately they're exposed in an external environment  of which we have only a relative control of the environment. So water washes through these  cages, temperature is out with our control, but also is the introduction of pathogens  
**[0:05:18-0:05:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:05:18):**  and probably just as important as the external factors like wind and waves and the climate,  which can have a big, big effect on exposed ages in sea locks and fields. And this is  where it makes aquaculture particularly challenging. In some ways it's very good because you do  have clean water washing through the cages producing usually excellent quality, but it  does mean that they are exposed to pathogens, parasites, storms, gales, plankton blooms  
**[0:05:47-0:05:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:05:47):**  can be a problem. And you know, disease really doesn't come alone. It comes in waves really.  So you'll find that there's usually more than one factor involved if you find fish that  have a disease problem.  In terms of, you know, what we see in Scotland and Norway, we're talking about salmon. What  other species are we likely to see in those areas?  
**[0:06:08-0:06:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:06:08):**  Well salmon is a catchall term really. The salmon that are grown in Norway and Scotland  and Ireland, don't forget, are Atlantic salmon. But we've got to remember that one of the  biggest salmon producers is Chile, where they grow not only Atlantic salmon, but coho and  Chinook salmon as well. And also you could classify the rainbow trout, which are part  of the salmon family, as also one of the species to be looked at. These are the types of salmon  
**[0:06:35-0:06:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:06:35):**  that are formed in the Northern hemisphere and in Chile.  You were talking about the way in which external factors can affect the fish farms themselves,  but of course the fish farms also have an impact on the world around them, both immediately  and more widely. And one of the challenges that I imagine people are pretty familiar  with in terms of salmon is that they're carnivores and they require a lot of protein. So where  
**[0:06:58-0:07:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:06:58):**  does that protein come from in a fish farm?  This is a challenge. This has been a challenge and it remains a challenge. As you rightly  say, they are carnivores and they can only use a certain amount of vegetable protein.  There is quite a bit of soya introduced into salmon feeds and that does to a certain extent  substitute for fish protein that's used. But most of it is white fish meal, which comes  
**[0:07:24-0:07:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:07:24):**  from the harvesting of krill and that's usually caught in the South Atlantic. Krill is just  the sort of a single cell of small organism and these are scooped up and this is the main  source of protein. But as you say, as aquaculture grows, how sustainable is that? It's probably  not. The fish farming industry, generally speaking, has been very innovative in a lot  of areas, but at the moment they're looking at things like insect protein, which is an  
**[0:07:49-0:07:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:07:49):**  exciting source of feed for fish as well. It would be a disaster if hypothetically all  the krill was removed, which is not going to happen. It's a fast growing species and  so far, as far as I know, there has been no evidence of it producing changes in the ecosystems  where it's fished out of. But in theory, it is not sustainable if salmon farming grows.  And maybe we should be looking at other species of fish which require less animal protein  
**[0:08:21-0:08:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:08:21):**  and carp and tilapia are two of them. Neither of them have quite got the same temperature  requirements as salmon, but they are possibilities. The problem with salmon is, well, it used  to be obviously a luxury food. It's much more attractive to the buyer than a piece of white  tilapia or a piece of white river cobbler, which could be grown using less animal protein.  The reason why so much salmon is grown, I think, is because it's attracted a relatively  
**[0:08:48-0:08:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:08:48):**  high price and there's a commercial imperative to grow this on.  You know, when we're talking about salmon, that's very clearly going in, as you say,  as a luxury product. But there are the different fish that are wild caught, you know, like  cod and haddock. And I wonder if there is capacity for them to stop being caught in  the wild and to start farming cod in the way that we do salmon.  
**[0:09:11-0:09:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:09:11):**  Cod is a very, very popular fish. It's easy to cook and they're tasty. But unfortunately,  even though some cod is farmed, it's not an easy fish to farm. And it comes back to the  fact that the eggs are tiny. They're very difficult to grow on from the egg stage. Normally  these eggs are laid into the seawater and they float around with the currents in a planktonic  form. So it's much more difficult to farm cod. It is being done in some parts of the  
**[0:09:41-0:09:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:09:41):**  UK and in Norway, but it's not without its challenges.  Do you think in the future, and we'll come on to the future later, but just in terms  of this, do you think that there is likely to be more of a swing away from wild caught  to fish farming systems where, you know, solutions have been found to creating more sustainable  sources of cod and haddock and other fish species like that? Or is it likely that cod  
**[0:10:06-0:10:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:10:06):**  will always be a species that's fished at sea?  I think cod could be fished, could be farmed, but again, it is mainly a carnivorous animal.  So you don't really get away from the problems of the type of feed source. And I think that  is one of the big problems really.  We'll come back to some of the other issues associated with agriculture in just a moment.  
**[0:10:23-0:10:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:10:23):**  But I mentioned at the start that you helped to put the idea of fish sentience on the map.  And you know, when I grew up in the 1970s, it was really common for people, you know,  in conversation. And I can remember lots of people fishing off harbours and in canals  to think that and to talk about the fact that, you know, so far as they were concerned, fish  had next to no memory and they didn't feel pain. What do we know now about the way that  
**[0:10:47-0:10:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:10:47):**  fish think and feel?  What we know now is simply because they've done studies to show that the nervous system  is very, very similar to mammals, the type of nerves and the nerve endings, the pain  receptors are the same. We know from physiological studies that fish will avoid pain, will have  a memory long enough to be able to stay away from something which has produced an aversive  
**[0:11:08-0:11:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:11:08):**  effect. So the behaviour studies and the anatomic studies and there's also physiological studies  as well, which again would indicate and looking at some of the chemicals in the blood called  his own levels and other stress levels to show that fish can feel not just pain, Fennelow,  but also fear and distress, which are probably just as important really. And you know, these  are the guiding principles for farm animals are do they feel pain? Do they feel stress?  
**[0:11:34-0:11:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:11:34):**  Are they out of their natural environments? Are they allowed to behave as a normal animal  would? I think the studies do show without a doubt fish can feel pain. Now, I would argue  that I don't really know if my dog feels pain if I if I trodden its foot by mistake and  it yells, does it feel pain or is it just some kind of reaction? I don't know. But I  assume it feels pain. I don't know that you feel pain. Actually, you can have no idea  
**[0:11:59-0:12:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:11:59):**  whether what pain means to you. So there is an assumption and in all of these studies,  but there's no difference between a fish and landing on a puppy's foot or you feeling pain.  We've got all the evidence with points to all these showing pain, fear and distress.  I remember you using that analogy when we spoke before the podcast, when I was asking  you about lobster because of course, lobsters, you know, cooked alive. And and I said to  
**[0:12:24-0:12:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:12:24):**  you, you know, if there'd been studies in whether lobsters feel pain in that situation  and I think your response was well, have there been studies into whether a dog feels pain  when it's kicked? It's just common sense, isn't it?  That's right. It is. And sometimes it's not a bad rule of thumb, really. I think the problem  really is that, you know, there's a very strong angling lobby, which would argue that fish  
**[0:12:45-0:12:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:12:45):**  don't feel pain. And you can see it from their point of view that that's what they want to  believe. But we've got to accept the fact that fish do feel pain. And this is, you know,  it's a challenging area because some of the practices that happen to fish, especially  as regards to disease and management can lead to fear, pain and distress.  It's interesting, isn't it? Because, you know, when we talk about pain, fear and distress  
**[0:13:09-0:13:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:13:09):**  and you talk about it in the way that you have, it just makes me think, well, you know,  that's kind of survival of the fittest. If we didn't have those abilities to feel fear,  distress, to run away from things that are dangerous, to feel pain so that we don't do  something again, which is obviously bad for our physiology, then we wouldn't survive.  So it completely makes sense that, you know, the majority of creatures have some sort of  
**[0:13:33-0:13:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:13:33):**  experience of that nature. That's right. Exactly. It is an actual reaction  of fear and flight, really. And I think you've put it very well. You know, this is an inborn  reaction for survival. I wonder, because you were talking about the  studies that have been undertaken, you know, with the aquaculture industry around this.  And I just wonder whether our knowledge about fish sentience has influenced the way that  
**[0:13:55-0:14:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:13:55):**  we treat fish in farm situations and whether that's changed over the last 30, 40, 50 years.  I don't think it's actually just specific to fish. It's when you have a large number  of relatively small and dare I say it's relatively cheap animals that they don't get the same  level of consideration on an individual basis as 30 cows in a field.  And let me look at it like this. We talk about all the time and quite rightly so, we talk  
**[0:14:22-0:14:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:14:22):**  about percentage mortalities and this applies across the intensive farming industries in  other species as well. So we'll be looking at 10, 20, 30% mortality  from up to the point of slaughter. That 20 or 30% is actually our individual  animals, which have got the capacity to feel pain and fear and disease as well. Sometimes  when I was heavily involved in the clinical side of my work, I used to try and stop and  
**[0:14:50-0:14:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:14:50):**  think these are actual individual animals because you get caught up sometimes in numbers,  it can just be a numbers game. And as you say, you know, if we were looking  at that in terms of, you know, animals that we see in the field, in the dairy industry  or the beef industry and the industry was working to, you know, a standard of 20, 30%  mortality, you know, that would be pretty shocking.  
**[0:15:11-0:15:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:15:11):**  James  Exactly. Exactly. That's right. You know, there are arguments to be made, counter arguments  to be made, you know, that fish, you can expect in the wild, much higher levels of mortality.  And in fact, the ones that we grow and keep and farm, the mortality is nothing like as  level as that. But I don't buy that argument completely because if fish are under our care,  
**[0:15:33-0:15:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:15:33):**  they deserve better than wild caught animals. So we can't, the two things are comparable  really. As long as they're under our care, they've got to get the best of attention.  Jason Vale  It's almost like that's the deal, isn't it? If you're a farmed animal, then you, you know,  you're going for the plate at the end, but at the same time, you're at least in theory  
**[0:15:51-0:15:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:15:51):**  being cared for in the interim. James  Exactly. That's exactly right. I think you put your finger on it really. You mentioned  in the introduction, I was very keen on fish eye work, oxymology, and I am and it's something  that's driven me for a long, long time. And this is a good analogy really, because I see  a lot of blind fish and you know, the farmer will say to me, well, you know, well, so what,  
**[0:16:10-0:16:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:16:10):**  the blind, does it really matter? Because often the fish actually can sense the pellets,  the feed coming into the water and they can, you know, they can probably just about get  around being blind. But I think they miss the point. They miss the point in fact that  these animals because they're under our care and they deserve better than that, there's  an ethical consideration. It's not just a commercial consideration or even just looking  
**[0:16:32-0:16:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:16:32):**  at, looking at farming from a production point of view, it's actually trying to grow fish  in the best conditions.  Jason I mentioned also at the start that aquaculture,  you know, had been on a steep learning curve. And I wonder if we could just take a look  at some of those big challenges that the industry has had to address, you know, that we started  
**[0:16:51-0:16:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:16:51):**  talking about earlier. And I wonder if we could start with pollution. What kind of pollution  is it that we're talking about that affect fish farms and from fish farms affect the  surrounding area?  David Well, let's take them separately really.  There's two big ones, really, aren't there? There's  
**[0:17:06-0:17:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:17:06):**  the pollution from the introduction of drugs and therapeutants or the chemicals that could  be given to the fish. You know, you'll be using very occasionally, although not much  these days, they'll be using a little antibiotics. They'll be using quite a lot of medicines  and chemicals for the treatment of sea lice at the moment. And even the use of vaccines  again got the potential for causing environmental damage, probably on a much less scale than  
**[0:17:36-0:17:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:17:36):**  the others. Most of the in-feed treatments, and I do stress again, very little antibiotics  is used these days. If I can just step back, the reason why very little antibiotics is  used is because of the success of some of the vaccines. It's important to remember that,  you know, fish farming has actually advanced quite a lot. A lot of the bacterial diseases  have been very successfully controlled with vaccines. This is mainly due in fact to the  
**[0:18:02-0:18:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:18:02):**  drive and the innovation of the fish farms themselves. You can enclose them in a smaller  container. You can put some anesthetic in the water to make them drowsy or completely  anesthetised, and then you'll inject individual fish and you'll have teams of, you know, teams  of vaccinators doing that. And this is hugely successful, very, very successful. And it's  really got rid of a lot of bacterial and viral diseases.  
**[0:18:30-0:18:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:18:30):**  Toby. But they are actually just injected in the  same way that we might be.  David. Yeah. There are one or two vaccines that can  be given by the fish being bathed in the product. So, the vaccines applied to water in a concentrated  form and then the fish are plunged into it for a few seconds up to a minute or two. And  
**[0:18:48-0:18:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:18:48):**  that's usually absorbed through the gills. It's not as successful and most vaccines are  still given by injection. There are other in-feed compounds. There's a city-like compound  which is given in feed. The way that all these in-feed compounds are, they're usually mixed  in with the feed at the mill or else they're coated on the surface of the pellets.  David. So, that's one sort of pollution, you know, is the medicines and handling of medicines,  
**[0:19:13-0:19:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:19:13):**  treatments like that. There's another kind of pollution as well, isn't there?  David. There's the pollution that you get from waste  feed. And this can be quite considerable, really. I'm not going to put a figure on it,  Finlow, because it varies very much, really. But there's huge, huge amounts of feed given  to a population of fish. You know, there can be hundreds of thousands of fish in that farm  
**[0:19:36-0:19:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:19:36):**  all producing waste feed. So, you can imagine the amount of excrement, faeces that are produced,  which has got an environmental effect. A number of fish, the biomass, the total biomass of  fish on a farm and the medicines that are used and all the drugs are very carefully  controlled by, in Scotland, by SEPA, Scottish Environmental Protection Agency. And there  is an equivalent in England, Norway, Ireland, Chile, Canada. They've all got these and they  
**[0:20:05-0:20:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:20:05):**  are carefully controlled. The most important thing is that the numbers, the total biomass  is controlled. And this is so that the water doesn't become polluted.  And what happens if it does become polluted? Is this where you get kind of blue-green algae  and things like that? Yeah, exactly. That's what happens. Well,  if it gets polluted, the fish don't grow. Often the pollutants, as you say, you'll get  
**[0:20:25-0:20:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:20:25):**  plankton formed. So, your oxygen crashes. And then this is a sort of a vicious cycle  because then there's not enough oxygen for the fish and the fish could start dying. And  as the fish die, it even strips out more oxygen out of the water. So, it can be a cascade  of serious events. I'm interested in the biomass point that  you made. Because, you know, it's just in terms of trying to imagine this, because obviously  
**[0:20:48-0:20:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:20:48):**  a fish farm is mostly underneath the water. Mostly we don't see what's there. So, on an  average fish farm, what sort of tonnage of fish are we talking about?  Well, you could look at a farm and it could have maybe half a million. This is a sort  of a big, but not huge farm. Half a million, four kilogram fish. So, you know, you can  do the maths. It's a huge, huge, huge amount of oxygen.  
**[0:21:12-0:21:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:21:12):**  And by the time you're talking about waste feed and the waste that comes from those fish,  that's potentially a lot of waste that has to be managed. I mean, we're talking kind  of small, like a small town or something. Yeah. You know, and you know what, you're  right to question me on this because I think it's one of the challenging areas of farming.  And this is a private, well, like the rest of this conversation really. It's all, it's  
**[0:21:34-0:21:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:21:34):**  just my opinions, but this in particular is my own private opinion. And so I wonder really  whether we're farming salmon in the right place. You know, we're looking at sheltered  coastal areas for salmon in Scotland. In Norway, they're grown in fields, again, sheltered  coastal areas. Okay. There's a move to move them a little bit offshore, but you know,  they're still within sight of land and they've still got the shelter of an island or two  
**[0:22:00-0:22:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:22:00):**  around about them, you know? So they're not really, certainly they're not oceanic by any  means. And we've grown them in these areas for the very obvious reason that it's close  to the shore. They're easy to get to. More importantly, that there's good shelter from  the weather. I did touch on it earlier about how important it was that the wind and the  waves and the storms are not so severe that they're going to damage the cages, damage  
**[0:22:24-0:22:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:22:24):**  the nets and damage the fish. And that does happen even now, quite often. So to cut, you  know, to get back to the original, what I'm trying to say really is if I was starting  to farm in Scotland, Norway, I would be looking at farming in the middle of the ocean. It  would be a very different system. It would be more in line with what oil rigs look like.  There probably wouldn't be nets, but maybe steel structures that the fish are in.  
**[0:22:51-0:23:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:22:51):**  Jason Vale It is happening with the industry, but you  know what? It's not being actually pursued. And the reason is because where we farm them  at the moment, there's enough profits to make money without doing this, without moving them  offshore. But if there was an environmental demand, or there was a commercial demand because  it wasn't sustainable any longer to farm them in these conditions, then they would have  
**[0:23:25-0:23:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:23:25):**  to look at alternative way parts of growing them. The problem is that even in sheltered  Scottish sea locks, there have been some sites that have had to be closed down because you  haven't had the water exchange, the oxygen's depleted to such a level that you can't farm  salmon in them. And the planktonic plumes have been such that the fish have been killed.  And presumably if you went out into the deep ocean, then that transfer, you could have  
**[0:23:51-0:23:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:23:51):**  a relatively large amount of waste products, but because you've got that immense wash through  by comparison, it wouldn't have anything like the same impact.  Jason Vale Absolutely. Don't forget, you're talking  to a vet and not a fish farmer. You know, I'm not involved in the commercial imperatives  in this, but this is my vision of the future. And I think it will happen as well without  
**[0:24:14-0:24:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:24:14):**  a doubt that we will have to move out of these coastal areas. It's not just the actual pollution  from feed and medicines either. It's also the impact of disease. There's much more.  Sea lice, which we haven't touched on yet, and I'm sure you'll be asking me about this.  A lot of the wild fish around the ages introduces the sea lice at some stages into the life  cycle of the salmon. And studies do show that there's not the same levels of infestation  
**[0:24:45-0:24:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:24:45):**  in wild fish out in the ocean. Jason Vale  You mentioned, Tony, that you're a vet and not a fish farmer. And that comes onto something  else that we've talked about in the past, where you said that the scale of the profits  within the industry can drive bad practice. We touched on this slightly earlier when you  were talking about the acceptable percentage of mortalities as far as the industry is concerned.  
**[0:25:08-0:25:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:25:08):**  Tony Crowley Well, I hope I didn't use those exact words  because it's a bit harsh. I don't think that the profitability drives bad practice. I think  it lets bad practice off the hook to a certain extent, which is a slightly different way  of looking at it, I think. Everybody wants to get 100% survival. And of course you don't  do. There'll always be some losses inevitably. It's just keeping them to a minimum, really.  
**[0:25:31-0:25:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:25:31):**  But what I mean by it is that to a large extent, and it's quite acceptable, a fish farming  is a commercial industry and it's got to be profitable. It's got to be seen to make money  for the farm, for the shareholders. If the price of the fish is such that you can still  make money and lose 30% of your fish, that will encourage people to keep using the same  systems that they always have done. Jason Vale  
**[0:25:59-0:26:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:25:59):**  But having decent profits must also have a flip side. There's the opportunity in an industry  that's relatively profitable to invest in research and development.  David  And fish farming has done that. There's one thing that they can really hold their head  up about, and a lot of other things as well. They're always driving forward research and  
**[0:26:17-0:26:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:26:17):**  developments and looking at things like insect protein, trying to predict disease outbreaks  by looking at the bacterial films on cages. There's lots of good things happening in these  areas. So I'm not too critical about the industry. I'm just looking at it from my own personal  long view that I think if the price of salmon came down to a lower level, but it wasn't  quite as profitable, I think maybe, you know, we might have to look at, we might have to  
**[0:26:46-0:26:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:26:46):**  have a complete reappraisal of how we farm these fish really.  Jason Vale  Another area that we've touched on, you know, we talked about disease. We know that that's  a big issue or can be a big issue for the fish that are clustered together, where, you  know, there are some fish in a farm and there are wild fish as well, bringing in, you know,  
**[0:27:02-0:27:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:27:02):**  external factors. But sea lice in particular is something that regularly hits the news  in relation to aquaculture. I wonder if you could talk to me about how much of a problem  sea lice are.  David  It is a problem. And it's a problem touching on the things that we've already mentioned  
**[0:27:18-0:27:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:27:18):**  really. There's wild fish round and about who will infest the caged fish, usually the  salmon. And because there's a lot of animals in a small area, the numbers of lice will  grow very, very quickly exponentially. And managing them is really difficult. Now, because  of the interaction between the salmon on farms and wild fish and going back from farm fish  back to maybe wild sea trout and the effect it might have on them, there's been a lot  
**[0:27:46-0:27:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:27:46):**  of legislation that's been put into place in all the farming countries that the lice  levels have got to be very low. This is enacted in legislation. So it means that there's  an awful lot more treatments going on, sea lice treatments.  David  And how does sea lice get treated? What happens?  
**[0:28:02-0:28:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:28:02):**  David  Two main methods really, most of it is by bath treatments. The cage will be enclosed  in a tarpaulin and a waterproof tarpaulin to stop the ingress of any water from the  outside. And then chemicals put into the water and that kills the sea lice. And essentially  they are different forms of insecticide type products, ectoparasiticides.  
**[0:28:25-0:28:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:28:25):**  David  And what happens to that treated water when it's been used?  David  Yeah, good point. Until recently, the tarpaulin was just released and it was left to wash  out into the environment. That's why the treatments were very carefully controlled on the levels  
**[0:28:39-0:28:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:28:39):**  of the environmental impact from the chemicals. There has been in the last two or three years  some innovation where fish are treated in well boats. They are pumped into well boats,  treated in the well boats, and then the water that's used there is captured and the chemical  is stripped out of the water. This is quite an exciting innovation.  David  
**[0:29:02-0:29:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:29:02):**  There's a product called CleanTreat, isn't there, that I think does that work?  David  Yeah, that's the one I'm talking about. It could work for a lot of bath treatments. It's  not without its cost because you've got to use a well boat. So it does increase the cost  of treatment a lot. Of course, it'll only work if the chemical works and some of these  
**[0:29:19-0:29:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:29:19):**  chemicals become ineffective. The lice become resistant to some of these chemicals. So we  do have the problem that we've got to use one treatment and then another and another.  And you probably read in the press recently about the antibiotic resistance that you're  getting in man and the problems that we have, the critical antibiotics are being mopped  up so quickly. You can read across to see lice treatments just the same. We have got  
**[0:29:46-0:29:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:29:46):**  these big problems. There are other couple of treatments now where the fish is subjected  to an increased temperature, but very, very quickly, just for seconds. So it's about 30  degrees centigrade. And the other one is maybe brushing the lice off the fish with soft brushes.  But both these do have major welfare issues and they can damage the fish. It's a huge  challenge because the lice come from the outside, from the external conditions, and they've  
**[0:30:13-0:30:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:30:13):**  got to be treated so often to keep the numbers low for the sake of the legislation. And it's  doing the fish no good at all. And I think this is one of the biggest concerns we have.  And it's a vicious circle then really, because if you get these kinds of conditions, the  fish become poor, they become damaged, and then other diseases that occur as well. I  just want to mention that there are environmental conditions, especially some gill diseases,  
**[0:30:38-0:30:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:30:38):**  bacterial gill diseases, parasitic gill diseases like amoeba, which are increasingly common.  And again, these are to a certain extent related to the environment that the fish are living  in, which does bring me back to are we farming salmon in the right parts of the seawater?  Tony, I also wanted to ask you about slaughter. Now, wild fish caught at sea are taken from  the water and they essentially suffocate in the air, don't they? And sometimes processing  
**[0:31:07-0:31:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:31:07):**  even begins before they die. If this happened to land-based animals like cattle and pigs,  then there would be a public outcry. And it seems that this is an area where fish farms  can do better and do do better. For example, a lot of fish are now stunned before slaughter.  And so what I'm wondering is if you could talk us through that stunning process and  whether this happens across the board for all species, or whether there's still quite  
**[0:31:32-0:31:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:31:32):**  a wide variance in slaughter between species and around the world.  It's interesting really. Again, there's different sorts of methods for different species. What's  technically possible for a big four kilogram salmon? It's much more difficult for a half  a kilogram table size rainbow trout. Let's look at Atlantic salmon to begin with. Yes,  you're right. Now at this present day, all the salmon that are killed for food are stunned,  
**[0:31:59-0:32:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:31:59):**  usually a percussive stun, that's a bang on the head, and then they're unconscious and  then the gills are cut and the fish bleeds out before it recovers consciousness. The  fish are usually pumped onto a table from the cages. The water is coming one way and  the fish swim against it, which is just the natural way that fish do. And as the fish  swim against the current, they end up by going down the pipe getting stunned, usually automatically  
**[0:32:23-0:32:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:32:23):**  these days, but not always. And then they are, the gills are cut. I haven't seen this  method, but I was just talking to a colleague yesterday who was telling me about a modification  of this and quite an exciting one really, where the fish are given a small electrical  shock before the stunning process, which means the fish are much quieter, more relaxed and  easier to stun. That's quite interesting, I think. And it does exemplify the way fish  
**[0:32:51-0:32:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:32:51):**  farms and the industry generally are all the time looking to improve their practices.  Shouts are differently smaller and trout in this country, and I can only really speak  about this country because I haven't seen, well, this country in Europe anyway, fish  are killed by an electrical stunning method. Stunning a fish in seawater is quite difficult  than stunning a fish electrically in freshwater and voltages and the waveforms are quite different.  
**[0:33:17-0:33:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:33:17):**  So we've got to be, it is quite specific for these rainbow trout, but they go up a pipe  and there's electrodes there and they end up by the fish being dead at the end of it.  They are actually killed rather than just stunned because little fish don't get the  gills cut.  Although slaughter method, which I want to mention is bass and bream in the Mediterranean  
**[0:33:38-0:33:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:33:38):**  countries and water. Bass and bream generally speaking can't be grown in the UK, but they  do very well in the Mediterranean countries and further south. These again, as you see,  you've seen them probably on the fishmonger slab fin, they're quite small fish, table  sized and the way that they are harvested, killed in there is that they are netted out  of the water or pumped out and they go straight into ice slurry. This immobilises them to  
**[0:34:05-0:34:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:34:05):**  a large extent. There's a huge temperature drop going down to somewhere between two and  four degrees centigrade. So the fish are actually pretty immobilised, but they're not. And studies  have shown that these fishes are not dead. Hearts are beating and they still actually  have got brainwaves, cerebral function to show that they are actually are conscious.  So they're conscious, sentient, alive, just not moving.  
**[0:34:29-0:34:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:34:29):**  Yeah, exactly. They'll probably be a bit of movement, but not a lot really. And because  they're at such a low temperature, they can actually, these fish remember, as I was saying  before, they are, they're slaves to their external environment to a large extent. So  at these temperatures, their requirements for oxygen are very low, so they can stay  alive for ages and ages. So often these fish will end up in the processing factory and  
**[0:34:52-0:34:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:34:52):**  they might still be alive. And then in which case they will be gutted alive, which is,  you know, similar to what happens on wild trawlers. But we're not comparing these because  these are fish under our care, these farmed fish.  So even within Europe, there is quite a wide variety. So when we're talking about trout  and salmon, you know, usually we would expect those animals to be stunned before slaughter,  
**[0:35:18-0:35:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:35:18):**  the gill cutting, but when it comes to bass and bream in the Mediterranean and warmer  waters, you know, we're quite a different situation with fish being put into ice slurry,  still alive, still sentient, and then potentially processed alive.  That's right. Exactly. Yeah. And I think it's a concern really. This is the way that they  used to, when I started looking at going to fish farms and I'm an old man, so it was a  
**[0:35:42-0:35:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:35:42):**  long time ago, but you know, the rainbow trout were killed just by leaving them to die in  air or they were killed the way that bass and bream are done now. And it's great that  these things have changed and improved so much. As you said in your introduction, it's  a relatively new industry and things have improved a lot, but I'm an old man in a hurry  and I'd like to see quite a few other things changed as well. You know, if necessary, if  
**[0:36:04-0:36:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:36:04):**  we can't control sea lice and planktonic blooms in some of these sea locks and fields, well,  I'm sorry, we just shouldn't be farming there, you know, simple as that.  Now, you talked quite a lot about the idea of fish farm moving away from the coastlines  and out into the deep ocean to help with a whole range of the challenges that we've discussed.  If that happened and if it did move out into deeper waters, do you think there may be an  
**[0:36:30-0:36:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:36:30):**  opportunity to develop smaller polyculture fish farms, regenerative systems, if you like,  based on perhaps shellfish and kelp along those coastlines where big aquaculture systems  currently exist?  Yeah, I think that's right because they don't have the same environmental impact. I think  that's very true. You know, there's a lot of areas that some shellfish, mussel farming  
**[0:36:50-0:36:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:36:50):**  actually removes a lot of the plankton and the single-celled animals, you know, and that's  what they use, that's what they grow on. So yes, and kelp as well, I think it's quite  possible, really. I think the other thing as well is, and it does happen in some countries,  that we could be looking at a polyculture, that we don't just have carnivorous species  at the top, but we might have shellfish or urchins or other species, aquaculture species  
**[0:37:14-0:37:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:37:14):**  below their eating and growing on the byproducts of the fin fish above them. So yeah, I think  these are areas which haven't really been developed enough.  But they're conversations that could happen within the industry?  Yeah, it's conversations that should be happening as well. And you know, as I say, fish farming  in itself has been very innovative and there's a lot of credit to these areas, you know,  
**[0:37:38-0:37:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:37:38):**  while it's still so profitable, these are the areas that we should be looking more and  more at.  Tony, that's been fantastic. It's been so fascinating listening to you, a real insight  into the industry and the issues and challenges that it's facing. That's all we have time  for. I'm afraid I'd like to thank my guest, Tony Wall, the founder of the Fish Vet Group.  
**[0:37:56-0:38:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:37:56):**  This programme is part of a series in which we're talking about the future of ocean  food. If you've enjoyed listening, please come back and listen to more, tell your friends,  like us, review us and share our links.  Farmgate is a partnership project for Farmwell and FAI Farms. We're funded by San Calpa  and you can join the conversation on Twitter by searching for Farmgate podcast. I've  
**[0:38:16-0:38:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Aquaculture---An-insiders-view-e109odg#t=0:38:16):**  been Finn Loceystane. Bye for now.  