### Farm Gate  (2022-57-19)
**[0:00:00-0:00:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to Farmgate. I'm Finlow Kustain, the Chief Executive of Farmwell and founder  of the Food and Global Security Network.  Carbon tunnel vision is a nasty disease and can create a strongly distorted perspective  on agricultural land use and food production. This programme will help to remedy the condition  by showing that land use decisions are complex. I'm joined by Adele Jones, the Executive  
**[0:00:26-0:00:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:00:26):**  Director of the Sustainable Food Trust and by Ashley Bright, a food systems and sustainability  scientist based in New Zealand. Welcome both. Ash, from your perspective, why is carbon  tunnel vision a problem?  So I think the main issue is that the focus on carbon or on carbon footprints of food  is often used as a proxy for environmental or ecosystem impacts. So the environment covers,  
**[0:00:50-0:00:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:00:50):**  you know, a load of different things like biodiversity loss, freshwater use, soil erosion.  But these don't always get measured, reported or discussed. And it's also often used as  a proxy for sustainability. And sustainability is much broader. It includes animal wellbeing,  human wellbeing, as well as ecosystem wellbeing. And food production influences and it's influenced  by so many factors. And it's more complex than, you know, just to focus on carbon. By  
**[0:01:19-0:01:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:01:19):**  focusing on just one issue, you know, albeit is a really critical and important issue,  we could make decisions based on our purchasing or our land use without, you know, a complete  picture or a complete understanding of what's actually going on.  So we've got this situation where the carbon element is presented as the most important  and often a lot of this other information just simply isn't there. So in terms of being  
**[0:01:43-0:01:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:01:43):**  a customer, it's extremely difficult to make an informed choice. Now, Adele, you've been  leading on the global farm metric at the Sustainable Food Trust for several years now. Would it  be fair to say that your work aims to be the antidote to carbon tunnel vision?  Absolutely. As Ash was alluding to, farming and food systems are made up of a whole load  of cycles and dependencies. And actually you cannot make a decision using one single metric  
**[0:02:08-0:02:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:02:08):**  such as carbon dioxide equivalents without factoring in the economic implications, the  social implications, and of course the other environmental implications, for example, such  as those as nature, water pollution, air pollution, or even things like animal welfare. So we  need to start looking at the future of food and agriculture in this much more holistic,  complete picture sense.  
**[0:02:31-0:02:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:02:31):**  And before we go into the global farm metric in more detail, I just wonder if we could  look at where this problem of carbon tunnel vision comes from, because it's something  that's being picked up quite a lot in social media at the moment. And Ash, it seems to  me there's a piece of research by Joseph Poore and Thomas Nemechek, which epitomises the  issue. And I just wonder if you could talk us through that research.  
**[0:02:53-0:02:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:02:53):**  Ash  Yeah, so it's a few years old now. It came out in 2018 and it looked at the environmental  impact of a wide range of foods. So plants and animal proteins, palm oil, wine, chocolate,  fruits, vegetables, and it was significant because it was so large. So it consolidated  global data, something like 1500 lifecycle analyses or LCAs on 38,000 farms, and it used  
**[0:03:20-0:03:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:03:20):**  one consistent methodology. And this is important because lifecycle analyses, you know, globally  have used different methods. And so it's been quite difficult to compare between countries  or between farms or, you know, between systems. So lifecycle analyses are a way to assess  the environmental impacts of food over the whole course of that food's life. So from  farm to fork or farm to retail or shop. And they're basically an inventory of all the  
**[0:03:51-0:03:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:03:51):**  inputs that's gone into producing that product like feed or machinery, and all the outputs.  So things like manure, meat, emissions, crops, and then at all the different stages of the  supply chain, it records the environmental impacts. So the Pura Nemechek paper actually  looked at five different environmental impacts, but the one that has received all the attention  is the carbon footprint. And here for plant and animal proteins, they presented the KGs  
**[0:04:24-0:04:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:04:24):**  of carbon equivalents per 100 grams of protein, and then extrapolating sort of at a global  level and using averages just for each of the food products, so beef or chicken or milk  or tofu, they propose that moving to a diet that reduces animal products could spare something  like 3 billion hectares of land and reduce greenhouse gas emissions from food by 49%.  And so the media headlines that followed sort of condemned livestock production, and then  
**[0:04:53-0:04:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:04:53):**  other sites like Our World in Data, which is a really well respected data visualization  site, picked up the study and has used that for its own graphs and analyses.  Jason Vale,  the  next  
**[0:06:09-0:06:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:06:09):**  average, you can't determine what it is within that product that's causing something to be  lower or higher. So you can't see the differentiation between systems of how that product is actually  being produced.  Mason, and of course one of the other challenges with the work is that it was produced before  Professor Miles Allen published his research around methane and revised the global warming  
**[0:06:31-0:06:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:06:31):**  potential metric that's standardly used for assessing the carbon impact of different greenhouse  gases. So it's still using GWP 100, which overemphasises the role of methane as opposed  to GWP star, the revised metric, which shows that methane has a much lower impact in farm  systems.  Yeah, that's right. It just used GWP 100. It didn't use GWP star, which would have changed  
**[0:06:59-0:07:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:06:59):**  the averages for beef somewhat, more for ruminants in general somewhat.  And Adele, why is it that you think this research has been so influential?  Well, firstly, just to say I really respect Joseph Paul and Thomas Nemechek. I think they're  great academics. I was lucky enough to spend the day with Joseph to explore his new project  or newish project now Hestia. So really excited to be working closely with him to hopefully  
**[0:07:25-0:07:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:07:25):**  remedy some of these difficulties that we've been talking about by linking up Hestia and  the global farm metric. But I think it became so popular for a few reasons. Firstly, as  Ash said, it was a huge global analysis looking at a whole load of different products. So  it really sparked the interest of a lot of people. It also came out of two very reputable  institutions, but also because we're always looking for silver bullet answers, particularly  
**[0:07:51-0:07:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:07:51):**  the media, they like a headline. And this report really gave them some headlines, in  this case, looking at the carbon dioxide equivalents of kilograms of products. And of course, suggesting  that beef had a huge environmental impact. And really saying eat less meat is a bit like  saying eat less plants. It's way too simplistic. There's a whole load of variation between  different farming systems. And we really need to take that into account in future.  
**[0:08:17-0:08:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:08:17):**  Jason Vale,  Absolutely. And I think the issue with farming is there is a bit of a data gap, to be honest,  in terms of the impacts of different farming systems. For example, with grass-based livestock,  there's quite a big data gap actually on the soil carbon sequestration potential of, for  example, what we call mob grazing, which is where animals mimic through human management,  
**[0:08:59-0:09:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:08:59):**  the herd instincts of large herds that used to roam the plains of the savannas in North  America and Africa, for example. And I think, obviously, that then isn't factored into government  decision making. And so I think we've got a challenge ahead of us and an opportunity,  you could say, to fill some of those data gaps so that future decisions, whether it's  market-based or policy-based, can take into account this nuance in terms of the different  
**[0:09:23-0:09:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:09:23):**  farming systems and the impacts they have.  Jason Vale,  You talked about the time that you'd spent with Poirot and Nemechek. And I wonder, do  you think that they're aware of some of the challenges that came out of the work that  they did and are aware of perhaps some of the anger towards that work from people within  
**[0:09:41-0:09:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:09:41):**  the livestock rearing community?  Alesha Campbell, Yeah, absolutely. I do. And I think they completely recognise that using  these global averages with huge error bars is actually quite dangerous in terms of decision  making. So they're definitely looking to improve on  those models and try and pool as much data as possible to start then looking at different  
**[0:10:03-0:10:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:10:03):**  scenarios and playing with different metrics and indicators to see whether that changes  some of the results. And so Hestia, as far as I understand it, and I'm probably going  to do a disservice, sorry, Joseph, is basically a huge portal of lifecycle analysis data that  then uses all the different models that exist, poor and never check model being one, but  of course, the IPCC model being another, and there's plenty of others as well. And it then  
**[0:10:30-0:10:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:10:30):**  uses these different models and uses the data to look at different scenarios, basically.  So we can start to build up, hopefully, a more nuanced understanding of the impact of  these products, these farming systems, different regions around the world.  Ash, one of the metrics that keeps coming up when people are presenting the idea of  feed efficiency and that intensively produced food can produce more calories, for example,  
**[0:10:57-0:11:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:10:57):**  for less carbon, is the metric of feed conversion efficiency. Can you talk to us about what  that is and why that's become important?  Yeah, so feed conversion efficiency or feed conversion ratio is often abbreviated to FCR.  So it's the basis of a lot of comparisons of livestock systems. And it's also a key  input into lifecycle analysis because feed is such a large component of lifecycle analysis.  
**[0:11:24-0:11:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:11:24):**  So species like chicken and salmon, they have much lower FCRs than species like beef. And  that's because they can grow very quickly when fed foods like cereals and soy. That  is, they convert feed to meat. So it's an input to output ratio based on quantity. So  it's an efficiency metric, essentially. And so it's one of the reasons why livestock like  chicken have lower carbon footprints than extensively kept beef. But what it doesn't  
**[0:11:55-0:12:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:11:55):**  factor in, though, is sort of where and how that feed was produced. And there, I guess  there's arguments and value judgments to be made as to things like whether it's OK to  import soy from the Amazon to feed chickens or cereals from land that could grow crops  to feed humans directly. And how important is the role that cattle have in converting  grass that humans can't eat to meat and milk? And I guess that relates back to my earlier  
**[0:12:23-0:12:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:12:23):**  point about what systems the animals are raised in and the broader range of impacts other  than carbon, just to get a complete picture.  So is it that the feed conversion ratio really speaks to a challenge that government sees  and policymakers see, that they're facing a growing population, that they're facing  a climate crisis, and therefore they feel that it's a good thing that they can produce  
**[0:12:48-0:12:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:12:48):**  this food faster and more efficiently. But the problem is that it distorts this larger  message.  They're just one type of metric, aren't they? They're just a metric around efficiency. And  they are almost always based on quantity of output. So FCR would be the equivalent to  yield from crop systems. And they are going to drive intensification because they're looking  
**[0:13:12-0:13:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:13:12):**  at this ratio of inputs to outputs. It's through this negative lens to do reduced harm, essentially.  It seems to me that once again, this comes back to different visions of land use. And  the feed conversion ratio and the lifecycle assessment are part of a sort of spreadsheet  efficiency that supports land sparing, but which doesn't really work in terms of practical  or sustainable, certainly multi-outcome land use.  
**[0:13:38-0:13:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:13:38):**  I guess, as I said, I think efficiency metrics, they are going to drive intensification because  they're just focused on the quantity of output. But on a practical basis for land use, your  starting point for the discussion is what land you have. What can you do with that particular  area of land, with its climate, with its soil type? And I feel that surely we can be a bit  more ambitious than just the quantity of food that we need to produce from that land. It's  
**[0:14:05-0:14:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:14:05):**  not just about the least impact of greenhouse gas emissions.  Maybe a question to ask is what can we do to maximise the benefits across a wide range  of areas? What can we do to maximise the nutrition, maximise the animal welfare from that piece  of land, maximise the carbon sequestration and the soil health? And I think if that's  the basis for food and farming that's considered sustainable, it might not be so attractive  
**[0:14:31-0:14:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:14:31):**  to grow hundreds of hectares of one crop. Because we're not just focused on the negatives  of reducing our impact. We're looking at how can we maximise the benefits. So maybe growing  multiple crops or integrating trees and livestock would produce a better outcome across a broader  range.  Now I'm certain that when Poor and Nemechek began their research, they clearly weren't  
**[0:14:52-0:14:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:14:52):**  setting out to produce something which has been used by companies and corporations to  support business as usual. And we've already discussed that the research itself was much  more complex than some of the messages that came out of that. But still, I wonder what  it is, Ash, about our scientific processes that means that people, academics, probably  with good intentions, end up delivering something which is either distorting in and of itself  
**[0:15:18-0:15:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:15:18):**  or which lends itself to distortion by simplifications in the way that it's communicated.  Well, the scientific process is about formulating questions and then making predictions. And  then you test those predictions. And over time, you end up building sort of a body of  evidence. But a greenhouse gas emissions lifecycle analysis, for example, it ends up being quite  a simple model of this incredibly complex food system because it has to reduce it down  
**[0:15:48-0:15:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:15:48):**  to its component parts of inputs and outputs and impacts. And we don't quite yet understand  the whole story of how our food production interacts with the ecosystem and all the biological  processes that are involved. Yet we need to break it down into these component parts and  look at certain factors in isolation. And I think it's worth sort of stepping back.  And then you look at the whole picture and you have a holistic framework of issues and  
**[0:16:14-0:16:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:16:14):**  you question maybe where does that bit of research fit into this holistic picture? What  does that piece of evidence tell us? What behaviours or practices is that metric or is  that research going to drive? And ultimately, lifecycle analyses and carbon footprints,  they're just one tool. As Adele said, this research has stimulated an awful lot of debate  and it's not like it's stopped there and nothing else has happened. I was reading a paper just  
**[0:16:41-0:16:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:16:41):**  the other day that rather than looking at 100 grams of protein as the output, looked  at the quality of the protein, so greenhouse gas emissions per unit of protein quality.  And it came out with different rankings to the Pura Nemechek paper. And it was only possible  because of the data set that they had and the data set that they produced. So it has  been used to stimulate and generate different research and starting to build that more complete  
**[0:17:10-0:17:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:17:10):**  picture.  So there's a degree to which it doesn't matter if the research takes us in a way that's unexpected  or a way that seems in and of itself slightly distorting because that provides an opportunity  for future research to pick up on that and make a correction.  Yeah, exactly. So, you know, the data set that they have is incredibly useful and it's  
**[0:17:33-0:17:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:17:33):**  consolidated, you know, just with one methodology. And it's about understanding that it isn't  the whole message, that it's just part of the message and that we just have to keep  building our evidence and building our knowledge and not accept that these simple messages  that come out in the media are the whole story. There is always more to know, especially when  we have such complex food systems and biological processes at play.  
**[0:18:00-0:18:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:18:00):**  Adele, I'm thinking about the balance between the speed of academic research and the delivery  of this process that we're talking about here and the need for policy to move at a more  rapid pace. There seems to me to be a huge disconnect here that the perhaps slightly  sluggish way that the academic community moves because research takes time and because those  natural corrections might take place over a number of years. But you've got governments  
**[0:18:29-0:18:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:18:29):**  trying to deal with a number of global crises in a short space of time between elections.  And there are always going to be this natural disconnect and this challenge for policymakers  to deal with.  I think you're right. I think there always will be that challenge and that friction,  I suppose, between having peer-reviewed academic research and then needing to make progress  
**[0:18:53-0:19:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:18:53):**  on issues. And I think what's needed within policymaking is, I suppose, a practical approach  to these sorts of issues where you're matching up the academic research with what's really  happening on the ground. And perhaps in some cases, it might be slightly more anecdotal.  Farmers are saying, look, we've been doing this for years and we're seeing these impacts.  It might not have been published in a journal by Oxford University, but you can genuinely  
**[0:19:20-0:19:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:19:20):**  see that by implementing certain practices or using different farming techniques that  really serious impacts, hopefully in a positive way, are being had. So I just think policymakers  need to be practical. And I've seen that in action. For example, I spent a year working  for Defra on Succomment and then I spent a year working for the Welsh government on Succomment.  And I have to say that the way that the Welsh government were making policy decisions was  
**[0:19:46-0:19:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:19:46):**  by being very proactive about speaking to farmers on the ground. And I really think  that's a much better way of thinking about the future of these new schemes, for example,  that are going to support farmers in future. It's matching up the scientific evidence with  what's happening on the ground. And there might be a little bit of disconnect, but we  shouldn't let perfect be the enemy of the good here.  
**[0:20:06-0:20:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:20:06):**  I wonder if you think that there is a problem when it comes to communicating agroecology  and regenerative farming, that we can't just draw a simple graph and say, this is good,  this is bad. The Global Farm Metric, for example, has 33 largely outcome-based measures across  11 different categories. And that's not straightforward at all, is it?  Exactly right. And I think this is exactly what we need to move away from the, this is  
**[0:20:30-0:20:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:20:30):**  good, this is bad, very binary approach to looking at different farming systems. And  so with the Global Farm Metric, we try and take that very holistic view. And it does  have 11 categories of assessment at the moment and three key indicators under each one. So  you look at it and could feel quite overwhelmed. But our hope is that by trying to collect  this data, trying to encourage farmers to engage with this data, it will give us that  
**[0:20:55-0:20:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:20:55):**  much fuller picture. And of course, there's different interfaces. Not everyone is going  to want to look at all the data. For example, farmers might need to go into much more detailed  management data. And a buyer might want to look at a slightly kind of aggregated view  of that data when they're making decisions. So it's, we're not saying that every, every  person in the food system needs to understand the granularity of the Global Farm Metric  
**[0:21:20-0:21:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:21:20):**  data. But we are saying that people need to take a holistic view of agriculture when they're  making these decisions.  Mason, so just talk us through some of those categories and metrics. And, and if, you know,  you're having a conversation with the government or with a food company about how to apply  the Global Farm Metric, how do you start to advise them about how they prioritise perhaps  
**[0:21:39-0:21:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:21:39):**  different elements of it if they don't want to use the whole thing?  Bridget Finken We are trying to encourage them to look at  the whole spectrum of categories. What the point I was alluding to is that we were not  necessarily saying that everyone needs to go to the same level of detail. But just kind  of going back to where the project started, I suppose, because it provides some useful  
**[0:21:58-0:22:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:21:58):**  context. We started this project back in sort of 2015, 2016. So quite a long time ago now,  pre Brexit, pre a lot of the net zero commitments that most companies and organisations now  have. And it really started with a group of farmers saying, look, we're collecting all  this different data or doing all these different audits or assessments each year, whether it's  for certification, compliance, for receiving their BPS and stewardship payments, a whole  
**[0:22:27-0:22:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:22:27):**  load of different audits that many farmers are subjected to each year. And when we asked  them, I suppose, the killer question of does any of that information actually help you  make more informed decisions about how to be better in terms of sustainability each  year? The resounding answer from all of them was no, not really, you know, we might do  our certification for whether it's organic or retractor each year, but it doesn't really  
**[0:22:51-0:22:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:22:51):**  tell us if our soil health was any better or worse than it was last year, or our water  quality or our animal welfare. And I think that's the type of data that farmers are really  wanting to see now. And as you were saying, it's we need to move away from the black and  whiteness of good and bad, and instead look at it as a spectrum, which is okay, how can  we make small steps each year or each month or each day even, which allow us to be better  
**[0:23:14-0:23:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:23:14):**  across the spectrum of sustainability metrics. So we basically took that challenge and put  it back to the farmers and said, look, what do you all think you should be measuring and  reporting on each year? And let's not reinvent the wheel here. Let's let's use all the existing  data points, assessments, audits that already exist, and take the best bits from all of  them basically. And so fast forward to where we are now, six or seven years later, we have  
**[0:23:40-0:23:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:23:40):**  what we now call the global farm metric. And it's it's called that because we have aspirations  for this to become a globally common framework for measuring farm level sustainability. So  far, we've been focusing quite a lot on the UK. And we relaunched the project in 2020.  As a coalition, it now has I think, between 90 and 100 different organisations, part of  that coalition, all helping us to come up with these common metrics, so that we can  
**[0:24:07-0:24:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:24:07):**  all use that data in different ways to drive progress in the same direction. So actually,  it doesn't really matter if you want to call it regenerative, or agroecology, or climate  smart farming, or nature friendly farming, what we're looking at is the is the impact  of those production systems. So what's the soil health score? What's the water quality  score? What's the animal welfare score? What's the productivity score? So we're looking at  
**[0:24:29-0:24:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:24:29):**  all these different factors as part of a complete picture.  Jason Vale,  So we see the global farm metric having multiple uses, of course, as I was saying for farmers  to use as more of a management tool. And we're not we're not in the business of creating  technology here, we're really focused on on the framework. So it's up to the technology  
**[0:24:58-0:25:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:24:58):**  providers who are far better at this than we are to come up with those applications  of the global farm metrics, so say, but we hope it can be used by farmers in future as  a management tool. We also see it as an opportunity for governments to understand how and where  public goods are being delivered. So we're lobbying government quite hard at the moment  to introduce a annual sustainability assessment as a condition of receiving taxpayers money,  
**[0:25:25-0:25:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:25:25):**  something that the Welsh government have already committed to if their farm sustainability  review, which is great. But we're working with Defra and undertaking some elm tests  and trials, which I very much hope will still go ahead with everything going on at the moment.  But it could also be used by food companies and retailers to improve supply chain transparency,  and also finance and investors as well. There's a lot of talk at the moment about green financing,  
**[0:25:49-0:25:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:25:49):**  green loans, for example, and of course, natural capital investment, even carbon offsets and  biodiversity offsets, which I think could potentially be a force for good as long as  they're governed by these common metrics. And if that whole system are all using the  same metrics to drive change, I genuinely think it could be a game changer in speeding  up the transition to more sustainable, more regenerative agriculture. But your question  
**[0:26:12-0:26:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:26:12):**  was about disseminating this data for citizens, which I think is really, really important.  Ultimately, governments and companies will only act if they feel the heat from the general  public. So we need to provide people with this tool, I suppose, to be able to make decisions  about the food they're buying the food they're supporting. And again, we're not in this to  try and create a food label here. So we're working quite closely with the clear labeling  
**[0:26:33-0:26:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:26:33):**  group to try and lobby for common metrics behind future eco labels as they're referred  to. So the idea would be that whether you go into Tesco's in the UK, or Walmart in the  US or Woolworths in Australia, wherever you might be, you'll probably see an eco label  which is branded in a slightly different way. But it will be using the same metrics and  the same data behind it. So you can make genuine comparisons between that carrot versus that  
**[0:27:00-0:27:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:27:00):**  carrot, based on this holistic set of metrics. And as I said, it's currently got 11 categories  of assessment, I think they fall quite nicely into three sort of macro categories, which  is climate, nature, and health and well being. And I think if we can give consumers that  tool to make decisions based on those three kind of overarching categories, we could be  in a much better place in terms of allowing people to understand the relative sustainability  
**[0:27:24-0:27:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:27:24):**  of products.  Mason  Ultimately, do individual citizens need to take an interest and start understanding the  nuance rather than just hearing media messages that meat is good meat is bad, you know, and  reductionist stuff like that? Or is it that the companies that you're talking with will  
**[0:27:41-0:27:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:27:41):**  handle that complexity, and then these labels will reproduce a simplicity in the marketplace  for customers?  Hannah  I think ultimately, it will be both. I think there is a huge interest amongst the general  public now about wanting to do things which are going to make a difference. And there's  
**[0:27:57-0:28:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:27:57):**  always going to be a subset of the population who want to dig into more detail on this topic.  And I think we should allow them to do that by giving them the information they want to  see. Even if it means, you know, for example, there could be a QR code where you can go  and learn more about the complex data behind some of these farm level assessments. And  we do believe this should be coming from the farm up rather than academic models. But at  
**[0:28:20-0:28:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:28:20):**  the same time, I think there, you know, there's always going to be people who would rather  the, for example, the supermarkets choice edit for them. And, you know, Sainsbury's,  let's say, say, look, we want people to know that when they come into our store, there's  going to be a degree of quality and transparency about the food that we're selling. I think  ultimately it will be a mixture of both and we need to sort of embrace both approaches.  
**[0:28:40-0:28:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:28:40):**  But it's all about honesty, it's all about transparency, and it's all about holistic  measures.  Mason, which to an extent, I guess, Waitrose has done quite successfully just with its  Dutchy brand, that it's used the Dutchy brand as a proxy for greater sustainability.  Bridgette W  
**[0:29:01-0:29:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:29:01):**  When we're talking about this issue of nuance versus simplicity, bringing us back to the  academic community, scientists, you know, by their very nature, very often take something  which is quite big and quite complex, but then sort of try and extract, you know, one  element of it so they can research it in detail and answer a more simple question that goes  sort of back into the whole. So if the criticism of the scientific process is that it reduces  
**[0:29:42-0:29:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:29:42):**  complex challenges down to their component parts, and then perhaps fails to rejoin the  dots at times, or the communications teams fails to rejoin those dots, then the global  farm metric is clearly approaching the land use challenge in the opposite way. So I wonder  how academics and policymakers have responded to your work.  Bridgette W I mean, generally pretty, pretty positive.  
**[0:30:04-0:30:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:30:04):**  In terms of the academics, we've been actually working quite closely over the last six months  or so to really back up the farm level data collection with scientific evidence, because  of course, that's always going to be a criticism of, okay, well, if you're asking farmers to  collect this data, as we are at the moment, currently, the global farm metric is being  used as a self assessment by farmers, that you need to make sure that data is rigorous  
**[0:30:26-0:30:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:30:26):**  and credible. So we've been undertaking what we call a Delphi review over the last six  to eight months, which is where we put the metrics to a really diverse group of academics  and ask them for their opinions about how rigorous these these data points are. And  so I think it's about matching up the scientific credibility with with what farmers need to  make useful decisions on farm.  
**[0:30:47-0:30:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:30:47):**  David Pembroke Has the feedback been good?  Bridgette W The feedback has been good. I mean, it's  really good. As you can imagine, for example, the biodiversity category took weeks to go  through this scientific analysis, and I'm sure we're not finished yet. It's really difficult.  We're not saying this is easy at all, but we're only going to achieve it if we work  
**[0:31:03-0:31:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:31:03):**  together.  David Pembroke Fantastic. Ash, you've worked with people  from across a whole range of supply chains over the course of the last 20 years. Do you  see an appetite for moving away from single issue sustainability metrics and towards a  more meaningful whole system approach, you know, within those companies and food systems  
**[0:31:21-0:31:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:31:21):**  that you've been working in? And from an outside perspective, how practical do you think the  global farm metric is for people working in the food system?  Bridgette W Well, I guess as Adele mentioned before, I  think the global farm metric is helping to put all this complexity into context with  these 11 categories. And so whether you're a farmer or whether you're a food business,  
**[0:32:07-0:32:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:32:07):**  that you know, those categories are the same. In terms of measures, I think all you can  do is make a start. As Adele mentioned, it's not starting from scratch, you're not trying  to reinvent the wheel. You're taking data that already exists from farm management systems  from other audits and using that. And so it's building on that and taking it one step at  a time and doing what you can do. And I think honesty is really key in this whole debate  
**[0:32:35-0:32:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:32:35):**  as well. You know, being honest about the fact that it's hard and it's complex and that  we haven't really done it before and we haven't approached it like this before in this holistic  framework and we've got a lot to understand. And honesty that the food systems, you know,  making fundamental changes is really difficult and this all gives a picture from which citizens  can make better purchasing decisions and ultimately help drive that change. It's not going to  
**[0:33:00-0:33:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:33:00):**  come down to simple, binary, good and bad products.  Fantastic. That's been so interesting and thanks so much to both of you. That's all  we have time for. I'd like to thank my guests, Ashley Bright and Adele Jones. If you've enjoyed  listening, please come back and listen to more. Tell your friends, like us, review us  and share our links.  
**[0:33:19-0:33:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon-tunnel-vision-e1pfrsm#t=0:33:19):**  FarmGate is funded by San Calpa and you can join the conversation on Twitter by searching  for FarmGate podcast. I've been Finnlow Costayne. Bye for now.  