### Farm Gate  (2021-12-28)
**[0:00:00-0:00:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to Land Unlocked, a collaboration from the Food Farming and Countryside Commission  and the Farmgate podcast. I'm Fenlow Kastain, the chief executive of Farmwell, and in this  series I'm talking about land use, with influential figures from the UK and around the world in  the run-up to COP26 in Glasgow this November. In this programme we're focused on water.  As precipitation patterns change, how can we ensure consistent year-round water availability  
**[0:00:30-0:00:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:00:30):**  for crops and livestock, and how can we manage land better to reduce the risk of flooding  for downstream communities? Emma Howard-Boyd is the chair of the UK Environment Agency,  an ex officio board member of the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, and  was the UK commissioner to the Global Commission on Adaptation. Stuart Roberts is deputy president  of the National Farmers Union and an arable and livestock farmer in Hertfordshire. Stuart  
**[0:00:54-0:01:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:00:54):**  has also worked for Defra and the Food Standards Agency and previously served on the boards  of Red Tractor and AHDB. Welcome both. Morning Fenlow. Good morning, good to be here. Stuart,  let me come to you first. Thinking broadly in the UK, how has precipitation and the water  coming on to farms from surrounding land changed over the course of the last 20 years? Yeah,  over the course of the last 20 years, you've probably only got to think about the course  
**[0:01:20-0:01:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:01:20):**  of the last 20 months actually in some ways. And I think there is no two years that are  the same. I think if you go back, I look at my farm records that go back decades. I look  at my neighbours, which happened to be Wroclawthamsted Experimental Station, which go back over a  century plus. And we've always had variable weather, but what we are seeing, and I think  it is becoming ever more clear, is we're seeing more extremes and we're seeing them more frequently.  
**[0:01:47-0:01:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:01:47):**  So those that want real evidence of climate change, if you like, we are seeing that evidence.  So we're seeing more floods, we're seeing more droughts, but I suspect actually on average,  the total volume of rainfall is not massively wildly different, but when it comes is what's  important. So we are seeing more extremes of both dry and wet. And I think for me that  feeds straight into the discussion that hopefully we're going to have today about what do we  
**[0:02:17-0:02:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:02:17):**  need to put in place to deal with that very different set of circumstances rather than  it's a bit damp all 12 months of the year to it's very wet and it's very dry and how  can we move water, store water, etc. So I think it's going to be a fascinating discussion  I hope.  And it's interesting, isn't it? You mean you talk about evidence of climate change and  
**[0:02:39-0:02:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:02:39):**  of course there's probably few people in the country who are more aware of the changes  that we're seeing in terms of weather patterns.  I agree. I think, and I'm not sure if this is the right phrase, but I'll use it anyway.  I get quite excited about climate change actually, because I think on the one hand, we as farmers  are absolutely part of the solution. And I know from previous discussions that Emma and  
**[0:03:00-0:03:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:03:00):**  I have had on this, that farming is absolutely critical to solving some of the challenges  around climate change. I think that's a big opportunity for us, but you're absolutely  right. I can't think of any other sector of the economy, any other part of society,  arguably, that won't feel the effects, the real effects of climate change first. We can't  put our offices inside. It's one of the great things about farming is that actually  
**[0:03:25-0:03:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:03:25):**  dealing with the climate, dealing with weather and its variability is a challenge and it  also gives opportunities. But we are arguably, as I say, the first people to see that. And  therefore, as an industry, we have a responsibility to be a big part of the solution because actually  we're also the recipients of a big part of the problem and the consequences that come  from it.  
**[0:03:49-0:03:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:03:49):**  It's interesting framing because you talk there about farming being first, you know,  farmers being first responders really in the changes in patterns that we're facing and  how farmers respond as first responders has a huge impact on other people, whether there's  enough food available or indeed, as we're talking about today, whether that water hits  downstream communities and indeed whether you've got enough. So in terms of your farm,  
**[0:04:12-0:04:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:04:12):**  Stuart, has it changed the way that you manage water?  It has. And I say, look, just by a little bit of background. So I am 150 metres above  sea level. I'm 24 miles north of Marble Arch. We're pretty heavy clay, so we don't  suffer too badly with droughts and we're on top of a hill, so we don't suffer too badly  with floods. So if I go back 10 years, if somebody said to me, my farm has an impact  
**[0:04:36-0:04:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:04:36):**  of water, I sort of flippantly said, well, the reality is by the time my farm floods,  the whole of London is going to be under an awful lot of water before it gets to me and  there'll be a bigger problem. But actually, the more time I've spent with people who  are interested in this topic, I've become fascinated. So actually, I'm a real, I reckon  I must be one of the country's biggest enthusiasts around water now. I find it fascinating because  
**[0:04:57-0:05:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:04:57):**  what I've now got to understand much better is the importance of entire catchments, the  importance of it everywhere in the country. The fact that what happens on my farm does  have an impact. You may not see it on my farm, it may manifest itself downstream, it may  manifest itself in an urban area, it may manifest itself on somebody else's farm or in a commercial  operation. So actually, we've all got that responsibility to manage water and we've done  
**[0:05:20-0:05:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:05:20):**  a fair bit on our farm. So we have changed some of our cultivation techniques, we have  looked at putting in place some more permanent pasture. But probably the most exciting one  and the one I get really excited about, and this was over the period of the last year,  we've just put a fairly big investment in place in terms of effectively a new farm yard,  for want of a better word, it's a set of new buildings. And we're capturing every drop  
**[0:05:44-0:05:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:05:44):**  of water off that. And from my calculations so far, and so far it is proving itself, from  our farming operations, we will not have to use a drop of mains water for any of our farming  operations. That's fantastic.  And that clearly has a, look, there's an economic benefit to that, although I did spend a slightly  eye-watering amount of money on it. But the reality is there is an economic benefit, but  
**[0:06:06-0:06:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:06:06):**  it's also the right thing. It is doing my bit because otherwise that water is going  somewhere else. So I think there's great opportunities. And ultimately for me, the next big question  is how can I expand that across my existing buildings and then think about, well, I've  then got too much water, so should I be looking at some more water intensive cropping? So  actually I see big exciting projects around fruit veg, around nuts, around other areas  
**[0:06:32-0:06:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:06:32):**  where I've now got that water. So let's make the most of it.  It's interesting to think about retrofit in terms of farms, farm outbuildings and so on  as well.  That's why I started with the new building because it was a damn sight easier than fitting  it on the old building.  
**[0:06:46-0:06:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:06:46):**  Indeed. So you've got the new build, then you've got the retrofit, not just of the buildings,  but then there's also the kind of the retrofit of the way that you manage the land as well,  which will, which will make that difference. So Emma, the Environment Agency has a broad  range of responsibilities, of course, in relation to water. In terms of water and agricultural  land use, what are the Environment Agency's chief priorities?  
**[0:07:07-0:07:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:07:07):**  So really excited to be here today having this conversation with Stuart, because I think  what he's immediately drawn out is some of the practical things we can get on and do  around water. And one of the things we need, those of us focusing on water need to do is  make sure that water is way up the agenda alongside carbon, because it's such a, will  have such a huge impact in terms of how we cope with the changing weather patterns that  
**[0:07:42-0:07:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:07:42):**  we're seeing.  And Stuart's talked about that. I very much see it in my role as Chair of the Environment  Agency, in terms of some of the visits that I have done over the last couple of years  in incident mode, where literally we have flip flopped from too much water to too little  water within weeks. And we've also started seeing the layering of impacts from a water  
**[0:08:09-0:08:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:08:09):**  perspective as well. When you start combining prolonged dry weather with a heatwave, that  is when we can move to moments where issue of water supply can become critical to certain  parts of the country and to farmers in particular. So our priorities, given that we are the delivery  body for England on flood, but we also are the environmental regulator, which includes  responsibilities around water, is to move into what needs to be an integrated framework  
**[0:08:48-0:08:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:08:48):**  for managing water. It would be very fair to say that over past years, government thinking,  organisational thinking has probably been seen too much in silos on the issue of water.  One of the things that we did with our flood strategy when we published it last May, alongside  Defra's work on flood, was to make sure that we were focusing as much as possible on integrated  water management. The flip side of too much water is too little water. And we need to  
**[0:09:28-0:09:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:09:28):**  find better ways of managing water on the land, storing it in terms of excessive plenty  for those moments which can happen within a short period of time where we do find ourselves  with too little water. So this has got to be, alongside this being the decade for delivery  on the climate change and focusing on net zero, we need to be prioritising our work  on water as well. It's so good to hear that and I think it's  
**[0:09:58-0:10:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:09:58):**  really interesting the way that you framed that initially around connecting carbon and  water management because the two are so integral to each other and the way that we manage land  and we manage water can change land from being a carbon sink to a carbon source and vice  versa. Do you feel that there is a real sense that those silos are genuinely being broken  down and that people really are starting to work in a more joined up way?  
**[0:10:25-0:10:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:10:25):**  There is no doubt in my mind that people are working in a more joined up way across government.  One of the best ways to illustrate that is a role that I have in relation to infrastructure.  As the Environment Agency is the infrastructure provider for DEFRA, I'm part of a cross government  steering group focused on infrastructure and we're roughly 1 billion. If you take the 2020  allocation and investment into infrastructure, roughly 40 billion, we're 1 billion of that.  
**[0:11:01-0:11:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:11:01):**  But I'm now meeting regularly with senior officials across all of the key infrastructure  departments and see myself very much as the voice, not just of net zero, but preparing  for climate shocks, the whole resilience piece and also making sure that nature, nature's  recovery is seen as having a core role in this and that absolutely links to the way  land is managed. Fantastic. I want to ask you about the future,  
**[0:11:32-0:11:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:11:32):**  Emma. Climate change clearly, you know, we've discussed it. It's already disrupting UK rainfall  patterns, more extreme weather, more flooding, more droughts. But thinking about both the  best and the worst case global warming scenarios, how much more change do you think that we  should be expecting in the next 20 years? So we do a lot of our scenario planning with  the Met Office. We have a joint venture, the Flood Forecasting Centre, where we combined  
**[0:12:00-0:12:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:12:00):**  their metrological data with our hydrological data and look at when and where we might expect  flooding. We also work with them on the scenarios. They feed those into the Climate Change Committee  and other parts of government and private organisations as well. And I think what we're  beginning to see is what came out in the last set of predictions, which is warmer, wetter  winters, and then what we're seeing in terms of drier weather. I don't think we can put  
**[0:12:36-0:12:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:12:36):**  a precise figure on what we expect, but everything that I'm seeing and everything that I am hearing,  not just from UK based scientists, but global scientists, and we're expecting a whole range  of new scenarios, new reports coming out from the IPCC later this year, is that it feels  like things are speeding up. So we need to look at every investment decision that we  are making through the lens of climate change, making sure that it is thinking about net  
**[0:13:17-0:13:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:13:17):**  zero, embedding net zero into that, preparing for climate shocks, and working very closely  with nature. That's why we at the Environment Agency, whilst having responsibility for flood  and coastal erosion risk management in England, made a commitment to net zero by 2030, because  we know that as we invest in flood schemes, we need to make sure that they're not only  resilient, but building in net zero commitments as well, and actually delivering on that in  
**[0:13:50-0:13:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:13:50):**  the way that we are building those schemes, using the best technology to make sure that  they are as low carbon as possible today.  Stuart, did you want to come in there?  Yeah, if I could, and I want to go back to something that Emma said earlier on, which  was about how we need to make sure we put this issue, and water in particular, right  
**[0:14:11-0:14:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:14:11):**  up the agenda, because I think she's absolutely highlighted there why it's so important. But  I also think that we all do this, and I do it, we look at, if you like, flood and drought  as avoiding negatives. We look at them very defensively. And I also think actually, we  should spin it the other way and look at it in an offensive way. So we have at times too  much water, we have at times too little water, often it's in the wrong place, as Emma articulated  
**[0:14:38-0:14:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:14:38):**  earlier. But when you look at food production, for example, in lots of different places in  the world, actually one of the things that the UK will have going forward is availability  of fresh water. When we look at where our fruit veg comes from, for example, something  we don't grow anything like enough of in this country, and we're importing lots of fruit  veg from parts of the world that are already short of water and arguably will be even shorter  
**[0:15:03-0:15:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:15:03):**  in years to come, then actually I see an opportunity in the UK, but only if we invest. Because  at the minute what we're doing is we're taking a defensive approach, if you like, to floods,  and rightly so, and we end up pumping hundreds of thousands and millions of gallons of fresh  water into the North Sea at some times of the year. And at other times of the year,  we're struggling and we're having to cut abstraction, etc. And if we can put the right  
**[0:15:29-0:15:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:15:29):**  infrastructure in place, if we can put the right investment in place, if we can put the,  if you like, the political ambition in place, you know, I look at the budget that is there  for something like HS2, a fraction of that budget could revolutionise the water infrastructure  in this country. And I tell this story, about two years ago, I met with a group of farmers  at the Norfolk show who were really struggling with abstraction licenses. There was a real  
**[0:15:56-0:16:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:15:56):**  shortage of water in the area. And literally 24, almost to the minute, 24 hours later,  I moved 50 miles north, I was meeting with a group of farmers in Lincolnshire, and I  was watching their fields that at the time were under six feet of water and we were busy  pumping that water out into the North Sea. We have a massive opportunity in the UK if  we can harness this properly, if we can work together. And I think actually the environment  
**[0:16:20-0:16:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:16:20):**  agency and ourselves are working much closer together than we have historically. It's  not just silos within government and agencies, it's also how industry and the agency work  together on things. And when it comes to water, I see that call to put it right at the top  of the political agenda. It will be water that people see, it will be water that manifests  itself as the impact of climate change. Carbon is almost this sort of anonymous thing, whereas  
**[0:16:45-0:16:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:16:45):**  water is real, you can see it. And I just couldn't echo more Emma's points about how  important we need to get this issue.  And I want to come back to you, and I'm just curious about that scenario planning that  you were talking about. And I wonder what those scenarios take into account. Is it just,  you know, water and water level rise, or are you including the potential impacts of degrading  
**[0:17:07-0:17:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:17:07):**  or regenerating soil health and biodiversity and the impacts of, for example, additional  house building on floodplains?  A huge amount of data goes into the scenarios that we're working on and involving others.  So I've already talked about the projections that we work with the Met Office, in terms  of environmental impacts of climate change, such as river levels, flood risks, a lot of  
**[0:17:32-0:17:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:17:32):**  that is done by ourselves. And then we factor in a whole range of other detail that working  in partnership with others, so whether it's water companies, land managers, the role that  different forms of land management can play, all of this needs to be factored into the  way we work with water. Some of that is set out in quite detail in our flood strategy.  And we set out a flood strategy out to 2100, because this is a massive long term issue  
**[0:18:12-0:18:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:18:12):**  that we need to work on. But in May this year, we published an action plan for the next five  years. And Stuart will know this because the NFU is one of our partners. But within that  action plan, we have set out things that we want to do in real life, practical things.  And one of the pilot areas that we're working on with the NFU is the FENDS. And again, using  this next five years to trial different ways of working to understand how the work in the  
**[0:18:49-0:18:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:18:49):**  FENDS on integrated water management, even though it starts off with a flood focus, can  help us in other parts of the country. And this is what we need to do, move policy and  ambition to real projects where we actually trial different ways of land management and  understand the practical things that can be done. Stuart talked about investment and looking  at this through a positive lens. One of the things that we did again, during the course  
**[0:19:22-0:19:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:19:22):**  of last year with DEFRA, with Ofwat, the economic water regulator, with the other water regulators,  the drinking water inspectorate, and Consumer Council for Water, was put out a call to water  companies to accelerate investment in water related work that could enhance a green recovery  and bring in jobs. And that led to nearly £3 billion worth of investment, about a billion  pounds of that was new money that wasn't in the current price review. And that shows how  
**[0:20:04-0:20:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:20:04):**  the private sector can get behind investment in integrated water management. One of the  water companies involved with that issued shares, this is Severn Trent, on the back  of their plans. And those shares were four times oversubscribed within a couple of hours  of announcing those additional shares, which shows that there is money from the institutional  markets to invest in some of the large scale integrated projects that we need to see in  
**[0:20:37-0:20:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:20:37):**  order to manage water fit for this century. And what we've all got to do is recognise  the different parts that we play in pulling this all together to lead to action on water.  You're talking about real examples there. And I think it's worth looking at one or  two real examples to see where responsibility lies and what can actually be done. And so  if I think of Bewdley on the River Severn in Worcestershire near where I grew up, there's  
**[0:21:05-0:21:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:21:05):**  always been flooding there, but it's now more frequent. It's regularly much higher than  it was before with severe flooding in the town becoming a fairly semi-regular and nationally  newsworthy event. Now, the Severn watershed is enormous with multiple opportunities to  capture the rainfall and to slow that flow of water from the land, even before it reaches  the towns and meets Environment Agency flood defences. So my question, Stuart, is whose  
**[0:21:30-0:21:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:21:30):**  job is it to prevent flooding?  It is everyone's job. I think Emma just articulated that really well, that actually  we've all got a role to play. Now the solution lies in multiple hands. And I think farmers  absolutely have a role to play. But I think this is where we also need to look at how  we fund some of this. So I know of farmers all over the country who absolutely get the  
**[0:21:53-0:22:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:21:53):**  role they need to play and the role our farms need to play in preventing flooding downstream.  I know of no farmer who would argue we should flood a town rather than flood farmland that  is upstream of that town or that commercial business. Therefore, farmers are part of that  solution. But we need to make sure there is a funding stream for that because actually  I struggle to think of a better public good that farmers can provide than actually alleviating  
**[0:22:23-0:22:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:22:23):**  floodwater from urban areas and ultimately potentially saving lives. But I also hear  of way too many examples of where farmland has been flooded. We haven't got the infrastructure  in place to get that water off quickly. And then we have a squabble about compensation  and about values and the rest of that. I think we need to absolutely have that. And it's  almost a contractual relationship. If I am providing a public service, which is preventing  
**[0:22:48-0:22:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:22:48):**  flooding downstream, then I have a role to play. But also how I farm my land. Let's have  discussions around that. Let's have discussions about having the infrastructure in place to  get the water off. One of the issues often is not the water arriving in the first place.  It's actually how long it takes to get it off. And let's prioritize that. Let's invest  in that. Let's value that. I know a farmer up near Selby who I think on four or five  
**[0:23:12-0:23:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:23:12):**  occasions in one year his farm was flooded, which directly stopped the flooding of Selby  itself. Yet we haven't got a proper arrangement in place to properly manage that, to properly  recognize that, reward that, etc. And I think this is for me a really exciting area. It's  no one person's problem. Farmers are absolutely a component of it, as is the environment agency  and some of their flood defences, are to our householders and actually how they build resilience  
**[0:23:41-0:23:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:23:41):**  into properties and developers have a role to play. The water companies have a role to  play. Yet we all do. And I think that's one of the most interesting bits here. And it's  about how do we all bring something to the table in an integrated water strategy that  actually complements each other. And it is an unusual way of working because quite often  as a farmer or as a developer or as whatever, we look to the regulator to give us the answer  
**[0:24:09-0:24:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:24:09):**  or the regulator just looks to regulate us to tell us what to do. And actually this new  world that we are going to have to inhabit is going to need different relationships.  So actually we're going to have to work better together. We're going to have to understand  each other better. We're going to have to understand that an accident at one point in  a catchment has a consequence somewhere else in catchment. Now, if that's a positive consequence,  
**[0:24:31-0:24:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:24:31):**  that's great. If it's a negative consequence, what can we do to address that? And ultimately  that comes down to relationships. It comes down to communication and it comes down to  some of the conversations that Emma and I have on relatively frequent basis, which is  great. And we see ourselves actually in the flood and coast action plan, we see ourselves  as a component of delivering the actions. Our own integrated water strategy absolutely  
**[0:24:58-0:25:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:24:58):**  highlights that. But we've also got to recognise that you can't just dump water on farms and  expect farmers not to be compensated, rewarded, paid or have the infrastructure in place.  And farmers are ready for that up and down the country, but we need others to be part  of that journey as well.  I'd like to start talking more specifically about what actually happens on farms and how  
**[0:25:23-0:25:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:25:23):**  that water gets managed. I wonder what role soil in particular plays in the Environment  Agency's approach to water management and flood risk alleviation.  It is one of the key ingredients that we look at across a catchment and understand that  on land, how that land has managed, would be managed, how porous the soil is, how, where  the water goes can be inextricably linked to what happens when we have extreme rainfall  
**[0:26:00-0:26:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:26:00):**  events. And around the country, and if we go back to Bewdley, there is an increasing  emphasis on how we look at catchments from a water perspective, and then how we bring  in partnerships to look at every single aspect of how water needs to be managed throughout  that catchment. And with Bewdley in the Severn Valley, we now have a partnership, the River  Severn partnership, up and down the river to look at what needs to happen all the way  
**[0:26:38-0:26:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:26:38):**  down the River Severn, starting up in those parts of the country where there is potentially  more room for water to be stored on land. And to Stuart's point, we have a real opportunity  with Reform of Care, with Environmental Land Management, to look at how do we reward farmers  for the role that they play in terms of storing water on their land, particularly during flood  events. So what our action plans do is set out all of the things that need to be explored.  
**[0:27:19-0:27:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:27:19):**  And we have the national one, but we've used this model after flooding events in Cumbria,  in the Cawdor Valley, where we have set out what needs to happen. We have taken a strategic  overview, but also need to recognise that along the catchment, there will be many different  parties and partners that need to take responsibility for specific actions. And we set out the timelines  as to when we should see action and update it so that these plans become dynamic. But  
**[0:27:56-0:28:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:27:56):**  going back to your original question, soil has a place alongside all of the other things  that we need to look at as the environment agency when it comes to our primary responsibility  and duty to protect people and homes from flooding.  Stuart, give me some examples of what farmers need to do to ensure good water management.  I mean, I'm thinking, you know, leaky dams and that sort of thing. And I'm interested  
**[0:28:22-0:28:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:28:22):**  in the funding element as well, because, you know, a leaky dam, it takes a couple of days  to stick it in. There's a clear sort of, you know, cost associated with that. But then  how do we fund the maintenance of it? How do we fund the fact that it's there at all  doing that job in the environment?  It's really easy for, and I'll be slightly controversial maybe, but it's really easy  
**[0:28:43-0:28:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:28:43):**  for a politician to stand in front of a great big piece of concrete. And you can see a legacy,  you can see it, you can touch it. The immediate reaction, I'm sure, and I'm sure Emma gets  fed up with it. After every flood event, I'm sure somebody suggests a big piece of concrete,  another six feet of concrete on top of what's already there is the answer. It's visible,  it's tangible. But actually, we can't just keep building metre on metre on metre of concrete.  
**[0:29:09-0:29:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:29:09):**  What do we do eventually? We have a basically a great big concrete wall all around the UK.  It's fictional. And unfortunately, things like leaky dams, things like changes of cropping,  things like slowing that flow through more permanent pasture or through tillage techniques  we use, they don't look like big pieces of concrete that are massive legacies, but actually  are possibly more valuable sometimes than those pieces of concrete. So we've got to  
**[0:29:34-0:29:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:29:34):**  come up with a mechanism, whether it be through ELMS or whether it be through other funding  mechanisms, we've got to find a way that puts the real value on it. So the value of  that leaky dam is not the cost it takes to put the leaky dam in, it's the value of the  protection it provides downstream. Now that's difficult economics because actually  what you're trying to do is you're trying to put a value on something that might have  
**[0:30:00-0:30:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:30:00):**  happened. And yeah, that's where you need to get into the model and various other things.  But I'm very much of a view that if I am providing effectively a service to a community that  is no different than a concrete wall against the river or against the coast or whatever  it may be, then I should absolutely be recognised and rewarded for the value that that provides.  But it's a difficult calculation. So I've not got the answer, but I think we just need  
**[0:30:25-0:30:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:30:25):**  to turn things on their head slightly and not look at what does it cost to do something.  It's also what is the value of doing that downstream? I was on a call yesterday with  some colleagues of EMMA's and some colleagues from Natural England, where actually there's  a group of farmers I know of who made a proposition to the green infrastructure fund and actually  looking to, and it failed. But actually what we've now got is the environment agency and  
**[0:30:50-0:30:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:30:50):**  Natural England saying, well actually what can we do to help you? How can we help you  put values on it? How can we help you endorse some of this? And I think that's how we need  to start to look at some of these things. I think there is also, and Emma touched again  earlier on this, there will be private sector money in this area. When we look at the additional  benefits, so it's not just about flood protection, it's also about, well actually by changing  
**[0:31:14-0:31:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:31:14):**  that cropping, what does that deliver in terms of biodiversity benefit? What does that deliver  in terms of a carbon sequestration benefit? And actually how can we start to put some  values on that? So actually what you could end up with is the flood protection value  is X, but you may well have additional biodiversity or carbon or whatever other benefits over  and above that, that you could stack on top of that, which then make it a very, very attractive  
**[0:31:42-0:31:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:31:42):**  proposition. Too often in the past, we've looked one dimensionally at solving problems.  So actually how do we feed people? How do we stop floods? How do we improve biodiversity?  The reality is we need to look at all of those things in balance and how the mechanisms we  put in place need to maximise all of those variables to be able to deliver what ultimately  what a modern society wants us to deliver.  
**[0:32:08-0:32:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:32:08):**  Emma, you wanted to come in.  Yes, I have a background in finance. So one of the things that I have been encouraging  colleagues at the Environment Agency at Defra to do is make sure that we are playing a full  part in all of the work that is going on around green finance. We work very closely with the  Green Finance Institute, which is working on how to crowd in private sector investment  
**[0:32:39-0:32:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:32:39):**  into nature based solutions. And one, sometimes the way to get into that space is through  the net zero work that has a much longer history. Because the way land is managed, you may be  able to track that value back to storing carbon more easily than the work that or the value  that it brings in terms of storing water. And if I look at some of the green bonds that  have been issued by the water companies, sometimes the primary indicator they use is a carbon  
**[0:33:22-0:33:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:33:22):**  one. But actually what is being funded brings in a whole plethora of nature based solutions  and land management techniques. But it's just easier at this point in time for the investors  to understand what is delivered from a carbon perspective. I was visiting some flood meadows  yesterday and again, a brilliant example of how land can be used for many different purposes.  But with that starting point of it is a flood plain meadow and how private sector companies  
**[0:34:02-0:34:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:34:02):**  will ultimately want to invest in land solutions as part of their offsetting mechanisms is  something that is also going to become increasingly important and may start delivering some of  that investment that Stuart's been talking about that is going to be so vital for farmers  and other land managers too.  Stuart, you wanted to come back in as well.  
**[0:34:30-0:34:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:34:30):**  Yeah, and look, I agree with everything that Emma just said, but I also have some fears  in this area. I think as a farmer, I reckon I must be being approached at least once a  month at the moment by someone who wants to offset their carbon, buy my carbon, buy some  biodiversity, you name it. It does feel a little bit like the Wild West out there actually  in terms of, and I also fear there will be farmers who sign up to deals that today look  
**[0:35:00-0:35:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:35:00):**  attractive but actually don't have any robust matrix around them, that don't have transparency  around them, that don't have rules around them. And in 10 years' time, well, there will  be a huge hangover from those. And I think this is where I think government has an important  role to play actually around setting some of the rules around this, setting some of  the transparency around this. And some of the standards institutes will also have a  
**[0:35:22-0:35:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:35:22):**  role to play. So I think there's a big, big role for what Emma's just articulated. But  I think there's also, I certainly have some fears that there are some fairly sharp operators  out there who will not do it for the public good and for all those other benefits, but  could well land some farmers in hot water in years to come because they didn't realise  what they were signing up. You need the environmental regulators to  
**[0:35:50-0:35:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:35:50):**  be working in lockstep with the economic regulators, in lockstep with the financial regulators.  This is another area where we've got to stop working in silos. We have just been asked  as the Environment Agency to be part of a treasury initiative that again is being supported.  The secretariat is coming from the Green Finance Institute, which is looking at the taxonomy  of how different environmental services and goods are classified. And I think that's fantastic  
**[0:36:28-0:36:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:36:28):**  that you're bringing together the different types of expertise. Because Stuart's absolutely  right, we've seen it before with emissions and offsets in the past. We need to work at  pace, but we need to work at pace in a properly regulated way, so that we're delivering real  benefits. We're not double counting, triple counting, etc. We're seeing real stuff happen  on the ground. But also we need mechanisms that can allow us to unravel the unintended  
**[0:37:00-0:37:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:37:00):**  consequences because this is new territory for us all. And what we can't do is set off  in one direction and find that we can't get out of that direction if we're ending up doing  the wrong thing. Yeah, and just building slightly on that  as well, I agree with that. But I also have a pretty selfish interest here. I also worry  that there will be other parts of the agri-food supply chain who look to come and take the  
**[0:37:31-0:37:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:37:31):**  credit for the carbon sequestration that's happening on the farm. I'm pretty selfish  about this, right? I'm the active farmer. It is me that is sequestering that carbon.  It is me that is responsible for that. And we are one of the very few sectors of the  economy that are a sink as well as a source of carbon. And we need to make sure that the  farmers are very aware of this. I get really excited about this area. I think it is a huge  
**[0:37:56-0:38:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:37:56):**  potential for the farming sector. But I also fear that there are a number of other people,  whether it be in commerce, whether it be in agri-food supply chains, that will look to  effectively do that, to take that thing that's happening on farm to offset their emissions  when actually the real value needs to be back on the person who's doing it themselves, which  is the active farmer. It's interesting. We touched on this conversation  
**[0:38:22-0:38:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:38:22):**  in the first of the Land Unlocked series, this idea of what is the value of farming  and that it's just so much more than GDP. And you've articulated some of those things,  both of you today. But maybe that's part of the excitement here  because we know for centuries, the core of farming is food production, right? It's feeding  an urbanised population that can't feed itself. That's what we do as farmers. But we also  
**[0:38:49-0:38:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:38:49):**  know we have delivered huge intangible benefits, whether it be landscapes, whether it be flood  prevention, whether it be biodiversity. We've not always got that right, but we have delivered  those. And actually, maybe this is a really massive opportunity to turn things that historically  have been intangible into tangible things for farming. And then actually, we can get  to what the real value of farming is, not the massively subsidised, if you like, food  
**[0:39:16-0:39:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:39:16):**  production piece, which never reflects the real value of that food production.  Stuart, we're coming to the end of the programme. And this is a fascinating discussion. I really  don't want to curtail it. But at the same time, thinking forwards to the Climate Change  Conference COP26 in November, if you were going to be addressing the main conference  on the issue of agriculture, water and climate change, what would you say? What would your  
**[0:39:39-0:39:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:39:39):**  key message be? For me, it's fairly straightforward. It's  that farmers are absolutely part of the solution. We are up for working in a different way.  We see ourselves in that role. And ultimately, as a farmer, I see a big chunk of my role  of delivering on a modern society's values. Now, that is about food production. It is  about the standards we produce food to. But it's also about delivering against climate  
**[0:40:05-0:40:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:40:05):**  change, delivering against water protection. And let's see freshwater in the UK as an opportunity  and invest in it with pace. Because actually, we really should be making much more of the  water that's available to us here, as previous generations have looked to do.  Thanks, Stuart. Emma, it's very likely that you will be addressing the conference. So,  for you in terms of land use, water and global warming, what are your central messages?  
**[0:40:34-0:40:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:40:34):**  It's about preparing the climate shocks that we are going to see that are already locked  into the system. It's about making sure that we, as we invest towards net zero, as we race  towards net zero, that we're embedding resilience and nature's recovery into those investment  decisions. Otherwise, we will be seeing our fantastic new technology washing away in a  flood or melting in a heatwave. And it's about making sure that water is seen in the same  
**[0:41:10-0:41:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:41:10):**  light as carbon, that this is something that we are already experiencing and individuals  vulnerable communities, vulnerable countries are going to experience climate change through  the water dimension far more quickly than perhaps through other ways. And we just have  to get ahead of our action to make sure we're ready for those climate shocks.  Water absolutely at the centre of land use, but also, as you say, absolutely at the centre  
**[0:41:45-0:41:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:41:45):**  of our response to climate change. It's been a fascinating conversation. That's all we  have time for. I'd like to thank my guests, Emma Howard-Boyd and Stuart Roberts. If you've  enjoyed listening, please subscribe to the Farmgate podcast so that you never miss an  episode of Land Unlocked, which is being broadcast on the same channel. And then tell your friends,  like us, review us and share our links. Land Unlocked is produced by the UK's Food, Farming  
**[0:42:10-0:42:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Carbon--water-e13jbga#t=0:42:10):**  and Countryside Commission and the Farmgate podcast. You can find out more about us online  at ffcc.co.uk and you can join the conversation by following us on LinkedIn and on Twitter.  I've been Finn low Costayne. Bye for now.  