### Farm Gate  (2020-38-29)
**[0:00:00-0:00:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:00:00):**  Welcome to Farmgate, I'm Finnlow Costayne. It's widely accepted that climate change  can have an impact on food availability in developing countries, and that these impacts  can act on existing vulnerabilities and threats, and lead to conflict. But what about developed  nations? Countries like the United Kingdom or the United States of America? Could our  own food availability be threatened by climate change? Could the complexity of our supply  
**[0:00:30-0:00:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:00:30):**  chains make us more vulnerable than we realise? And could future food scarcity mean that existing,  but largely latent, social tensions begin to fracture?  Do we think that we're not vulnerable? Do you think it's only in developing countries  that you have climate risks? And the answer is absolutely not. The US, the UK, we are  vulnerable.  
**[0:00:51-0:00:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:00:51):**  We'd be living in a pretty challenging world. I think we face the risks of not just an uncomfortable  world, we'd also have a world of uncertainty. Uncertainty about where our food's going  to come from, whether our imports, our trade is going to flow. And I think it would become  a pretty techy world as well in the process. So we really have got to do something about  it.  
**[0:01:10-0:01:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:01:10):**  In this programme, I'll speak to Caitlin Wherill, the co-founder of the Washington-based  think tank, the Centre for Climate and Security, which works with the Pentagon and advises  the US government. And I'll talk to Rear Admiral Neil Morissette, the UK's former  climate energy and security envoy and former special representative for climate change.  Global warming, leading to food shortages and insecurity, increased poverty and climate-related  
**[0:01:36-0:01:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:01:36):**  migration will emphasise existing inequalities in developed nations and could act alongside  other social undercurrents to build greater resentments and increase the threat of civil  unrest. As the world continues to warm, the resilience of our crops and food infrastructure  could mean the difference between a civilisation that continues to thrive and a broken society  in which communities are forced to defend food supplies from other citizens.  
**[0:02:05-0:02:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:02:05):**  I have a fear that by 2060, when my children are about the age that I am now, if we continue  on current warming trajectories, then people not only in developing countries, but those  living in mature democracies and economies such as the UK and the USA could be facing  severe disruptions to food supplies, water and nutrition. I asked Neil Morissette whether  he thinks I'm right to worry.  
**[0:02:31-0:02:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:02:31):**  Neil Morissette Yeah, I think you are because, I mean, the  causes of conflict are multiple and there's a myriad of factors that come to bear in why  conflict or instability occurs in different places in different world, different communities  have different degrees of resilience to the challenges they face. But we know that at  a time when the world's population is still growing and the aspirations of those who are  
**[0:02:50-0:02:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:02:50):**  on the planet are increasing, there's only a finite amount of food and water and land  available. And anything that adds to the pressure on that, perhaps because of the scarcity of  food or an imbalance, one area having too much, another having not enough, can only  cause a degree of tension.  Paul Edmondson So are we thinking that climate change can  
**[0:03:09-0:03:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:03:09):**  directly lead to conflict or is it something that contributes, that sort of layers on top  of other issues in order to lead to conflict? Is it one or the other or a combination?  Neil Morissette Very much the latter. You can't rule out the  possibility of a war or a conflict being started solely by climate change, but that's pretty  unlikely. But as an accelerant or a threat multiplier, then I think it is much more likely.  
**[0:03:30-0:03:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:03:30):**  And it's a bit like, I mean, it's like throwing a bucket of petrol on a smouldering fire. It  will inflame the situation, it will cause challenges and in some communities may result  in conflict or just instability.  Paul Edmondson People talk about society being nine meals  from anarchy, which puts food right at the heart of the potential for society to break  
**[0:03:53-0:03:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:03:53):**  down. How important do you think that food is?  Neil Morissette Yeah, I mean, nine meals and probably two  days of water away from, not necessarily anarchy, but certainly instability and rising tensions  and different countries, different communities, different degrees of resilience. But even  in a developed world, I think our pain threshold is quite low in these sort of areas. And there's  
**[0:04:15-0:04:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:04:15):**  risks of people becoming vociferous or starting to complain or starting to look after themselves  if they are missing things that they've become used to or expecting to have, particularly  the staple things of food and water.  Paul Edmondson Caitlin Weryl has spent more than a decade  assessing the security risks of climate change. She co-founded the Center for Climate and  
**[0:04:34-0:04:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:04:34):**  Security in 2010. And she spoke to me following the launch of the first World Climate and  Security Report.  Caitlin Weryl The expert group of the International Military  Council on Climate Security, which is a group of senior military leaders, security experts  and security institutions from across the globe, just put out its first World Climate  
**[0:04:51-0:04:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:04:51):**  and Security Report. It's a very extensive report. It looks at climate and security in  various different regions. What we found was that increasingly more and more militaries  are sounding the alarm on climate change. They're seeing how it's affecting their own  mission sets. But they're also calling on diplomacy and development civilian lead for  how we actually attack and deal with with climate security risks. One of the major survey  
**[0:05:17-0:05:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:05:17):**  findings was that 93% of those who were surveyed see that the likelihood of water insecurity  and by 2030 will pose a significant or higher risk to global security. And the way that  fits in with agriculture is fundamental that you need water to produce food. And so when  you have changes to water availability, and a lot of times we talk about water scarcity,  there's a sense that it's just droughts, but it's actually also sometimes it's too much  
**[0:05:43-0:05:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:05:43):**  water or and sometimes it's also just water variability where you have the greatest risk  to things like food security where you have a drought and a flood in succession. We're  also seeing more things when you do have water scarcity and it affects your food production.  This can scale up into higher order risks. This is where you can have conflict, particularly  between ethnically fractured communities between farmers and herders. And so these are things  
**[0:06:07-0:06:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:06:07):**  where you know, particularly with with the military expert network group, they say, we're  seeing this we're called more and more into various regions across the world to intervene  to do conflict prevention or to respond to places where you have things like food and  water insecurity that are are calling on the role of the military. And they said, you know,  this isn't we need development and diplomacy to prevent this from becoming something that  
**[0:06:32-0:06:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:06:32):**  we do have to intervene. Now, you mentioned there, you know, conflicts between ethnic  groups and so on. I think, you know, when we're talking about climate change and food  and national security, there's a reasonable recognition that hotter countries, perhaps  countries that are already at drought risk, places where there is a higher instance of  subsistence agriculture, that those countries are, of course, vulnerable to climate change.  
**[0:06:56-0:07:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:06:56):**  But do you think in terms of developed countries like the USA, like the UK, that enough is  being done to identify not just the risks to food security, but also nutrition security  and all those risks similar in developed countries like our own in general, what you're getting  at. And I like your question, which is, do we think that we're not vulnerable? Do you  think it's only in developing countries that you have climate risks? And the answer is  
**[0:07:20-0:07:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:07:20):**  absolutely not. The US, the UK, we are we are vulnerable. We're seeing impacts. We're  seeing entire crops being destroyed by by flooding events and extreme weather events.  And so I think that I have a frustration with some of these climate vulnerability maps where  you have things like Africa and the Sahel will be red and Middle East will be red and  very climate vulnerable. And then places like the most of Europe and the US will be colored  
**[0:07:45-0:07:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:07:45):**  green. Like everything's just going to be fine, which is absolutely not the case. You  know, when we talk about climate change, we often talk about climate impacts. One of the  ones that we don't talk a lot about is health and health security. So that gets to your  nutrition aspect. I think we need to do a lot more to understand what these risks are  going to be. You know, one of the things that we talk about is our responsibility to prepare  
**[0:08:05-0:08:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:08:05):**  and prevent. And this is if you look at climate risk, particularly compared to other risks,  we can see these risks coming. We have climate models that are developed in 1950 that are  still largely accurate. If you compare this to the political, you couldn't have predicted  the political environment today. And so we really need to do whether it's food security,  water security, nutrition, health, anything that we can model and say, okay, this is there's  
**[0:08:30-0:08:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:08:30):**  a very high likelihood and a high probability that this is the future that we're facing.  We need to start planning for that future. And by doing that, then you have greater probability,  better policies in place. That's essentially what we mean by climate proofing. The whole  world has already shifted and changed. We're already living in the climate change world.  It's just describing the future world and how that's going to continue to change. I  
**[0:08:52-0:08:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:08:52):**  think one thing that's really important and fundamental to talk about is how these changes  are unprecedented for human civilization. And particularly when we're talking about  food security and agriculture. So if you look at the development of civilization, if you  look at the development of agriculture from the very beginning, all of that occurred within  the Holocene. Then we had fluctuations and extreme weather events and things like that.  
**[0:09:13-0:09:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:09:13):**  But for the most part, there was this very kind of safe bubble in which civilization  advanced. If you look at the charts that say where we are within terms of carbon dioxide  in the atmosphere, we've left that bubble. Some people are calling this the Anthropocene.  And so all civilizations living in uncharted territories. So we talk about climate insecurity.  What we're talking about is living in a world where there's a lot of unknowns. I have a  
**[0:09:35-0:09:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:09:35):**  lot of concerns about agriculture because it's again, it's developed within this bubble  that we've left.  Climate and security planning is about identifying and mitigating risk, accurately and honestly  considering worst case scenarios. To help with this, it's important to understand how  climate change can accelerate threats and fan the flames of existing tensions. I asked  
**[0:10:00-0:10:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:10:00):**  Neil Morissetti to explain the link between climate change, food and the Arab Spring.  We saw in the beginning of the Arab Spring that one of the factors that contributed to  it was the riots in the markets in Tunisia, in part because of the price of bread. And  that bread had gone up in price because the year before in 2010, there had been a heatwave  in Russia, which meant that the wheat harvest was down. So less wheat was exported. Coincidentally,  
**[0:10:24-0:10:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:10:24):**  in Australia and Canada, there was extreme wet weather, which resulted in smaller harvests.  And all of that pushed the price of wheat up and therefore pushed the price of bread  up. So not the cause of the riots and instability, but one of the contributing factors perhaps  that sort of tipped the balance.  Again, in Syria, we know the prolonged drought in the first decade of this century resulted  
**[0:10:45-0:10:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:10:45):**  in failed harvests, a lot of rural people moving to urban areas, put pressure on the  services and resources in those urban areas. It also accelerated some of the historical  tensions, some of which are religious. Again, a contributing factor to the conflict in that  country.  So what's really interesting there is that there's a combination of sort of local factors  
**[0:11:02-0:11:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:11:02):**  and global factors that are acting together.  The reality is, with 7 billion on the planet today, with more as the population grows,  and there's a demand on the resources is getting greater and greater. And there's an imbalance  between those who have a surplus and those who have a short footage. But because we lived  in this, we live in this joined up world, we see the effects right across the whole  
**[0:11:23-0:11:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:11:23):**  planet.  One thing that it's important to do is not to suffer from a failure of imagination. We  really need to take time to think through all of these vulnerabilities, be it domestic  food production or global market, food market vulnerabilities. We need to think through  all the different possibilities of what could happen and plan and prepare for this. We also  
**[0:11:42-0:11:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:11:42):**  need to accept that some of these changes are already locked in. We have already released  emissions in the atmosphere that are some of which are going to stay. We've committed  ourselves to a certain future. The worst can be avoided if we reduce emissions now and  quickly.  I think we need to understand we live in a global world. And then we talk about climate  
**[0:12:00-0:12:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:12:00):**  change. These are it's an international risk. It's an international opportunity as well.  And so like these risks, they don't recognize national boundaries, and neither do our decisions.  And so part of it is just is just rethinking how we understand the climate change world  and how we live amongst it and how our decisions can, whether we realize it or not, impact  people thousands of miles away.  
**[0:12:24-0:12:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:12:24):**  Planning to identify and mitigate risks associated with climate change requires leadership, which  under the current US administration presents a degree of challenge. I asked Caitlin Weryl  about the role leadership plays and where, when we're dealing with threats of this nature  and on this scale, that leadership needs to come from.  Executive leadership absolutely does matter anywhere that that affects. But we are happy  
**[0:12:49-0:12:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:12:49):**  to see that the military has continued to take this threat very seriously. The intelligence  community has continued to take this threat very seriously across administrations. The  last at least 12 worldwide threat assessments by the intelligence community, including under  the US administration, has said that climate change is a security risk. There's just it's  a certain amount of you have to deal with the reality on the ground. And so but we are  
**[0:13:14-0:13:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:13:14):**  encouraged also by seeing the international community step up quite a bit more. We're  seeing places like NATO, like the EU, Asia Pacific, where countries are increasingly  understanding how we need to be working together to prepare and prevent the worst of climate  security implications.  World Finance and the US government have also said that the US government is not the only  
**[0:13:34-0:13:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:13:34):**  country to be working together to prevent climate change. But to effectively mitigate the impacts  of climate change on local and global food supplies, we need to be able to understand  where our vulnerabilities may lie.  If you take the UK, we import about 40% of our food. Some of the supply chains are particularly  complex. The sources of food are in regions which will be affected increasingly by the  
**[0:13:58-0:14:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:13:58):**  impact of climate change, whether it's the onset of long-term trends or extreme weather  events. There's demand for that food from elsewhere, whether it's from the local population  where it's grown, or other developed countries. Our resilience is perhaps weaker in some areas  as individuals, if we can't get what we want. Now, that doesn't mean we should grow everything  in our own country, but we probably ought to look at trying to get the balance right.  
**[0:14:20-0:14:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:14:20):**  And we certainly need to understand where the fragility is in the supply chain. It may  be because of the route it takes. We know that during the ash cloud issues at the beginning  of this decade, we were pretty close to running out of certain commodities on the shelves.  And we've seen, as a result of the coronavirus, that our supply chains are very much just  enough just in time. And if there's disruption, then we start to lose it. Look at Australia  
**[0:14:43-0:14:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:14:43):**  and the bushfires at the moment. That is on a massive scale, and that has really stretched  the Australian firefighting community, the rescue services, and it's happening in an  area where they grow their wheat. So that will potentially have a bearing.  So what you're saying is that the complexity of our supply chains, the length of them,  the number of different breaks in that supply chain or potential breaks in the supply chain,  
**[0:15:04-0:15:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:15:04):**  actually potentially make us perhaps as vulnerable as some of those more developing nations,  but in a different way? Yeah, I think we have resilience in ways  that some of those countries don't have, and we have the ability to act. But also, we have  greater demands on the world as a developed country and on the planet. And many of the  areas where we have the demands are, particularly in the context of food, are ones that will  
**[0:15:27-0:15:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:15:27):**  be impacted by a changing climate. And if we sort of think of a scenario there,  maybe in 10 or 20 years' time when temperatures have risen perhaps another degree, then, you  know, if Britain was going hungry, then I think, as you've indicated, we could import  some food from somewhere else. But if Britain was going hungry at the same time as France  was and Germany was, and there was conflict in the Suez Canal, then that becomes a real  
**[0:15:52-0:15:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:15:52):**  problem doesn't it? Yeah, and that's why I think we have to work  as nations to do two things. One, to try and remove the source of the problem, in other  words, to reduce our greenhouse gas emissions quite markedly so that there is less risk  of future climate change, but also acknowledge that there is climate change locked into the  system for the next 30 years, whatever we do, and we need to work together as nations  
**[0:16:13-0:16:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:16:13):**  in order to mitigate those risks to the point at which they're manageable, to understand  not just the most likely risks, but the most challenging risks, to share knowledge, to  share technical expertise and understanding of how we will meet some of these challenges.  And that means you have to work beyond just your own national boundaries.  In the agricultural community, in the environmental community, there's a recognition that it's  
**[0:16:34-0:16:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:16:34):**  not just climate change that is undermining our ability to produce food potentially in  the future, but also the crisis in biodiversity, in nature, the collapse in soil health that  limits our capacity to even grow food in the future to have successful harvests. And in  that way, we could be facing a sort of perfect storm if we failed a couple of those actions.  I wonder within the security community that you move in, whether biodiversity loss is  
**[0:17:02-0:17:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:17:02):**  something which is starting to be discussed in the same way that climate change is already  being discussed?  The conversation is very embryonic. It is just starting to be discussed. I think perhaps  as people learn more about the impact of climate change, and then start to hear more as experts  talk about the core challenges of biodiversity and understand you can't just carry on harvesting  
**[0:17:23-0:17:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:17:23):**  the land year after year and expecting to get the same sort of yields. There is a growing  awareness but it's pretty embryonic at the moment.  One of the things I would say is the way in which we assess risk, the way in which we  think about how much risk we can absorb, what we can withstand, what we prepare for. We  tend to think only in terms of one disaster. We think one hurricane or one major flood.  
**[0:17:44-0:17:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:17:44):**  And we say, sure, we'll be fine. We can recover from that. There's not a lot of thought given  to cascading disasters or multiple disasters in quick succession. And I think that this  is going to be a critical point in terms of understanding the vulnerability of places  like the United States. So if you have, we see an incredible amount of strain within  the last hurricane season where you have the National Guard going to help with disaster  
**[0:18:08-0:18:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:18:08):**  recovery from the hurricane, but at the same time are being called out to the West to fight  wildfires. And so if you combine that with another major storm somewhere else in the  country, it's going to put strains on it that potentially you're going to have to make hard  choices. You're going to have to say, we simply can't respond in this instance because we  don't have the capacity to do so.  
**[0:18:28-0:18:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:18:28):**  We need to understand all the different points of vulnerability. And so right now, we see  this annually where you have some place like the US, the breadbaskets of the world. US  is in Russia. And unfortunately, there hasn't been a situation where simultaneously all  of these major food producing areas have been affected at the same time. But that's not  because it's impossible. So that's something where it doesn't matter where you are in the  
**[0:18:51-0:18:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:18:51):**  world. If you are heavily dependent on the global food market and you see a major impact  across a lot of these food producing places, you're going to be affected. The other thing  I think you mentioned that was really important to us is the supply chain and how it can break  down if you have supply routes and channels like the Suez Canal, but also in the US, the  Mississippi River is incredibly important for transporting goods. And so if you have  
**[0:19:17-0:19:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:19:17):**  a climate impact on these places that break down, then that's also a vulnerability that  you need to anticipate.  It seems pretty clear that a lot more climate, food and security planning is needed at both  global and national levels. These plans must reach out beyond the traditional military  and civil security establishments and include farmers, retailers, importers, experts in  
**[0:19:41-0:19:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:19:41):**  nutrition, health and infrastructure, as well as other critical civil society stakeholders.  I asked Neil Morissetti and Caitlin Wherill what we should be expecting from our governments  right now.  They've got to start to develop a plan. But I think the most important thing is they've  got to engage with the public and they've got to be honest, easier said than done. We  
**[0:20:02-0:20:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:20:02):**  live in a world which is pretty short term. The public is encouraged to believe they can  have what they want when they want an affordable price with limited risk. And the reality is  it's not going to be like that. We need to think more long term. We need to be prepared  to invest now in order to help future generations, acknowledging that actually the amount it's  going to cost now is pretty limited compared to what it would cost if we don't do anything.  
**[0:20:26-0:20:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:20:26):**  And we need to be willing to work together both on a regional and sub-regional basis  as much as on the international stage.  Just finally, Neil, humour me a little. If we fail, I wonder if you could paint a picture  looking forward 40 years to when my kids, you know, around about my age, around 20,  60, if we fail in the UK or the USA to hold down global temperatures, if they continue  
**[0:20:54-0:21:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:20:54):**  to rise in terms of worst case scenarios from the IPCC, if we fail to arrest the breakdown  in biodiversity, what could be the consequences for our society?  We'd be living in a pretty challenging world. For some countries it would be too challenging  and parts of the world would certainly become uninhabitable, but there'll still be a population.  I think we face the risks of not just an uncomfortable world because it's a warmer world and a warmer  
**[0:21:20-0:21:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:21:20):**  country. We'd also have a world with uncertainty, uncertainty about where our food's going to  come from, whether our imports, our trade is going to flow. We could find ourselves  having to deploy our military more often, perhaps on humanitarian operations, but also  in order to protect interests around the world. And I think it would become a pretty techy  world as well in the process. So we really have got to do something about it. But there's  
**[0:21:43-0:21:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:21:43):**  some real opportunities that we act now, whether they are in the sense of health, in the sense  of economic benefits, but also with co-benefits of improved stability and security around  the world, which makes me think that actually if we get this right, we can mitigate most  of the risks. But it's challenging and we need to start now and we need to think long  term.  
**[0:22:03-0:22:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:22:03):**  But if we don't manage to do that, do you think that we could be seeing a situation  where there is civil conflict in Britain?  There will be tension. I wouldn't go so far as to say we'd see conflict in the country,  but I think we would be very fragile. And if something happened elsewhere that disrupted  essential supplies to this country, then we really we would face a risk perhaps of some  
**[0:22:25-0:22:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:22:25):**  form of civil disobedience.  But as you say, if we look and we plan and we have that honest conversation with society  as a whole and government starts to take this this much more seriously, then we could plan  to shorten our supply chains to reduce that vulnerability and over-dependence on other  parts of the world. We could take action to ensure that our farmland is more productive  
**[0:22:51-0:22:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:22:51):**  than it is today and that we're able to face the more extreme weathers, droughts or flooding  that we're more likely to see as a result of climate change. Then we could find that  we're actually in a much stronger position perhaps than we are even today.  Yeah. And I think we should be striving to be more resilient because we're going to face  more challenges in the future. And what we learn from that, we need to be prepared to  
**[0:23:13-0:23:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:23:13):**  share with other nations, both developed and developing, because of this because of this  joined up world that we live in. If we don't, we will experience the consequences of more  fragile societies collapsing just as much as they will where they are in the world.  So to summarise, there's a threat. It's very real. So we need a plan. And if we get a plan,  we'll be OK.  
**[0:23:34-0:23:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:23:34):**  There's a threat. It's real. We need to act. We should have started acting before. We certainly  need to start acting now. But we need to do it in a measured fashion. We need to think  it through. We need to understand what we're trying to achieve and how we're going to achieve  it. It involves all of us. But the opportunities make it worthwhile.  We're at a very important moment in history where we're deciding what the future world  
**[0:23:54-0:23:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:23:54):**  we live in looks like. And I think if we don't take the time now to prepare, to think about  this world, to really put in place climate-proofing policies, to understand the risks that we  face, then we're potentially facing a future of hard choices where there just aren't good  opportunities available and choices where you potentially have authoritarian responses  to these. This is the kind of issue that keeps me up at night is when you have a breakdown  
**[0:24:24-0:24:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:24:24):**  of governance, when you have a breakdown of the ability to put in place protections for  people for the most vulnerable, when you lean towards building walls versus helping people  move out of harm's way. We have a moment now where we can put in place  humanitarian policies, where we can work together to agree that this is the best for the most  people. And I hope that we use this opportunity to do so. I hope that we use this time to  
**[0:24:55-0:25:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:24:55):**  we have an incredible advancement in technology, things like satellites that are able to measure  groundwater around the world. There's so many different ways in which we can anticipate  these risks and we can get people out of harm's way now. And I hope that we take the opportunity  to do this because if we don't, it could bring out the worst in people and I hope we avoid  that future. Yeah. I think that, you know, here's the, this is the important thing too  
**[0:25:21-0:25:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:25:21):**  is not to just focus on the doom and gloom and to really understand that the technological  innovations that we have and the capabilities, the analytical capacity, we need to think  about all the opportunities and ways in which we can build a more resilient world, a world  of the future. Climate, food and national security is a critically  important issue. And right now a lot more needs to be done to realistically analyse  
**[0:25:45-0:25:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:25:45):**  the threats and then to develop, fund and deliver practice and policies that mitigate  the risks and help to build stronger, safer and more resilient societies. Over the next  few months, we'll return to this issue and consider key aspects in more detail. But for  now, I'd like to thank my guests, Caitlin Wherill from the Centre for Climate and Security  and Rear Admiral Neil Morissette, the former UK Climate, Energy and Security Envoy. If  
**[0:26:13-0:26:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Climate--food--national-security-eb5fgq#t=0:26:13):**  you've enjoyed listening, we have an ever expanding back catalogue of programmes. So  why not listen to those and then come back and listen to more, tell your friends, like  us, review us and share our links. Farmgate is a partnership project for Farmwell  and FAI Farms and you can join the conversation on Twitter by searching for Farmgate podcast.  I've been Finn low Kustein, bye for now.  