---
title: Conservatives The Environment Interview With Sam Hall
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### Farm Gate  (2020-01-20)  
### Author(s): ffinlo Costain  

**[0:00:00-0:00:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:00:00):**  Hello. On Farmgate today, I'm talking to Sam Hall, the Director of the Conservative  Environment Network, also known as SEN. With nearly 60 MPs making up its parliamentary  caucus, SEN is arguably the most important and influential network of environmentally  
**[0:00:21-0:00:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:00:21):**  motivated Conservative activists and politicians in the United Kingdom. Its previous director  is now an environmental adviser to the Prime Minister Boris Johnson, while Sam Hall has  moved in the opposite direction, having worked as a special adviser to the previous DEFRA  
**[0:00:36-0:00:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:00:36):**  Secretary Michael Gove. This interview was recorded in mid-January, and the UK's imminent  departure from the European Union on the 31st of January was firmly on our minds. I started  by asking Sam Hall, in terms of food production and agricultural land use, what are the big  
**[0:00:54-0:01:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:00:54):**  opportunities arising from Brexit? The biggest opportunity as I see it is the  fact that we're leaving the Common Agricultural Policy. I think the cap has been bad for our  farming sector and I think it's stifled some productivity improvements, but I think  
**[0:01:10-0:01:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:01:10):**  crucially it's been really bad for our environments. The fact that we've had to pay out the £3  billion a year, predominantly for farmers simply keeping land in agricultural condition,  rather than for particular environmental benefits, I think is a huge missed opportunity.  
**[0:01:25-0:01:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:01:25):**  But we've had the stewardship scheme, we've had the stewardship schemes coming out of  the cap. Do you not think they've been as successful as they might have been?  No, I don't think they have been particularly successful. I don't think uptake has been  
**[0:01:36-0:01:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:01:36):**  particularly impressive and the outcome of the limit hasn't been, haven't been as  good as they could do. And I think, you know, the fact remains that pillar one of cap is  that they by far the largest components of the funding. And I think after Brexit, I look  
**[0:01:51-0:02:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:01:51):**  forward to seeing environmental enhancement being the primary thing that we support through  our future farming and land use policy. So you see within the agriculture bill going  forward under a new Secretary of State, Theresa Villiers, as opposed to Michael Gove, who  
**[0:02:06-0:02:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:02:06):**  wrote the agriculture bill, obviously with his civil servants, you think that the environment  will still be the critical core of that bill going forward?  I think so, yes. I mean, that's that is the government's stated policy that although  
**[0:02:21-0:02:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:02:21):**  we're going to support a range of public goods through the agriculture bill, the environment  was sort of the preeminent public good, I think was the phrase that Michael Gove used.  And I think, you know, what the government is proposing to do through the environment  
**[0:02:34-0:02:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:02:34):**  bill as well, which sits alongside the agriculture bill, is to set a range of new environmental  targets on things like water quality, biodiversity restoration, I don't think you could deliver  those targets without significant levels of funding into into encouraging farmers to farm  
**[0:02:49-0:03:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:02:49):**  in a more sustainable way and to and to improve land use and make it more sustainable.  One of the conversations that we had around the time of the agriculture bill was looking  at the particular definitions of the individual public goods. And one of the concerns that  
**[0:03:02-0:03:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:03:02):**  I had at the time, and I think and I think a concern that you shared, was that it shouldn't  be possible for farmers to concentrate on one public good over and above another potentially  distorting progress, that action on climate change and action on biodiversity should be  
**[0:03:19-0:03:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:03:19):**  coupled. Is that a fair summary of your own view? And do you think that's something that  will be followed through?  I think I think there is a risk that you could, you know, solve for one of those public goods  
**[0:03:31-0:03:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:03:31):**  and not for another. I think the way that Denver is thinking about, you know, the environmental  land management scheme, particularly with its vision for these whole farm plans where  you look across the entire land holding and you think about what measures you want to  
**[0:03:47-0:04:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:03:47):**  deploy across them and the total environmental benefits you get from that. Hopefully that  will encourage farmers to look at the scheme in a holistic way so that they're not, they're  trying to solve multiple and deliver multiple public benefits rather than just one. I think  
**[0:04:02-0:04:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:04:02):**  the way that you design the, you know, the payment scheme as well, that you give an additional  financial reward for particular interventions that deliver multiple benefits and smaller  ones but the one for the intervention to just deliver a single benefit. You know, I think  
**[0:04:16-0:04:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:04:16):**  there are ways that you can design the scheme hopefully to mitigate that concern. But I  mean, I totally agree with the premise, which is that, you know, we do have these twin crises  on biodiversity and climate and, you know, there are a range of solutions that can help  
**[0:04:29-0:04:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:04:29):**  us tackle both simultaneously and those should be our priority.  So we talked about the Common Agricultural Policy there as being a sort of key opportunity  as we leave the European Union. Do you think that there are other opportunities, I don't  
**[0:04:43-0:04:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:04:43):**  know, perhaps around trade or other schemes that we could introduce to improve environmental  delivery that we'll be able to do as a result of leaving?  I mean, I think there are opportunities around trade. I know that, you know, there are many  
**[0:04:58-0:05:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:04:58):**  in the environmental movement that see, you know, a lot of threat from the trade agenda  and the fact that we might be pushed by some of our new trade partners to lower our standards  as a result of signing free trade agreements. Now, I think the government commitments on  
**[0:05:14-0:05:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:05:14):**  not lowering standards for by signing free trade agreements are quite strong and I think  the public support and the support in parliament for maintaining those standards is also very  strong and I, so I'm not particularly worried about that threat but I do think there are,  
**[0:05:28-0:05:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:05:28):**  you know, more positively I think we should also be thinking about the opportunities.  So one opportunity as I see it is the chance to use trade policy to reduce our global environmental  footprint. So the food that we consume I think obviously does have environmental impacts  
**[0:05:43-0:05:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:05:43):**  in other parts of the world and I think that by controlling our own trade policy we have  more levers to pull in terms of tackling that environmental footprint. And I also think,  you know, the British agriculture is, you know, has some of the highest environmental  
**[0:05:55-0:06:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:05:55):**  and our welfare standards in the world and I think we've got a great British food brand  and I hope that with a free trade, with a future free trade policy we can do more to  export some of that great food around the world.  
**[0:06:08-0:06:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:06:08):**  There's an interesting balance there isn't there because I mean I would entirely agree  with you that there is a brand associated with Britain which is, you know, that we are  good on environmental standards, we're good on animal welfare. I think to an extent other  
**[0:06:21-0:06:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:06:21):**  countries may be starting to overtake us so we, you know, we always need to improve that  brand. But at the same time, I mean, you raise the issue of trade agreements and as we leave  the EU we've got a fairly tight timeframe to do that. There is going to be a lot of  
**[0:06:39-0:06:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:06:39):**  pressure on senior politicians and on the Prime Minister himself to try and bag big  trade deals with countries like the United States of America and obviously that's really  the crux of where environmental groups are concerned that standards could be lowered.  
**[0:06:59-0:07:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:06:59):**  You say that you're confident that that won't happen. What gives you that confidence?  So my confidence I think comes from when the first instance commitments in the Conservative  parties manifested at the last election where they committed to putting into legislation  
**[0:07:16-0:07:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:07:16):**  a guarantee, a so-called non-regression guarantee that we won't lower our standards below  their current levels. So I think that's very strong and I think, you know, the Prime Minister  and the Environment Secretary to Isavillias herself sort of reiterated those commitments  
**[0:07:30-0:07:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:07:30):**  on a number of occasions and I think, you know, that those are now very hard to go back  from. And I think underpinning those commitments is very strong public support and parliamentary  support. You know, I think this issue around standards, it's something that can unite,  
**[0:07:42-0:07:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:07:42):**  you know, traditional farming groups like the NFU and environmental groups. I think  the coalition of support is very strong and I think, you know, provided that that is maintained  at that front, then I think politically it would be incredibly difficult for the governments  
**[0:07:58-0:08:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:07:58):**  to water down those standards. I mean, yes, this is obviously a top ask of the US trade  negotiators to get greater access to the UK food market for some of their food products.  But you know, like in a negotiation, I think, you know, you have countries have to set out  
**[0:08:14-0:08:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:08:14):**  their red lines, the things that they are just not going to agree to and in the same  way that another policy error on the NHS, I think this is just one of the things that  government is going to have to be clear with, it's not on the table.  
**[0:08:25-0:08:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:08:25):**  So following on from that, of course, the role of the Conservative Environment Network  is pretty crucial. I mean, arguably you are the first and foremost environmental organisation  for politically active Conservatives. So do you see that you, as director and Sen, as  
**[0:08:44-0:08:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:08:44):**  an entity, have a really strong and critical role to play in making sure that these environmental  standards are upheld?  I think the Conservative Environment Network definitely does have a big role in this parliament.  
**[0:08:57-0:09:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:08:57):**  So probably our main sort of area of activity is our parliamentary caucus. So we've got  nearly 60 backbench Conservative MPs now in our caucus, all of whom sign up to, you know,  a range of environmental principles, you know, for instance, around tackling climate change  
**[0:09:16-0:09:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:09:16):**  and protecting wildlife and improving air quality. And, you know, we work with them,  we support them, we give them the tools that they need to be able to raise some of these  important environmental issues in parliament. And we also act as a platform as well. So  
**[0:09:31-0:09:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:09:31):**  we help to convene and bring together, you know, not just MPs, but also councillors,  other people from the wider Conservative movement, and even the environmental movement, so that  we can have, you know, the key policy debates. And so that we can we can push ahead on some  
**[0:09:47-0:09:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:09:47):**  of these key issues, including including the trade standards piece that we've just been  talking about.  And I think actually, in to some extent, you're being quite humble there in terms of in terms  
**[0:09:57-0:10:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:09:57):**  of that caucus, because although you talk about those MPs as being backbench MPs, previous  supporters of the Conservative Environment Network have included Michael Gough have included  Theresa Villiers, and Rebecca Powell, Zach Goldsmith, so so people who are now really  
**[0:10:13-0:10:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:10:13):**  pretty critical and instrumental in government. So so that would seem that, you know, Sen  has the potential to be immensely influential. Do you see things that way? Do you see Sen  as a really influential body?  
**[0:10:29-0:10:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:10:29):**  Yeah, I mean, you'd expect me to say yes. And yes, I mean, I think we do have a lot  of impact, you know, from helping to, you know, coordinate conservatives in Parliament  and support at the net zero target was one of our most recent successes, we were pushed  
**[0:10:44-0:10:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:10:44):**  very hard on issues like legally binding targets and the environment bill, which we're very  pleased to see. And yet, as you say, I think another key measure of our influence is how  people, MPs who've been in our backbench caucus then go on into government and, you know,  
**[0:10:59-0:11:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:10:59):**  champion the same values that we've championed at Sen, but inside government. You know, my  my predecessor's director of Sen is now the Prime Minister's environment adviser. And  you've already mentioned Zach Goldsmith, Simon Clarke is another backbench caucus MP, Rebecca  
**[0:11:15-0:11:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:11:15):**  Powell, all of whom now in very key positions in government. So, so yes, I mean, as a network,  we look to sort of bring on the next generation of green conservative decision makers in government.  And, you know, that's definitely one of our one of our aims at Sen, I think, I think it's  
**[0:11:31-0:11:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:11:31):**  worked quite well in recent years.  So you very kindly agreed with my flattery there, that Sen is influential. And those  are some great examples, you know, sort of looking back to an extent how, you know, going  
**[0:11:45-0:12:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:11:45):**  forward, how do you how do you measure the success of Sen? How will you know at the end  of the year or the end of the next couple of years that Sen has been successful?  So I mean, there are three things in particular that we're really focused on this year. And  
**[0:12:00-0:12:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:12:00):**  I suppose, you know, ultimately, we should measure our success by how much progress we've  made on those three different goals. So one is on net zero. So we were delighted that  the government enshrined in all the net zero targets. I think this year, particularly in  
**[0:12:14-0:12:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:12:14):**  the run up to the UN climate summit COP26 in Glasgow, it's vital that we make more progress  on the short term, the near term policy delivery. So whether that's better incentive for electric  vehicles, farm emissions reduction plan, you know, delivering on the tree planting commitments,  
**[0:12:30-0:12:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:12:30):**  you know, really creaky that we get we get the policies, specific policies in place to  be able to deliver on net zero.  Second is around the sort of big post Brexit death rebuild for agriculture, environment  
**[0:12:41-0:12:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:12:41):**  and fisheries. I'm pretty happy certainly with the, you know, the agriculture bill,  lots of components of the environment and fisheries bill, but if we can strengthen those  further as they go through Parliament, make sure we preserve the bits that are great on  
**[0:12:54-0:13:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:12:54):**  the environment, then I think that's another key goal.  And then thirdly is around the sort of international agenda, where I think there's some of the  trade issues that we've talked about, making sure that we not only mitigate those risks  
**[0:13:07-0:13:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:13:07):**  that we might lower our standards, but also hopefully take advantage of the opportunities  for the environment to an independent trade policy. And then using the UK's sort of great  success stories on things like phasing out coal to make a really successful COP26 in  
**[0:13:22-0:13:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:13:22):**  Glasgow and so that we can encourage other countries to do more on tackling climate change.  So those are the three kind of big, big priorities for us. And, you know, I hope to see lots  of MPs from our caucus raising those issues in Parliament and championing and leading  
**[0:13:39-0:13:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:13:39):**  campaigns. And, you know, I will judge our success by to what extent we've made progress  on each of them.  Fantastic. And from there, I kind of want to take us back almost to the first question  
**[0:13:50-0:14:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:13:50):**  that I asked, which was about Brexit. We looked at the opportunities, but I wonder, you know,  we've discussed trade policy, you know, in the potential pitfalls there, but I wonder  if there are other specific risks that you see in relation to the environment or agricultural  
**[0:14:05-0:14:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:14:05):**  land use that you think that we need to be aware of that we outside, you know, in the  NGO and think tank community need to be aware of as much as you within the party itself.  I genuinely don't really see huge areas for concern. So, you know, another area that you  
**[0:14:23-0:14:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:14:23):**  hear a lot from NGOs is, you know, what if we weaken some of our environmental protections  without the EU being there essentially to force national governments that maybe are  quite as committed to the environmental agenda, you know, a government might come in in the  
**[0:14:39-0:14:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:14:39):**  future and lower some environmental standards or lower some protections or just not make  very much progress on some of the key issues like climate or biodiversity. I don't really  see that as being a huge threat. And I think, you know, I'm particularly reassured with  
**[0:14:54-0:15:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:14:54):**  the environment bill, the fact that the government is committing to setting these new legally  binding environmental targets that will require the government to make progress over the next  15 years on a whole suite of different environmental issues. And I think provided that those targets  
**[0:15:12-0:15:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:15:12):**  are set and they're ambitious and we've got a strong office for environments protection  to hold the government to account on its progress towards meeting those targets, you know, I  think that will, to me, I think that will ensure that we will continue to drive forward.  
**[0:15:26-0:15:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:15:26):**  And I think, you know, the political environment that we're in at the moment, I think support  for, you know, environmentalism, I think, has never been stronger. And I think ultimately  governments respond above all to that public and civil society pressure, provided the NGOs  
**[0:15:42-0:15:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:15:42):**  and others sort of keep making that case, keep building that coalition of broad support.  You know, that I think the risk of government backsliding on some of its commitments is  very small.  
**[0:15:52-0:16:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:15:52):**  Well, let's come back to the environmental movement itself a little bit later. I'm interested,  you know, you talked about your predecessor as director of SEN, having sort of moved into  a position as environmental advisor for the prime minister. And you've kind of come the  
**[0:16:09-0:16:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:16:09):**  other way because you were an advisor to Michael Gove for a couple of years. And of course,  Michael Gove, although I think it would be fair to say there was a measure of disquiet  when he was first appointed, by the time he left, he had been seen as an enormous breath  
**[0:16:26-0:16:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:16:26):**  of fresh air, almost a hurricane of fresh air, you know, going through that department.  And now Theresa Villiers has come in and you were advisor for her for a shorter time, but  still. And I wonder if you could, if you could tell me a little bit about them actually,  
**[0:16:42-0:16:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:16:42):**  a bit about how you were working with them, how you found them as people, how you found  them as policymakers, is their approach particularly different? I think there's, you know, there's  potentially a big legacy there of Michael Gove's to deliver. Will Theresa Villiers deliver  
**[0:16:58-0:17:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:16:58):**  it or make a legacy of her own? So, I mean, there's a whole basket of questions there.  So go where you want.  So I suppose to say a little bit first about the personalities and to have a caveat up  
**[0:17:07-0:17:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:17:07):**  front, which is that I didn't work particularly for a long time with Theresa Villiers and didn't  get to see a lot of her style. So I probably can't really comment so much on her, but certainly  in terms of Michael Gove, you know, I thought he was, you know, an incredibly bold politician.  
**[0:17:25-0:17:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:17:25):**  He you know, when he first came into DAFER, I think took some time to think about the  issues, to listen to experts, to gather evidence and to really think about what his strategy  was. You know, as one of his policy advisors, he was always very receptive to interesting  
**[0:17:43-0:17:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:17:43):**  ideas, would always give them consideration, would always show kind of real engagement,  I think, in some of the substance of the issues. And then once, you know, once he sort of figured  out what it was he wanted to do, he was very kind of effective and persistent at driving  
**[0:17:58-0:18:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:17:58):**  that vision through the department and indeed through government. And, you know, he would  think very strategically about how to get some of the policies that he wanted to see  enacted.  
**[0:18:08-0:18:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:18:08):**  And he was also very public, wasn't he? He was out there, you know, promoting what he  was doing, showing people that he was thinking that he was engaging. And I think, you know,  Theresa Villiers comes across as being much more reticent in terms of that media profile.  
**[0:18:25-0:18:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:18:25):**  I think there's something in that. Yeah, definitely. I mean, I think what I would say about Theresa  Villiers is, you know, she came into government only a short while ago, and she immediately  had a lot of work to do kind of behind the scenes. So that was, you know, making sure  
**[0:18:42-0:18:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:18:42):**  that Defra was fully prepared for a no deal outcome to Brexit, which was, you know, still  a strong possibility at the time. You know, that involves, you know, Defra is one of the  most, if not the most affected department by Brexit in Whitehall. And so there's a lot  
**[0:18:57-0:19:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:18:57):**  of painstaking work going into making sure the department was ready. And similarly on  the environment bill where, you know, a lot of the policy developments, the consultations,  the public aspects of developing the policies of the environment bill have been done, it  
**[0:19:09-0:19:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:19:09):**  was a question of deciding which bits to sort of finally push for when the bill, before  the bill was sort of formally introduced. So I think, you know, there's a lot of immediate  work on that, which didn't really have very public facing elements. But I certainly see  
**[0:19:24-0:19:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:19:24):**  that, you know, she, you know, the vision and the different elements of the Michael  Gove reform agenda at Defra are being delivered by Theresa Villiers. You know, I think she's  done a fantastic job of getting lots of the really difficult things that were really controversial  
**[0:19:38-0:19:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:19:38):**  inside government actually into the environment bill. You know, and I think...  What sort of things were those?  Well, I think, you know, the one that I think she deserves huge credit for is the legally  
**[0:19:47-0:20:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:19:47):**  binding targets. So legally binding, so the environment bill creates a framework for setting  legally binding targets for different bits of the environment, whether it's water quality,  biodiversity, resource use. And, you know, the idea of that is that it creates this long  
**[0:20:07-0:20:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:20:07):**  term direction of travel that businesses know where we're going and they can plan, they  can invest with confidence that this is the direction of government policy. But I mean,  the principle of the target setting framework draws very heavily on the framework in the  
**[0:20:22-0:20:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:20:22):**  Climate Change Act. But, you know, that is the sort of thing that is very difficult to  get through government. Governments don't like legal risk. You know, we've seen in air  quality where the government has been taken to court over the nitrogen dioxide limit values  
**[0:20:39-0:20:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:20:39):**  and has had to put up lots of money to help tackle that problem. So, you know, there are  bits of government that don't like various of the corollaries of legally binding targets.  So, you know, I think she deserves huge credit for, you know, and other ministers for helping  
**[0:20:55-0:21:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:20:55):**  to get that through and get that approved as government policy.  That's very interesting. And I think actually, from a sustainability perspective, it's almost  as if there's been a perfect storm in terms of ministers, because we've had Michael Gove  
**[0:21:07-0:21:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:21:07):**  come through where animal welfare was something that he was interested in. But really, the  environment seemed to be his passion. And I think with Theresa Villiers, animal welfare  is something that she's campaigned on a lot through her political life. So there's that  
**[0:21:20-0:21:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:21:20):**  that sort of combination where the impact that animal welfare has in terms of outcome  measures on measuring and demonstrating environmental progress, there's a nice coupling of those  two issues potentially going forward as well. I'd like to move on to a slightly different  
**[0:21:38-0:21:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:21:38):**  topic. Until recently, climate change was seen as being a very divisive issue for UK  Conservatives. If you look at the Labour Party or the Liberal Democrats, although you had  voices of denial within those parties, there was a broad consensus that climate change  
**[0:21:55-0:22:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:21:55):**  was something that was caused by humans and it was a threat that needed consideration.  That's changed, I think, really quite considerably in the UK. We've gone from a position where  we heard quite a lot of voices for climate denial within the Conservative Party, perhaps  
**[0:22:14-0:22:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:22:14):**  three or four years ago, to a point now where you're speaking with one voice. There is nobody  in the mainstream media from the Conservative Party that isn't recognising that there is  a climate emergency. So it's not only that the attitude has changed, but the language  
**[0:22:30-0:22:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:22:30):**  has ramped up significantly. And that's really still very different from the United States  and from Australia, where currently they're still going through these enormous bushfires.  So what's changed? Why is the UK Conservative Party different? Why and how has that change  
**[0:22:49-0:23:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:22:49):**  happened?  So I think, firstly, I agree with the premise that there has been a sea change, particularly  in terms of how openly and proactively government speaks about the climate change issue. But  
**[0:23:01-0:23:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:23:01):**  I would say that there has, going back to Margaret Thatcher, been consistent support  from, I would say, the mainstream of the Conservative Party in the UK, from the leadership of the  Conservative Party in the UK, for tackling climate change. So Margaret Thatcher was the  
**[0:23:15-0:23:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:23:15):**  first major world leader to talk about climate change at the UN in 1989. David Cameron made  climate action a fundamental part of his modernisation agenda. So I think this has been a theme for  many Conservative leaders. I think in terms of what has really changed in the last couple  
**[0:23:33-0:23:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:23:33):**  of years that has really, you know, ramped up the prioritisation of climate as an issue,  you know, firstly, I think I'd look to the 2017 general election, where after that, you  know, there was a lot of commentary about how the Conservative Party was struggling  
**[0:23:49-0:24:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:23:49):**  to appeal to younger voters. And polling evidence consistently showed that environment climate  change was a key issue for those younger voters, for appealing to those younger voters. And  I think, you know, this need to win over younger voters is an existential problem for the Conservatives.  
**[0:24:06-0:24:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:24:06):**  I think that is one of the reasons why you've seen climate change go up the order of priorities.  I also think public concern more likely than just younger people has started to really  crystallise on climate change. You know, TV programmes like Blue Planet, as well as lots  
**[0:24:25-0:24:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:24:25):**  of, you know, major high-profile events like the wildfires in the Amazon last year. You  know, I think these things have really helped to raise climate change up the public consciousness.  And I think people are more concerned now, and politicians are responding to it. You  
**[0:24:41-0:24:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:24:41):**  know, the last election, many of the MPs that we work with, you know, were talking to us  about conversations they've had on the doorstep about climate change, about environment hustings  that they've had. You know, it is just a big issue and MPs notice that their constituents  
**[0:24:54-0:25:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:24:54):**  are concerned about it.  But at the same time, I mean, you know, there have been school strikes around the world,  Extinction Rebellion exists around the world. And yet it's in the UK that the Conservative  
**[0:25:07-0:25:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:25:07):**  Party has changed. And I, you know, I'm kind of thinking back to my own memory over the  course of the last few years. And there were, you know, people and organisations who were  working quite actively, I think, within the Conservative Party to try and reframe the  
**[0:25:20-0:25:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:25:20):**  debate away from the impact on polar bears to perhaps the impact on agriculture, the  impact on flooding in people's own constituencies. And it seems to me that that's part of it.  But also there have been big personalities that have taken this on in the UK, from the  
**[0:25:39-0:25:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:25:39):**  Goldsmiths, who, of course, are, you know, key movers and shakers within the Conservative  Environment Network. But then Michael Gove himself, who seemed almost single handedly  at that stage to take the climate change flag and wave it, wave it, you know, really, really  
**[0:25:56-0:26:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:25:56):**  rapidly across the faces of the Conservative Party in this country and create that change.  Yes, I agree that actually, you know, the role of particular ministers, I think, you  know, should not be understated. I think, you know, Michael Gove, I think, sort of spotted  
**[0:26:13-0:26:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:26:13):**  some of those trends around, you know, the younger voters and the need to appeal to them,  the rising public concern, particularly about plastic, and was able to, I suppose, seize  that political moment to advance the agenda of his department, i.e. Defra.  
**[0:26:27-0:26:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:26:27):**  But that wasn't just a cynical move, was it? It wasn't just about voters.  No, it definitely wasn't a cynical move. You know, having worked with him, I can firmly  vouch for the fact that he is deeply committed to environmentalism. But I think what, you  
**[0:26:42-0:26:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:26:42):**  know, why I think that is important is because, you know, Defra, from a very long time environment  within Conservative politics, had not been a top priority issue. And I think he was able  to use that political context to advance his department's agenda. I mean, I think it was  
**[0:26:59-0:27:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:26:59):**  more, it was a sort of political tactics, I think, if you like, that created a political  opportunity for him, which he seized.  So traditionally, it's said that people become a little more conservative as they as they  
**[0:27:11-0:27:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:27:11):**  get older. Do you think that today's Extinction Rebellion protesters, the school strikers,  will be voting Conservative in the future?  I don't think so. I mean, I think, you know, we do have the strongest records on decarbonisation  
**[0:27:26-0:27:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:27:26):**  in the past 10 years of any G20 nation. We've made huge progress on particularly on expanding  renewable energy and phasing out coal. You know, and I hope that this parliament with  the various commitments that were made in the manifesto, the opportunity to revitalise  
**[0:27:43-0:27:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:27:43):**  farm payments, as we've already talked about at the start of the podcast, you know, will  demonstrate once and for all that the Conservative Party does have a really good record in the  environment and has made huge amounts of progress.  
**[0:27:56-0:28:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:27:56):**  You know, I do think that, you know, I sense there's a bit of irony in your question. I  think, you know, there obviously is, I think, a lot of overlap between Extinction Rebellion,  some of the school strikes and, you know, people that want to fundamentally change our  
**[0:28:11-0:28:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:28:11):**  economic model away from capitalism. You know, I think that those sort of left-wing economic  views, I think, are quite embedded in some of those organisations. But I think if you  were just looking at the, you know, the environmental record, you know, I do hope by the end of  
**[0:28:26-0:28:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:28:26):**  this parliament, you know, the consensus will have something strong to pointing.  I can remember talking to Michael Jacobs, who was a key advisor to Tony Blair on the  environment at around the time of the Climate Change Act. And I remember sort of saying  
**[0:28:39-0:28:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:28:39):**  to him, look, because at the time it wasn't, it's not just the NGOs don't praise the Conservative  Party. I think they don't praise any party that's actually physically in government very  often. I said, you know, how frustrating is it that, you know, you're doing the work that  
**[0:28:54-0:29:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:28:54):**  you're doing at that time on the Climate Change Act and you're not getting the plaudits for  doing that work? And of course, you know, he said it was immensely frustrating. And  so I'm interested, you know, from your perspective, you've talked throughout this podcast about  
**[0:29:09-0:29:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:29:09):**  the progress that the UK has made under the Conservative government since 2010. And, you  know, there's a lot of progress and clearly, you know, the net zero target first in the  world to have that, that is really big record levels of investment in renewables, as you're  
**[0:29:25-0:29:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:29:25):**  talking about the, you know, the phasing out of coal, this is all there. And yet, we don't  hear that being chanted by Extinction Rebellion. We don't hear environmental organisations  praising the progress that's being made, you know, in their press releases in the media.  
**[0:29:42-0:29:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:29:42):**  How frustrating is that?  I mean, it is frustrating. I mean, on one level, I do understand why I think, you know,  the scale of the problems that we face on the environment are vast and there is obviously  
**[0:29:57-0:30:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:29:57):**  lots, lots more to do. And, you know, the government can't afford to be complacent about  what it has to do ahead of it. But equally, I do think, you know, when a good announcement  is made, I do think it is important to pause and to give some positive reinforcement for  
**[0:30:14-0:30:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:30:14):**  that, because, you know, there will be, with any big sort of big policy that really has  an impact, there will be a debate within government on that. There will be people that will oppose  doing that. And if the ministers who are championing that climate policy then can't point to next  
**[0:30:28-0:30:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:30:28):**  time round that actually there's a positive political gain from the government choosing  to back a particular climate policy, then it's harder to make that case in government  next time. So I think it's all about that positive reinforcement. It's all about giving,  
**[0:30:43-0:30:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:30:43):**  you know, allies in government, I think, evidence that actually, you know, it is worthwhile  politically doing some of these.  It's interesting, isn't it? Because I think measures that we need, if you were talking  
**[0:30:53-0:31:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:30:53):**  to, you know, a lot of people, especially, you know, parents of young children, if my  child comes home from school and sticks their coat up on the coat pegs, I mean, it's a miracle,  but be if I then tell that child off for not also hanging up their scarf, then that's really  
**[0:31:10-0:31:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:31:10):**  not going to encourage them to do it again in the future. Whereas if I praise them, then  they're much more likely to want to hang up the scarf as well. So they get additional  praise and people kind of seem to forget that governments are made up of people as well.  
**[0:31:23-0:31:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:31:23):**  And you touched earlier a little bit on Extinction Rebellion and some of those sort of political  dynamics that are working within there. But why is it that you think it is so difficult  for Extinction Rebellion or, or environmental groups in general to applaud the progress?  
**[0:31:40-0:31:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:31:40):**  Yes, we know there is an emergency. We know that we need to do much more as a nation,  that the Conservatives need to do much more as a government, but progress is being made.  And surely it's better to reward before you then urge with the stick, carrot and stick.  
**[0:31:56-0:32:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:31:56):**  I think it's hard because, you know, Extinction Rebellion in particular have this, you know,  incredibly radical demand, which is that we need to reach net zero by 2025, which is five  years away. And I think, you know, whatever action the government takes, clearly, it's  
**[0:32:11-0:32:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:32:11):**  never going to be enough to get to get us on track to that sort of target. It's just  not, it's just not feasible. It's just not deliverable. So I think, you know, they've  created such a high bar to clear that I don't think any government is going to be able to  
**[0:32:24-0:32:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:32:24):**  clear that bar. So I think that's one of the reasons why the scale of the action they are  demanding that would meet their demands is so is just unfeasible.  And do you think that the government has done enough to reject formally that policy demand  
**[0:32:43-0:33:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:32:43):**  to make the case that net zero is achievable, that it's achievable within the timeframes  that have been recognised as being compatible with maintaining, you know, climate warming  within the two degrees? Do you think the government's been robust enough in making that case back  
**[0:33:01-0:33:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:33:01):**  to Extinction Rebellion, and to the public more widely?  I think I think the government has certainly tried to make that case. And obviously, the  target date that the government did eventually go for 2015 was based on independent advice  
**[0:33:14-0:33:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:33:14):**  from the Committee on Climate Change. And, you know, underpinned by science and economic  modelling and evidence. And I think, you know, that that should have been a way of hopefully  de-politicising the target date as an issue. I think, unfortunately, you know, the election,  
**[0:33:29-0:33:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:33:29):**  you know, the parties all proposed a range of different target dates. Greens went for  2030, Labour didn't actually specify a date, but they said they want to do as much as possible  by 2030, lived down to 2045. And I think as a result, you know, particularly academics  
**[0:33:46-0:34:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:33:46):**  and some NGOs, I think, were sort of reluctant to kind of intervene in that debate for fear  of sort of proving or, you know, frame the babyism to a particular party. But I do think  that now we've had the election, you know, the target date isn't going to change anytime  
**[0:34:01-0:34:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:34:01):**  soon. I do think we need to come back behind that, you know, trust, as it was set up to  do when we passed the Climate Change Act, trust the advice of the Committee on Climate  Change and focus instead on some of the nearer-term practical measures that we need to start implementing.  
**[0:34:18-0:34:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:34:18):**  You know, I think, you know, that will be the government's focus, to pivot back onto  that, focus on short-term actions that we can take now and to try and get away from  this endless debate about target dates, which I think, you know, ultimately doesn't really  
**[0:34:32-0:34:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:34:32):**  move us forward.  It's very interesting, I think, that you were talking about the way in which, you know,  there have been environmental hustings around the country at the last election. And that's,  
**[0:34:42-0:34:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:34:42):**  you know, that's very different from previous elections. And it's been incredibly satisfying  to go, you know, I went to one in Shaftesbury where there was, you know, a really good debate  between all of the candidates about progress that could be made on the environment. Everybody  
**[0:34:58-0:35:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:34:58):**  was saying that there wasn't enough progress, that there could be more progress, but it  was really good to see all of the parties engaging, you know, and the Conservatives  there championing the role that they have played to date and talking about the things  
**[0:35:12-0:35:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:35:12):**  that the party was going to do in the future.  When we talked about the fact that that's really been a big difference over the last  five years, the level of public acceptance of climate change and the championing of climate  
**[0:35:25-0:35:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:35:25):**  change policy, do you think that the Conservative Environment Network and that this Conservative  government in the UK will be able to play a role in transforming Conservative movements  in other nations like the US and Australia so that in five years' time this discussion  
**[0:35:46-0:36:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:35:46):**  about whether climate change exists has just simply gone away and that all of the political  attention is focusing on action to get to net zero?  I would like to think that we can, yes. I think, you know, one of the big problems with  
**[0:36:01-0:36:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:36:01):**  climate change as an issue in some of these other countries like Australia and the US  that you've talked about, that you've mentioned, is that it's become a cultural issue, that  if you're on the left you're in favour of action on climate change, if you're on the  
**[0:36:12-0:36:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:36:12):**  right you're skeptical that we need to tackle climate change. And I suppose what the UK  Conservatives can do is to say that, you know, we are on the same sides of the political  divide as you and yet we also support action on climate change. So you can start to unpick,  
**[0:36:28-0:36:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:36:28):**  I guess, some of that cultural identities which have proven a barrier to action. I also  think the UK Conservatives can show that it is possible to reduce your emissions and reduce  your emissions very rapidly whilst also growing your economy, whilst also creating jobs, whilst  
**[0:36:45-0:37:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:36:45):**  also preserving a broadly capitalist economic system. You know, a lot of, I think, a lot  of climate skepticism on the right is rooted in the fear that to solve climate change you  have to intervene incredibly aggressively in the market, you have to spend lots of public  
**[0:37:01-0:37:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:37:01):**  money, you have to essentially move away from the sort of economic model that people on  the right would like. And I think, you know, the UK with its record so far to show that  that's not necessary. And I think getting that story out there and telling these other  
**[0:37:17-0:37:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:37:17):**  countries, these other parties that don't need to be worried about that as an issue,  I think could be really valuable. And certainly at SEN, you know, we hope to use COP26 in  Glasgow as an opportunity to start some of those conversations with, you know, our sister  
**[0:37:34-0:37:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:37:34):**  parties in these other countries and hopefully build those relationships and get that message  out there.  Sam Hall, director of the Conservative Environment Network. Thank you very much for your time.  
**[0:37:46-0:37:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:37:46):**  It's been it's been a very interesting conversation.  Thank you for having me on, finally.  That was Sam Hall from the Conservative Environment Network. If you've enjoyed listening, please  
**[0:37:56-0:38:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Conservatives--the-Environment---Interview-with-Sam-Hall-eaa26q#t=0:37:56):**  come back and listen to more. Tell your friends, like us, review us and share our links. Farmgate  is a partnership project for Farmwell and FAI Farms, and you can join the conversation  on Twitter by searching for Farmgate podcast. I've been Finn low, Christine. Bye for now.  