### Farm Gate  (2019-22-29)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:00:00):**  Welcome to Farmgate. In this program, I'm fortunate to be joined by two remarkable people  to discuss how vets can contribute to sustainability.  Gudrun Ravitz is a past president of the British Veterinary Association and currently the head  veterinary officer for Simply Health Professionals.  Laura Chaim is a veterinary consultant from FAI Farms. She also set up Vets Sustain, a  
**[0:00:22-0:00:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:00:22):**  new and enormously important channel for vets to promote ideas, debate emerging science  and to find out more about critical issues such as combating antimicrobial resistance.  So first of all, hello to both of you. I'd like to kick off with a question about sustainability.  What is it? What does it mean? And how do we know when we got there?  I think for me, it's Gudrun, I think for me, if I look to what the British Veterinary  
**[0:00:49-0:00:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:00:49):**  Association has done around sustainable agriculture and what they've defined it as, it's the  point at which we can carry out animal agriculture so that it kind of meets the needs of the  present without compromising the ability to meet the needs of the future. So to me, that's  what the sustainability is. But importantly, it's got a number of factors to it. So we  have to be environmentally aware, we have to be ethically aware and it has to be economically  
**[0:01:13-0:01:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:01:13):**  acceptable. But it's also about animal health and welfare. And I think that's really important,  particularly for consumers, but very much for the veterinary profession. If anything  we do sustainably has to have the dimension of animal health and welfare in a positive  light. I think that's right. And I think this is  Laura here. I also, yeah, I absolutely agree with Gudrun on that one. We see in very traditional  
**[0:01:36-0:01:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:01:36):**  definitions of sustainability, such as those from the UN, they frequently include the environment,  social and economic dimensions of sustainability. And that really does for me exclude animals,  particularly domestic animals. So as vets, it's absolutely critical that we include ethics  more generally. And that would include both the social dimensions of sustainability as  well as animal health and welfare. It's always struck me that when we look at  
**[0:02:06-0:02:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:02:06):**  debates around sustainability, often they get sort of caught into silos or if you think  about DEFRA, then different government departments. This department does farm animal welfare.  This department does the environment. And I wonder if there is a role for vets in helping  to bring some of those different aspects together, whether it's farm animal welfare, farm animal  health being brought in with the environment and other issues. Do you think that's possible?  
**[0:02:32-0:02:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:02:32):**  I think it's more than possible. We have to do that. If we take a One Health approach  to everything and certainly the vet profession is on that One Health journey and is implementing  One Health with a lot of stakeholders, it has to tie in the environment. It has to tie  in animal health and welfare. It has to tie in public health. So it is something we must  campaign on. And the health and welfare is I think where Laura and I have started. We've  
**[0:03:00-0:03:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:03:00):**  been campaigning animals are sentient. We know they're sentient. And above that, it's  a marker of social progress. So we have to, as the world we live in, think about social  progress as well and animal health and welfare is within that. So all those streams that  we're talking about, environment, people and animals have to come into that sustainable  agenda. So whatever we're doing on a regulation level, on an association level, on a personal  
**[0:03:24-0:03:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:03:24):**  level, I think it has to marry all of those aspects to be sustainable.  I'm going to come back to maybe what leadership looks like in terms of the veterinary profession  and sustainability a bit later. But there's a question around the way in which sustainability  and climate change perhaps in particular has caught the public zeitgeist in the last year  or two. It's suddenly become fashionable to be sustainable in a way that it perhaps wasn't  
**[0:03:50-0:03:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:03:50):**  until the last couple of years. And every company wants to be seen to be doing its own  little bit. And this, it strikes me this can lead to overstatements that because companies  want to say something, they oversell what they're actually doing. And this can lead  to greenwash. But I wonder because I think of sustainability as a journey rather than  a destination, that it's something that, you know, no matter how well we're doing, there's  
**[0:04:17-0:04:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:04:17):**  always something we can do better as new information comes along. But does this greenwash challenge,  I mean, do you think it exists in the first place? And do you think that it's an important  part of that journey? Does greenwash lead to better practice?  I think there is a problem with greenwash. However, I think public statements by companies  to improve have to be seen in a positive way. If they're making public statements, that  
**[0:04:45-0:04:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:04:45):**  means they are accountable to the public to do more. And we've seen some great shifts  as a result of sort of what might seem to be knee jerk reactions from companies to step  up. There's been, as an example, in the sustainability world on the animal welfare side, there's  been recently the European Chicken Commitment, a group, a large group of NGOs, global NGOs  that are calling on companies to adopt a range of animal welfare measures for grueller chickens.  
**[0:05:15-0:05:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:05:15):**  And a number of companies have got on board with that particular commitment, some in a  very measured way backed by science, backed by research in their supply chains. And some  I believe that may have made those statements that affect huge grueller supply chains. That  is a really good thing from my perspective on the whole. However, there are major problems  or major challenges in the future with implementation of some of those standards. But on the whole,  
**[0:05:45-0:05:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:05:45):**  I'd say these statements are objective and they will drive change.  I was going to say, Laura, I think you're absolutely right. It's interesting, isn't  it? I mean, especially from the work that you do and what we're looking at with Vet  to Sustain, what you're looking at through that and the British Veterinary Association.  It's providing that evidence and making sure the veterinary profession is helping companies  
**[0:06:06-0:06:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:06:06):**  with the evidence and challenging them on the evidence. Because the greenwashing, it  starts a conversation at least. And I think people feel so motivated by the climate change,  partly because we can see the damage that can be done to our own planet. But also it's  something we can engage with, it's something we can each do. And it's something that  affects every one of us, even at the smallest level. So I think people can engage with it.  
**[0:06:33-0:06:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:06:33):**  But the greenwashing thing, at best, you know, it starts a conversation and that's important.  But I think, as you said, Laura, we've got to have the research and we've got to have  the evidence. And a lot of it we have that. So we have to use it and we have to challenge  it. So that's where Vets come in, because they're the gatekeepers to a lot of different  people, animal owners and keepers, etc. So we can help with that evidence. But we've  
**[0:06:58-0:07:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:06:58):**  got to challenge it as well and stand up and shout about this.  So what I'm hearing there is sort of conversations about evidence and accountability. And I suppose  social media, you know, for all its ills can be quite helpful in that way that if companies  overstate, then people can pick them up on things and challenge that and demand that  evidence basis that perhaps would be missing without that immediate opportunity for people  
**[0:07:22-0:07:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:07:22):**  to challenge.  Yeah, and so absolutely. So we have to do that and then take that and educate. So we  are in front of animal owners and keepers every day. And we're in front of the public  every day who are interested either in the pet or the animal in front of them and the  wider environment. And they will look to veterinary surgeons and the veterinary team as a source  
**[0:07:43-0:07:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:07:43):**  of evidence and science led. So we have to share that. So sometimes it's about feeling  empowered as a profession to speak with that one voice and share that knowledge to help  others make informed decisions.  And it's difficult for a layperson sometimes, isn't it? Because, you know, you rely on experts  to be able to sort of help you sift your way through these various different bits of information  
**[0:08:08-0:08:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:08:08):**  and people tend to graze information, you get a little bit of information on a particular  subject and you just you have to assume that's right. So when we're looking at these more  complex issues, we really do rely on experts like vets and other sustainability professionals  to help us sort the wheat from the chaff.  I mean, absolutely. And actually, I think that sometimes have to challenge themselves  
**[0:08:31-0:08:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:08:31):**  because we work sometimes in our little micro areas. And even in terms of climate, it's  a big topic. So understanding everything about it is difficult. And we have to be careful  that we don't rely on what we thought we knew. And evidence has moved on, which is why it's  really important to engage with the stuff that say FAI are doing with things that you've  written, Finlow, in the Vet Record that starts that conversation that allows vets to read  
**[0:08:55-0:09:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:08:55):**  more, understand more. And I think we're going to talk about vet sustain. But what Laura  has started with vet sustain as well is to allow vets a place to find that evidence and  signpost that evidence to be able to then educate the wider population.  One of the other things that I've really enjoyed about the vet sustain Facebook page in particular  is that ability to be able to have that debate with a whole range of different people. And  
**[0:09:21-0:09:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:09:21):**  one story that came out recently that I think helps to sort of link these two sort of questions  around what is sustainability and greenwash and evidence-based practice and change is  a story that Laura and I were debating on the Facebook page about one big retailer that  has recently announced that its trucks are going to run on cow poo. And my concern was  that this for this to happen, there needs to be a year round supply of cow muck and  
**[0:09:51-0:09:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:09:51):**  that that must come from indoor units. And Laura, you picked me up on that because my  you know, my own concern is that indoor units demand more cereal, more protein, potentially  from soy, etc. And so it seemed to me that this was greenwash, but you picked me up straight  away, which was great and said, well, indoor doesn't necessarily mean bad. Yeah, absolutely.  A lot of what we do at FAI is about collecting data around outcome measures. So many people  
**[0:10:18-0:10:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:10:18):**  will obviously know about outcome measures, they're looking at the impact of a particular  production system and the species in production, and really focuses on those as being the most  important thing in terms of driving our decisions in agriculture. And so in terms of indoor  outdoor, based on outcome measures approach, it wouldn't really matter what the production  system is, as long as those outcome measures are positive for people, animals and planet.  
**[0:10:44-0:10:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:10:44):**  So looking at the environment, looking at animals and animal welfare, and looking at  the people working in those units, as well as the wider community. And so there are some  parts of the world where indoor units, in my view, would currently be the best bet based  on outcome measures. Some parts of the world like Saudi Arabia or northern Norway, where  you've got those climatic temperatures and conditions that really would not be conducive  
**[0:11:09-0:11:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:11:09):**  to putting animals outdoors and wouldn't actually be fair to those animals. Some might say that  actually we shouldn't be producing dairy in those regions. That's another debate perhaps.  But currently where there is a current demand and a market for dairy in those regions, indoor  may, based on outcome measures, be the best solution. However, that said, in many parts  of the world, New Zealand, Ireland, many parts of England, there is a plentiful supply of  
**[0:11:35-0:11:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:11:35):**  pasture and grazing for dairy cattle. And in which case the outcome measures may inform  us that actually outdoor systems are the best in those situations. And of course, for me  as well, in terms of outdoor agriculture, for dairy cattle, we can then couple regenerative  agriculture approaches, which will really drive benefits in terms of animal behaviour,  animal behavioural opportunity, biodiversity benefits through planting trees and hedgerows,  
**[0:12:07-0:12:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:12:07):**  building soil fertility, building biodiversity by approaches such as using mixed herbal lays  to benefit insects and pollinators, et cetera. So there's a whole raft of other additional  approaches for outdoor agriculture that could really capitalise on the benefits of livestock  to human society. So I feel like it's in the UK, I think it's a really good discussion  to have about outdoor dairyhood, but it's not as cut and dried when you look at the  
**[0:12:32-0:12:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:12:32):**  global picture.  It's interesting. Just sort of focusing on the UK for a moment, because I think it's  interesting in that conversation about outcome measures, whether outcome measures in and  of themselves are sufficient to be able to give us enough information. Because when I  listen to industry, what I'm hearing, at least in terms of dairy, is that you can get really  
**[0:12:51-0:12:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:12:51):**  good health and welfare outcomes from dairy, even when you are indoor. But there are, as  you were just outlining there, a lot of other good reasons for having cattle outside.  Yeah, and that's where you have to collect outcome measures for the environment, as well  as the social and economic dimensions as well. So indoor units, you would have to be collecting  environmental outcome measures for aspects such as the feed, where it's produced, and  
**[0:13:21-0:13:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:13:21):**  the impact of that feed production. And it may again inform us that that's not sustainable.  So I think you do have to look at the three E's and outcome measures that underpin all  of those three areas.  And how does breed fit into that?  Yeah, sure. Again, it comes back to the health and welfare characteristics in terms of outcome  
**[0:13:40-0:13:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:13:40):**  measures. So we would look then at rates of mastitis, lameness, fertility, etc. And it  may be that for certain breeds that those outcome measures are less desirable. I think  in the past, there's been a real focus on production. So post-war, there was a massive  drive really for food production. And that led to really a focus on that single measure  of production and productivity. There's been a lot of progress in the dairy industry in  
**[0:14:10-0:14:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:14:10):**  recent years, looking at a more balanced range of traits, including longevity and again,  lameness and fertility and mastitis levels, creating some pretty robust breeds out there.  There's also recently been much more crossbreeding going on that again capitalises on the benefits  of two different or three different breeds together. But I do think for the future, we  will have to increase that sort of work and look at a much more balanced scorecard of  
**[0:14:40-0:14:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:14:40):**  outcome measures that really just start to prioritise or at least even consider animal  welfare as an equal measure to the economic output. And that won't always be popular,  that will not be a popular opinion. But for vets, I feel it's absolutely imperative. We  have an oath to protect animal welfare. And for me, it's absolutely critical that we're,  for example, not performing cesarean sections on the same cow year in, year out. And if  
**[0:15:07-0:15:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:15:07):**  we've got particular animals that are very, very prone to lameness due to confirmation  problems, but she's got very high milk yield, we need to be really looking at the animal  and potentially not taking any replacement heifers off her. Again, not popular opinions  there, but we really should be looking at a much more balanced approach to breed selection.  That's really interesting, because that's almost sort of taking us back to a point that  
**[0:15:30-0:15:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:15:30):**  we were making a few moments ago about different prisms and trying to separate out different  elements of sustainability. What you're saying there is that in the past, you know, food  production increasing more for less has been a real driver within agriculture, but that  now the public and government and farmers themselves are looking for a greater range  of outcomes. It's not just about the food production, but about perhaps the public goods  
**[0:15:58-0:16:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:15:58):**  that are associated, the environmental outcomes.  Just listening to that as well, it's making me think of the less and better, which is  the approach that came out of the BVA sustainable agriculture, is that, you know, we can have  the discussion on eating less animal protein, which I think we would probably agree is much  more sustainable for a number of reasons, but it's the and better as well, which encapsulates  
**[0:16:22-0:16:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:16:22):**  everything we've been talking about. And it's making sure those outcomes do measure the  and better. As veterinary professions, we have the evidence to give to clients and say,  actually, we need to be eating less animal protein, but we need to be eating the better  animal protein. So our spend is the same. We are valuing it, but we're valuing the right  reasons. So animal health and welfare, sustainability, biodiversity, the environmental factors, etc.  
**[0:16:48-0:16:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:16:48):**  And it's having that evidence and providing those tools, which I think through the sustainable  agricultural policy at BVA, we have been looking at that with the benchmarking around assurance  schemes. But as a profession and welfare scientists and others involved in this, we need to make  sure that our measures are robust and collecting exactly what we want them to collect to inform  consumers.  
**[0:17:11-0:17:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:17:11):**  Fantastic. Thank you. This is this is a really interesting discussion. Thank you both for  taking part. I'd like to move us on just a little bit, if I may, because that's been  a fantastic introduction to a whole range of different issues. And I'd like to look  at vet sustain and I'd like to look at the British Veterinary Association's sustainable  agriculture policy. Perhaps, Laura, vet sustain. What's who? What's it all about?  
**[0:17:36-0:17:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:17:36):**  Yeah, thanks for the opportunity to talk about it. It's a very new initiative, really. And  it's been a really exciting journey so far. Vet sustain is essentially a collective of  veterinary professionals, that's vets, nurses and paraprofessionals that are passionate  about driving sustainability, both within our own profession and within the sectors  that we influence. And really, we're building a bit of a movement here. It's at the moment  
**[0:18:03-0:18:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:18:03):**  been primarily a communications and engagement campaign to build our network. And we do have  a nice growing network of about 600 vets on Facebook and on Twitter and in our monthly  mailing. But also what we hope to do in the new year really is to launch our strategy,  which includes a number of really important initiatives and toolkits that we will develop  with partners to give us an example, what kind of things? Sure, well, the first one  
**[0:18:33-0:18:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:18:33):**  would be based on the demand for our work would be a toolkit that would inform veterinary  professionals and veterinary businesses on reducing the environmental footprint of those  businesses and all veterinary activities. So actually in the practices themselves? In  the practices, exactly. It would consist of, for example, a downloadable handbook that  contains very digestible evidence information about what they can do in practice, but also  
**[0:18:59-0:19:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:18:59):**  other sort of more participatory dynamic tools like carbon calculators and self assessments,  for example, that would really help businesses to make meaningful changes in reducing their  environmental footprint. And also potentially also we're looking at sort of companion handbooks  that would help vets to advise farmers, equine clients, exotics clients and pet owners on  actually reducing the footprint of ownership of those particular animals. So allowing vets  
**[0:19:31-0:19:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:19:31):**  to really deliver advice that's again, evidence based and looking at the populations and systems  of husbandry for those particular animals in order to reduce our footprint. So my next  question is why vet sustain is necessary? Because are you working alongside the BVA?  Is the BVA not doing enough on this? I think the BVA has done some fantastic work around  sustainability. They are ultimately a membership organisation and are driven by their membership.  
**[0:20:00-0:20:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:20:00):**  And vet sustain is separate to the BVA, but we're really lucky that we have Simon Docherty,  the senior vice president on our steering group, as well as Gudrun and Sean Wensley  as well, who are past presidents. So we have... Gosh, there's a full line up there. It's almost  like three series of the crown or crowns. It's like the old BVA dream team, I say. Meet  Sean and Simon. Yeah, exactly. But those guys have been huge champions of our work and really  
**[0:20:28-0:20:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:20:28):**  supportive. But I would say, you know, we're not directly affiliated per se with the BVA  other than that support, but they really have been fantastic in supporting our launch. What  we can do slightly differently to the BVA is to drive a number of initiatives with resources  that we can hopefully glean from various sponsors. And we can also have some really difficult  conversations that we feel are necessary. And I think a slightly separate organisation  
**[0:20:57-0:21:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:20:57):**  like vet sustain is able to have those difficult conversations around things like populations  of animals that will, you know, that is difficult to talk about because they're our clients.  And I think that's where we that's where our niche sits, really.  Interesting. Thank you. And Gudrun, you led the BVA as president, as we were hearing then,  and the BVA has its new sustainable agricultural policy. Could you pull out a few highlights  
**[0:21:23-0:21:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:21:23):**  from that, where that's come from and where you think it's going?  I mean, I think, you know, it started way back in with Vet Futures a long time ago,  with vets taking charge of their future and realising that we absolutely have a voice  and we need to talk on topics that are important to animal health and welfare, but also to  the veterinary profession. And it was quite obvious that sustainable animal agriculture  
**[0:21:46-0:21:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:21:46):**  is one of those that we absolutely need to have one voice on. We need to be a force for  change in it. And I think, you know, as an integral part in the agriculture and food  sector, the veterinary profession is very well aware that animal agriculture is a significant  contributor to climate change, habitat loss, etc. And it's for us as veterinary professionals  who are evidence based and science led to work with stakeholders to make those changes  
**[0:22:16-0:22:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:22:16):**  that we need to make, but also to help inform consumers. So the sustainable agriculture  policy came out as a stakeholder group led by the BVA, working with a number of our species  divisions, but also external stakeholders as well, to really look at what, A, what it  means to the veterinary profession, but B, come up with some really tangible recommendations  that the veterinary profession can both advocate for at various levels, but also individual  
**[0:22:45-0:22:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:22:45):**  veterinary surgeons and individual veterinary practices can go out there and make a change.  So some of the things that we've talked about in there is around advocating on policies  as we move forward, particularly around habitats, biodiversity, protecting the environment,  but also the role of veterinary surgeons as educators, as sign posters, and…  And are vets prepared to be that? Are they prepared to play that leadership role out  
**[0:23:15-0:23:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:23:15):**  in the field? I do know, I believe they are. You know,  when we ask vets, and so the British Veterinary Association asks vets what they think is important,  and 89% of them said that they think the veterinary profession should play a more active role  in the sustainability agenda. So I would say that from our membership we have a mandate  from them for the BVA to do it, but also a clear signal that they want to be more active  
**[0:23:37-0:23:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:23:37):**  in it. And I think what we perhaps haven't done before, which we are doing now, is providing  those tools both through what the BVA team and also the Texas AIM is doing, to allow  them then to have those conversations. But it's not just having those conversations,  it's empowering them that the rest of the veterinary profession thinks it's fair, because  we have a policy position statement on it. And I think if we can give vets that voice  
**[0:24:01-0:24:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:24:01):**  and give vets that confidence and backing, I think they are ready to do that, because  they see the effect on environment, the effect on people, and the effect on animals.  And so clearly the Sustainable Agriculture Policy is a really good example of leadership.  You've talked about there, you know, multiple stakeholders working together, this being  a process which has taken a number of years to achieve. I'm still sort of curious about  
**[0:24:26-0:24:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:24:26):**  how that actually then translates on the ground and how that leadership emerges, because,  you know, there's a cost associated with visits from vets, you know, vets certainly  on the farms that are perhaps less well, less actively managed for health and welfare. The  vets won't be coming on there on a regular basis. So is it possible for somebody, you  know, in the Yorkshire Dales or something to get out there and feel confident in challenging  
**[0:24:56-0:25:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:24:56):**  farmers on some of their behaviours, challenging them on some of their land management? How  do they go about doing that?  Yeah, so I think we do need to look at it and the whole policy in three areas. So there's  the individual veterinary surgeon, there's the practice level and then there's the association  level. So you're absolutely right, there are some harder to reach, perhaps farms or harder  
**[0:25:15-0:25:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:25:15):**  to reach practices of agriculture that we may wish to change that we find hard. And  perhaps that's more on an association level, taking it to government and saying, look,  are the regulations effective? Are they appropriate? Do we need to do something? Bearing in mind  that we're looking at potentially brand new policies coming through, how do we as vets  give the evidence? And I think we have that evidence now and through advocating and lobbying,  
**[0:25:41-0:25:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:25:41):**  the veterinary profession can play its part at that level. And that may help to bring  actually the bottom to a standard that is more acceptable. But I think where vets as  individuals play a role is educators. So they are the people that are on those farms, they  have an intimate relationship with those animal owners and keepers. And they are the ones  that are potentially able to signpost the information, have the conversations about,  
**[0:26:06-0:26:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:26:06):**  look, this is the way we're doing it now, but if we were to do it this way, this is  the benefit. This is how I can help you. Again, looking at the outcomes. So animal health  and welfare outcomes are fantastic ways of saying, look, we have a benchmark, how can  we approve? This is how we can audit it. But also perhaps more on environmental outcomes  that we haven't looked at before. And I think for individuals, again, it's that education  
**[0:26:29-0:26:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:26:29):**  piece. So I think we can, as trusted partners with farms, but I accept that sometimes that  is harder and we have to work at an association level to advocate for better at the base layer.  But also I think practices can really help with this. So practice policies, but absolutely  instil the confidence in farms that this is what the practice believes. Practice education,  the distributing education materials that practices that farms can believe in, that  
**[0:27:01-0:27:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:27:01):**  are science-led and evidence-based. And also at practice level, doing that local advocacy  work with politicians, key stakeholders, farming advocates, et cetera. So I think we need to  look at it at three levels, but I think we shouldn't underestimate the sort of privileged  relationship that vets can have as educators. And Laura, I was going to say, Laura, that  it seems to me that FAI has a role in that as well. That in addition to the BVA policy  
**[0:27:31-0:27:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:27:31):**  and the work with vets, that there's an opportunity to link up that renewed vision and leadership  from vets with retailer contracts and outcome measures and work that's actually taking place  on the ground. So that there's this pincer action taking place for better sustainability.  And one example I think that we've touched on amongst ourselves in the past is around  liver fluke and the way that you can try and manage liver fluke simply by medicinal approaches,  
**[0:28:02-0:28:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:28:02):**  health approaches. But if you change land management and try and dry out certain spaces,  fence off wet areas and manage animal livestock access to those wetter areas, then potentially  the combination of better land management and medicines can lead to a real reduction  in liver fluke outbreak. Yeah, absolutely. I think there's a real  role for vets in looking at land use as a tool for driving improvements in animal health.  
**[0:28:34-0:28:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:28:34):**  And again, you mentioned drugs there. I think as the veterinary model, the veterinary practice  model has to in coming years change from being reliant on drug sales through to reliance  on more services. We can see an opportunity here to bring in different types of services  that might include the empire of crotchethals, land management and other aspects of environmental  stewardship on farms. And also we're in a really interesting point in history as well,  
**[0:29:03-0:29:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:29:03):**  where we may see in the UK a change in subsidy structures on farms, which may allow farmers  to bring in more expertise in terms of environmental and their properties. And this may be an opportunity  to vet for vets as well, dovetailing into our new sort of new service structure may  allow us to capitalise on that and advise on boosting public goods on farms. So not  only environmental stewardship, but also animal welfare, of course, and fundamentally, which  
**[0:29:36-0:29:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:29:36):**  is of real interest to me as I'm currently studying for a PhD in antimicrobial usage,  looking at driving reductions in antimicrobial usage and looking at systems, system level  change in order to achieve improvements in these public goods.  I think it's interesting, isn't it? Because a lot of what I think we're talking about  is behavioural change and that kind of behavioural change management from moving from where we  
**[0:29:59-0:30:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:29:59):**  have been to where we kind of want to go. I think the really interesting piece for vets  there is providing that evidence, and I know I keep talking about that, but it's providing  that evidence base to it and the education that people can trust to help that behavioural  change to happen. And I think you're right, Laura, subsidies could well be changing and  certainly at an association level. I know the BVA is advocating strongly on the environmental  
**[0:30:25-0:30:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:30:25):**  stewardship, animal health and welfare, public health and others, so that they form part  of that subsidy package. But I think on the ground, behavioural change really matters  and vets can play a really key role in that. So let's go into that role just very slightly  more deeply. So you can call out a vet onto your farm and that vet could give you advice  and that may be around drugs and it may be around land management, it may combine those  
**[0:30:52-0:30:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:30:52):**  things, but you've still got to call that vet out. And if you're a farmer that is making  very little money, then there is an incentive not to do that, if there's a cost associated.  So are there ways that vets can help those farmers? Are there different models of veterinary  support that can be offered in the countryside? And I think we have to find those. We are  currently talking over the internet. I think vets are very well aware of innovation and  
**[0:31:21-0:31:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:31:21):**  technology changes, meaning that we need to get away sometimes from the brick and mortar  aspect of what we do and the actual face-to-face aspect of what we do for the palm of hand  aspect so we have those relationships through the palm of hand, which allows us to reach  out to more and educate more in a more timely way and a cost-effective way on both sides.  So I think we need to make sure that we're owning that educational space. I think we  
**[0:31:46-0:31:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:31:46):**  need to look at how we change our business models in practices, particularly in the agricultural  sector, so that we become more ingrained within businesses, so that we are seen as, you know,  we're there as a cost, but actually we provide them to, we give them the ability to make  more profits in the end.  Well that's all we have time for. I'd like to thank my guests, Laura Higham and Gudrun  
**[0:32:11-0:32:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Discussion---Vets--sustainability-e9t31j#t=0:32:11):**  Ravitz. If you've enjoyed listening, please come back and listen to more. Tell your friends,  like us and share our links. You can join the conversation on Twitter by searching for  Farmgate podcast. Farmgate is a partnership project for Farmwell and FAI Farms. I've  been Finn Loceystain. Bye for now.  