### Farm Gate  (2021-50-22)
**[0:00:00-0:00:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to Farmgate, I'm Flynnlow Costayne. In this programme we're discussing  racism, how to improve diversity in British agriculture and animal sciences, and how we  might successfully encourage more of our black, Asian and minority ethnic population to enjoy  the countryside. I'm joined by two people who've experienced racism in their everyday  lives and who are leading efforts to break down barriers so that our rural professions  
**[0:00:29-0:00:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:00:29):**  better reflect the UK's population as a whole. Navaratnam Potheban is a dairy vet who co-founded  the British Veterinary Ethnicity and Diversity Society, and Bushra Abu-Helil, who's a second-year  PhD student focused on poultry health and welfare at the Quadram Institute, and she's  Vice Chair of the BAME Ecologist Network. Thebe can be found on Twitter using the handle  at NavaratnamPart1, and Bushra is on Twitter as at BushyB94. Welcome both. Hello. Hi, thanks  
**[0:00:59-0:01:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:00:59):**  for having us. Thebe, we know that agriculture is a stubbornly white profession. Does that  matter? I think it matters massively. So we talk about why do we need diversity, and again,  diversity brings a wealth of talent, a wealth of thought, a wealth of experience, a wealth  of ideas. And I think for agriculture as a sector to grow, it needs that talent there.  But also agriculture is meant to be providing food for the population, and it needs to be  
**[0:01:24-0:01:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:01:24):**  able to be connected to that population, first to understand what the population wants, but  also for the population to be embraced and be close to agriculture. And again, the sector  therefore needs to reflect the diversity in the country it is supplying and supporting.  And so I think, and we talk about this disconnect all the time, but that is a lot to do with  the lack of diversity creating that disconnect. So there's a degree to which that diversity  
**[0:01:47-0:01:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:01:47):**  means that there's potentially a dearth of talent coming into the industry, but also  when we've got 8 million people from BAME communities living in Britain, many of whom  will want to eat different sorts of foods, there's a gap in the market for people to  grow different products. Yeah. And also it's not only do we need to cater for the different  tastes, but also if we want to promote British quality and the British standards and promote  
**[0:02:10-0:02:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:02:10):**  the message of farming, how can you do that if you don't understand or are able to converse  with different people? We talk about children understanding about farming again, it's a  cycle. Bushra, do you think there is a genuine resistance to people of colour in rural professions  such as farming and veterinary science, or is it just that BAME communities tend to live  in more urban areas and so gravitate towards the sort of jobs that we might naturally associate  
**[0:02:35-0:02:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:02:35):**  with towns and cities? I think it is a combination of both. I think inspiring that in nature  initial connection to nature and the outdoors is a really essential part of it and getting  people to do that as young as possible is great. But even over lockdown, if you look  at the national parks, only 5% of their visitors came from BAME backgrounds. And part of that  was also to do with transportation. The fact that many people who are living in cities  
**[0:02:59-0:03:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:02:59):**  don't necessarily have access to cars and therefore it's much more difficult for them  to get out to our beautiful countryside and experience some of our amazing national parks  that will help to inspire that real love for nature and hopefully then lead into those  kind of career paths. I also think people aren't necessarily aware of the diversity  of career paths that are available within agriculture and within the countryside in  
**[0:03:23-0:03:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:03:23):**  general. People think that you just have to be a farmer or a vet and those are the other  options when actually there is a whole range of things that you can do like myself who's  doing actual research to help benefit people. Thanks Bushra and some of those issues I think  we're going to get into in slightly more detail slightly later in the programme. I mentioned  in the introduction that both of you had experienced racism. I mean, you know, growing up and also  
**[0:03:44-0:03:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:03:44):**  in your professional lives, I guess. What was life like for you growing up?  My teen years I spent growing up in ultra rural Essex. I was the only person of colour  really at my high school and I was the only person from a Muslim heritage background as  well. I once got into a really big argument at school about a racist Islamophobic joke  that was told and I was obviously offended by it. And it's caused quite a large argument  
**[0:04:10-0:04:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:04:10):**  and by the end of it, I was the one who was pulled aside by the teacher for making a fuss  and for causing trouble making, which was an issue and I was the one who was trying  to be outspoken against the racism. And obviously my family are fiercely protected of me, but  we also never wanted to draw too much attention to myself either and to our family as a whole  when you are the only minority in a community.  
**[0:04:32-0:04:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:04:32):**  It's interesting, isn't it? Because, you know, with my kids, if I felt that they had been  wronged, that the teachers had jumped in, they'd come to the wrong conclusion, you know,  I'd be down on the school like a tonne of bricks. And you're saying that for your family,  there was a feeling that you couldn't do that, that in drawing attention to yourself, it  would kind of make the problem worse.  
**[0:04:52-0:04:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:04:52):**  Yeah, there was always that hesitation and that is also something that I've had to break  down in my professional career later on and understand that speaking out is actually a  very good thing and an important thing for us to do. And it doesn't make me a troublemaker  in any way at all. So that was actually something I had to unlearn as well as I progressed in  my career.  
**[0:05:11-0:05:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:05:11):**  So that was obviously at school. Have you experienced racism professionally as well?  And did things change when you went to university? Were you suddenly surrounded by people of  colour in a way that you weren't at high school?  I was really hoping that would be the case. And in the grand scheme of things, it was.  I went to university in Cambridge and overall the campus is very diverse. But on my course  
**[0:05:29-0:05:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:05:29):**  for zoology, there was only one other person of colour. So I soon realised that, yeah,  I'd certainly picked an industry where the resilience I'd built as a teen would certainly  be coming in handy. But whenever I go out to a new farm or even if I'm going to a new  place of academia and talking about my work, I sometimes always question, will people have  an issue with my age, with my gender, with my name or with my skin colour? Like which  
**[0:05:56-0:06:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:05:56):**  thing are they going to pick? And so you can probably tell I'm a very bubbly and positive  person and that is really intentional. I'm extremely passionate. And in the past that  has been perceived wrongly, that's been perceived as aggression or something. And I'm so worried  to be labelled that angry black woman. Once again, that troublemaker, they can sometimes  make you feel a little bit reserved. Certainly in my professional career, I experienced racism  
**[0:06:24-0:06:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:06:24):**  more in the form of microaggressions. So these would be things like, oh, you speak English  surprisingly well, despite the fact I was born here and being British my entire life.  Even when I once submitted a research article to a peer review paper, one of the first comments  from the peer reviewer was have someone with a native level of English read through your  work. I was the lead author and I'm British and the second author was Australian. So both  
**[0:06:48-0:06:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:06:48):**  of us were very much native English speakers, just as scientists, we're not that good at  writing prose all the time.  Steve, did you grow up in the countryside as well?  I grew up up north. I grew up in Scotland and in Yorkshire, but in towns. So I didn't  really grow up in the countryside. I've only sort of lived in the countryside since I started  
**[0:07:06-0:07:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:07:06):**  working as a vet. And yeah, and what Bushra shared, I can completely relate to because  I think, you know, even though we're different sides of the country, different backgrounds,  different everything, a lot of the similar sort of experiences.  Now, Steve, you love cows, but you grew up, as you say, you know, in towns, in big towns.  Why cows? Where did they come in?  
**[0:07:26-0:07:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:07:26):**  It's weird because when I, so I did an astrology degree like Bushra, but I did it in Manchester  and I worked with primates and small animals in that course. So when I did veterinary,  I thought, yeah, I'm going to become a small animal vet. I'm going to become a researcher.  And that was my idea and to work in a research establishment. And I think, and I've done  a bit of working on farms to get into vet school and I liked it. But when I was at vet  
**[0:07:46-0:07:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:07:46):**  school, I really enjoyed just standing on farms. And I think I enjoyed the working with  the individual animal and working with the herd, which you didn't get working with  cats and dogs. And also I just enjoyed going from one farm to a different farm and meeting  the family and the fresh air. Yeah. And so I think that's, and I think because cows  were there, that's what I enjoyed. Yeah. And then I'd fuddled it down to dairy cows.  
**[0:08:06-0:08:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:08:06):**  So that's my main passion.  So how have you experienced racism in your professional life or growing up?  Exactly like Bushra, everywhere I go, when I was a child, I was the only person of colour.  And like Bushra, my parents also almost suppressed anything that I sort of came up with, like,  oh, why is that? Why is this? And I think it's just to keep your head down and get through  
**[0:08:24-0:08:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:08:24):**  it because my parents immigrated to this country and they had to fight for everything. They  came with nothing, literally their suitcases, and they had to fight for everything they  achieved. But it was about being quiet and not speaking up because then the moment they  get excluded, they would have lost everything. So again, they taught that to us as children,  not realizing that actually we're born here, we've got rights and we've got our own feelings.  
**[0:08:46-0:08:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:08:46):**  They almost became that attitude. So I had, you know, at school, you know, people saying  racist jokes and things like that, but you just accepted it and went on with it. You  tried maybe to complain once or twice, but when the teachers didn't do anything, you  left it. Then at university, again, I was the only person, I was one of maybe four people  of colour in my vet school in my year. And in the entire vet school, out of five, six  
**[0:09:05-0:09:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:09:05):**  hundred people, there are probably 20 people of colour. So again, your focus is about finishing  your exams and getting through the course. You haven't got time to fight for your own  rights and for you to be accepted. And actually what you do is you just accept it because  you just need to get on with these people, especially in a course like veterinary where  you're so grouped together and you do exams together and you do everything together, you  
**[0:09:26-0:09:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:09:26):**  just have to do it. But, you know, there are good times as well. I'm not saying that it's  a horrible place and you're getting racism left, right and centre. It's nothing like  that. But like Bushra said, it's the microaggressions are worse than the overt aggressions. You don't  get that people saying the P word to me in the middle of the street or at vet school,  just the microaggressions, maybe people not pronouncing my name properly or purposely  
**[0:09:47-0:09:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:09:47):**  giving me an anglicised name. And then I think in my professional life, you know, things  like when I apply for a job, OK, the first assumption is I'm a foreign vet. You know,  people won't even look to where I qualified from because of my name. And you just think,  well, you know, I'm just as I'm just the same as any other vet who's qualified in the UK  and people assume things based on my name, you know, being asked, well, am I comfortable  
**[0:10:09-0:10:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:10:09):**  treating cows or dealing with pigs and assuming I might be Muslim or I might be Hindu or something  like that without even talking to me. And I think it's those things where as if I was  a white person, that wouldn't have even come out. So it's those extra things that I need  to tackle based on my name and my colour that if I was white, then I wouldn't have had to  do it. It's such a different way of growing up, isn't it? You know, and I think back to  
**[0:10:31-0:10:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:10:31):**  my childhood and, you know, I didn't have any questions about whether I had the right  to exist in the community that I lived in. I may have had other issues that, you know,  were sort of coming in, you know, and bits of bullying here and there and moments in  my life when I felt that I needed to keep my head down because there was a particular  individual. But that whole idea of not being able to challenge people when they are, you  
**[0:10:55-0:10:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:10:55):**  know, doing some of the things that both of you have said and that you just need to keep  your head down and just accept those microaggressions. It sounds like such a different way of life  that you're kind of combating almost on a daily basis.  You are combating daily basis and it almost becomes like second nature. So it probably  happens a lot more than we realise, but we've almost developed this coping mechanism and  
**[0:11:18-0:11:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:11:18):**  sometimes we don't even realise we're doing it. And sometimes when it is pointed out,  it does make you think, oh, do you know what? I do that as well. Do you know recently with  all these articles and things like that, sometimes I hear experiences from other people and I  think, do you know what? I never thought about it, but I do that sometimes and oh, and actually  the when they say it, it does sound horrible. And actually, why am I doing that? You know,  
**[0:11:37-0:11:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:11:37):**  but sometimes I think, I don't know, even now I'm still not comfortable enough to be  me. And I still do a lot of things just because end of the day, you know, I'm hoping that  enough is tackled now that maybe the next generation can tackle it even further.  Do you think that the way that you are able to support your children at school is different  to the way that your parents were able to protect you and support you when you were  
**[0:12:01-0:12:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:12:01):**  at school?  Absolutely. So with my children, I'm very aware of making sure that they're aware of  who they are, their identity. So I talk about where their grandparents were from. I make  sure that they are aware of some of the culture and traditions. I'm happy for them to talk  about it at school, you know, when they talk about themselves, I say, you know, talk about  
**[0:12:20-0:12:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:12:20):**  who you are and what you are. And also, I want them to understand that it's different,  but that's not a bad thing. So you know, even things like their skin colour, it might be  different, but that's okay. That's normal. And actually, that's you, who you are. And  the same with my daughter, you know, when Bushra was talking, you know, being a woman  and being a person of colour and that intersectional idea. So again, I talk to my daughter about  
**[0:12:42-0:12:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:12:42):**  being a woman of colour. And I try and highlight and I like to talk, show, highlight examples  of role models out there so that they can be who they want to be as well, which I think  is really something that I was never shown. And I was never told. I try and push them  to be positive about their identity. I still think that they struggle. And I think sometimes  that they, you know, end of the day, things, there is still a lot of issues in this country,  
**[0:13:06-0:13:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:13:06):**  but I am much more proactive about that.  Jason Vale,  Bushra, thinking about the racism that you've experienced in your life. I mean, you've talked  about some of it. And how much of it do you think was overt or, you know, kind of deliberate  on behalf of the people who were expressing that racism? And how much of it was down to  
**[0:13:23-0:13:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:13:23):**  simply a lack of understanding or experience and knowing how to interact with somebody  of colour?  There are certainly some examples I've had which have been absolutely deliberate racism.  Like there's no other way to look around it. I once had, I was with two white colleagues  at work and the cleaner opened the door for the two white colleagues and I was just behind  
**[0:13:43-0:13:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:13:43):**  them and they shut the door before I could even go through, which was just very much  deliberate and overt. Similarly, one time me and my sister had gone shopping and a white  family refused to let us go into the lift with them, which again, was just outright  overt racism with people we don't even know. I think especially at a young age, it can  be difficult for you to tell. And it's only when you start discussing these experiences  
**[0:14:07-0:14:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:14:07):**  once you're older that you begin to realise what happened and the impact this had. So  I remember visiting a friend's house when I was younger and I was told by her parents  when I first came in, oh, you are the first coloured person we've ever had in this house.  And for me, I had no idea how to respond. Am I supposed to act differently? What are  you expecting of me? Like you've made this huge like comment and observation. How do  
**[0:14:33-0:14:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:14:33):**  you want me to respond? Like I am just a child. And I also had experience during primary school  when I was on the playground and you know those checkered dresses that the primary school  children wear, I was wearing one of those and someone came up on the playground and  completely unzipped my dress and they asked, are you made of wood or chocolate underneath?  Which again, is just, it's ignorance and children are children, but these ignorances are still  
**[0:14:56-0:15:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:14:56):**  so, so hurtful and they do have a big impact. I had such identity issues throughout my entire  life being biracial, having both black heritage and white heritage, and then being in a school  that was all white people, I was constantly trying to fit in somewhere where I definitely  didn't and people made it very apparent to me that I didn't fit in either.  And of course, when you're getting comments like that from children in the playground,  
**[0:15:21-0:15:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:15:21):**  you know, and you sort of look back on it from hindsight, those are probably reflecting  things that their parents have said at home, isn't it? Now you're a very rounded person  now. And so how have you managed to deal with those sort of issues of identity that you  were talking about just then?  I definitely think one of the things that have helped me is once I did go to university,  
**[0:15:40-0:15:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:15:40):**  I managed to make a greater diversity of friends from different backgrounds and sharing these  experiences really helped me to feel empowered and to have a better understanding of my experiences.  You mentioned earlier, so I'm the vice chair of the BAME Ecological Network. And the point  of this is that we want some kind of network where people from these environmental sectors  and agricultural sectors, zoologists, plant biologists, all different people that feel  
**[0:16:06-0:16:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:16:06):**  like they are minorities within their areas to be able to come together. And those meetings  have a really profound effect on just how empowered we all feel to create that safe  space is a really, really unique thing. And I do remember the first time I ever had that  very specific feeling. And it was just before I started my PhD, I was looking at what I  wanted to do. And in London, they had a seminar that was specifically for people of colour  
**[0:16:33-0:16:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:16:33):**  that were looking to go to do their PhD. And I turned up and I was in a room of about 50  other people of colour that were all looking to do their PhD. They were all as passionate  as I was about scientists who all had the same kind of experiences of imposter syndrome  and wondering if they weren't good enough. And that was the first time I'd ever had that  of like actually being with real peers for my career, like actual people who really understood.  
**[0:16:57-0:17:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:16:57):**  I think I've always been very resilient throughout. And I've always been very confident and outspoken  as well, which has really helped. And like I said, I do have a fiercely protective family.  So although we wouldn't want to draw attention to ourselves publicly within our households,  we'd very much have these open discussions and create an understanding of our identity,  much like what Thibe was saying he does with his daughters and helping them to understand  
**[0:17:22-0:17:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:17:22):**  what is a part of them. I remember again, during high school, when you're going through  this process of work experience, and you have outside companies come in, and they give you  interviews. And one of the things I mentioned in my interview is that I'm really passionate  about my culture and my religion. And the interviewer stopped me right there and said,  never, never, when you're going into a profession, do you ever mention your culture or religion?  
**[0:17:43-0:17:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:17:43):**  Never, never, never, like is a really big thing. Whereas now, it's something I'm very  comfortable talking about. And I found actually, people are really interested to listen and  to learn and to hear about it.  The thinking about the countryside and being a person of colour in the countryside and working in the countryside,  it feels like there's something of a vicious cycle that rural communities tend to be less  
**[0:18:06-0:18:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:18:06):**  diverse, which in turn means that rural careers might well be less attractive to people of  colour. And I just, you know, I wonder, how do we start to break that cycle?  I think there's a big assumption there that rural careers are less attractive, because  why should they be less attractive? End of the day, you know, there is so much opportunity  and variety in agriculture, like Bushra said earlier. And again, we're just assuming that  
**[0:18:28-0:18:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:18:28):**  if you go in the countryside, you're setting a tractor and that's life. But actually, you  know, there are data analysis, there are geneticists, there are crop scientists, there are all  sorts of different things that need that are in the agriculture, or in the rural sector,  even working for some of these land agents and countryside management. So there's loads  of different jobs there. And again, people in the urban communities don't know these  
**[0:18:53-0:18:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:18:53):**  things exist. So yes, there is a vicious cycle because there is very little advertisements  of the rural countryside to urban people. And I think the assumption is urban people  aren't interested. But if you think about it, a lot of immigrants in this country come  from farming backgrounds. In fact, I'd say there's probably a bigger connection of farming  among BME people in general compared to the white community. But because they live in  
**[0:19:16-0:19:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:19:16):**  the city, we just assume that they don't know anything about farming. But both my parents  come from farming backgrounds, both their grandparents' farming backgrounds. Yeah, I  was born in a town. But my parents talked about those stories and I've got that understanding.  So again, it's taken away those assumptions, and actually given an opportunity of going,  well, this is what rural life's about. These are the opportunities that are there for you.  
**[0:19:35-0:19:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:19:35):**  These are what you can be doing, and breaking down those barriers. And for people in the  rural setting, it's about how do we bring those connections closer. Now, we know there's  a huge technology issue with internet and things like that, and broadband issues. And  what COVID has taught us is we don't need to travel to meet people. We can do it online.  We can read about it. We can listen. And we can talk. And so it's, again, it's using those  
**[0:19:58-0:20:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:19:58):**  things that we've learned better to bring the communities together.  Mason, who needs to take more responsibility in changing these attitudes? Is it professional  bodies? Is it teachers and schools or government or rural councils? Where does the responsibility  for this lie?  So I think government bodies, and especially schools, are a really essential way for us  
**[0:20:19-0:20:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:20:19):**  to be able to change these attitudes. But I do think that this is everyone's responsibility,  and not just people of colour, where the responsibility often falls on. It's also the responsibility  of white people who are living in the countryside. You know, make sure it is as welcoming and  as inclusive as possible. Be as friendly and as inclusive as possible. But I also think  there's a huge responsibility that lies with the media. Thieve mentioned earlier about  
**[0:20:46-0:20:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:20:46):**  role models and the importance of that, and representation is so important. For me personally,  I found Michaela Strachan, honestly, one of my all time best role models. Her on the Really  Wild Show definitely helped me get onto the career path I'm on now. At the moment, we  have Gillian Burke, who's on Spring Watch. She is fantastic. I think she's a fantastic  example of representation. And similarly, Sean Fletcher on Countryfile. But I know that  
**[0:21:13-0:21:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:21:13):**  he has even received a lot of racism since some of his most recent shows talking about  racism in the countryside. He's actually faced a lot of negativity on social media after  speaking out about this. So it is really important that we have this representation because it  is so clearly needed when you see people's reactions about it.  Do you have any sort of insight into where that negativity is coming from on social media?  
**[0:21:37-0:21:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:21:37):**  People don't want to be considered racist. People don't want to admit that Britain is  racist and has systemic racism issues. I mean, just look at the response from the Sainsbury's  advert over Christmas, like the disgusting racist responses that Sainsbury's received  after that. And how can you deny that there isn't a racism issue within the UK? And I  think that's a big issue as well. Often people are like, well, I'm not racist. Of course  
**[0:22:02-0:22:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:22:02):**  I'm not racist. But they're not actually willing to learn about what some of the barriers we're  facing are or what some of our fears or concerns are. They're just, yeah, immediately on the  defence.  It's remarkable, isn't it? I mean, I've literally heard people say to me, I'm not racist. I  just don't like black people. You know, it is remarkably ingrained in places. Now, I  
**[0:22:21-0:22:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:22:21):**  grew up in the 1970s in a rural village in Worcestershire that was almost exclusively  white. And now I live in Dorset in a different rural village that's almost exclusively white.  And it would be easy to conclude from that, that really nothing has changed in the intervening  decades. But it seems to me that actually quite a lot has changed. That people of colour  are much better represented. I mean, you talked about representation in the media, Bushra.  
**[0:22:44-0:22:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:22:44):**  And there is more representation there. And there are more people from BAME communities  in top jobs in Britain and on the front line in politics. Equality is now required in law.  You know, that's happened in my lifetime. And discrimination itself is generally treated  more seriously by the police.  So Theve, I'm not for one moment suggesting that we haven't still got a mountain to climb.  
**[0:23:04-0:23:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:23:04):**  But have we perhaps at least reached the foothills of change?  That's an interesting one. Because, yeah, you've given me some examples. You know, you've  seen more politicians, you've seen three or four new politicians on the front benches  of the Conservatives. And so does that mean now the barriers for becoming an MP is broken  down and the Conservatives are not a racist party now? Really? And also, let's look at  
**[0:23:28-0:23:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:23:28):**  the type of people they've put on those front benches. What type of representation are they?  So that would be one example. We look at the media, for example, OK, we're seeing more  BAME representation in the media. And we suppose, OK, that must be a change. But if you look  at the top producers and directors, it's all white. Look at the Oscars last year, all white.  If you look at the number of heroes, all white. If you look at top grossing films again. So  
**[0:23:52-0:23:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:23:52):**  again, what has happened there? There are a few more. But are they representative of  real change? You know, I think...  So if there's a mountain to climb, then you're saying that we haven't reached the foothills.  We've just kind of got out of the car and paid for parking.  Yeah, for real change, we haven't done the real change yet. We've done the awareness.  
**[0:24:10-0:24:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:24:10):**  So we're aware there's an issue. Black Lives Matter was an awareness time. Brexit and the  issues of that was an awareness time. But what has actually changed? Very little. You  know, and that's what the issue is. And that's why people are angry or upset or are protesting  is because, yes, people think that by adding one or two black faces or brown faces to a  board means that change has happened. It hasn't changed anything for people on the ground.  
**[0:24:35-0:24:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:24:35):**  And so I think that's where we need to work on what are the systemic issues and barriers  for reducing the amount of racism and such like. And you mentioned earlier racism. Racism  is a word that makes people very uncomfortable. But what we've got to understand is racism  is not just one thing. Racism is a spectrum. And it can be anything from not serving someone,  you know, shutting the door in Bushra's face or it can be not giving me an interview based  
**[0:24:58-0:25:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:24:58):**  on my name to throwing trash or shouting abuse out of a car window. And people think that  that is racism. And if you call someone a racist, it's the overt stuff. But what we're  going to understand is a spectrum and having those barriers is a racist thing to have.  And it happens in all forms of society. Bushra, you're from a younger generation. How do you  think that Britain's relationship with race has changed during the course of your life?  
**[0:25:23-0:25:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:25:23):**  So like Thieve said, I definitely think there has been more acceptance and awareness around  issues associated with race and ethnicity. People are definitely more willing to open  up a conversation about it, although there is sometimes still a little bit of reluctance.  But I also fear that people think that I've been chosen for opportunities because of tokenism.  So Thieve again mentioned briefly like the idea of having black and brown faces on a  
**[0:25:46-0:25:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:25:46):**  board to show on paper that you've got some diversity. But for me, I've been told from  a young age that I would need to work twice as hard to get half as much. And so I've continued  to do that throughout my life. And it's now kind of caught up to a point where I'm in  my professional career and people are noticing I am working twice as hard. Therefore, I do  deserve these opportunities. I have earned them. But there is still always this concern  
**[0:26:10-0:26:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:26:10):**  I have been chosen because of the colour of my skin and because everyone else is white.  Thieve, thinking around the changes that we've seen in society over the last few years, have  Brexit and the rise of nationalism in Britain started to reverse, you know, some of that,  I mean, albeit limited progress that we've made?  No, I think what Brexit has done is exposed some of the limited progress that has occurred.  
**[0:26:33-0:26:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:26:33):**  I don't think people become racist overnight or people have racist thoughts overnight.  And so what Brexit did is it made what people suppressed come out. So it does sound like,  oh my God, we're worse than we were. We're not worse. We're just more aware of what the  situation in this country was. And I think before, because everyone was the British way  of being polite and keeping things in was that compared to the Americans, which are  
**[0:26:58-0:27:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:26:58):**  a bit more outward, you know, they'll just say as it is. And that's why we think America's  racist and Britain is not. But actually Brexit has shown that we're probably the same, but  we just hold it in a different way. So it's exposed, I think, more of the holes in society.  We've talked quite a lot about diversity in professional lives and about living, you know,  as a person of colour in rural communities. I wonder if we could think for a little bit  
**[0:27:19-0:27:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:27:19):**  about trying to get people of colour out of towns and into the countryside. And Bushra,  when we spoke before the recording, you talked about the invisible barriers to the countryside  that exist for people of colour, about the way in which people from BAME communities  perhaps were worried about how they might be perceived or even that they might not be  sure what to do or how to behave in a countryside setting. I wonder what kind of things you  
**[0:27:41-0:27:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:27:41):**  have in mind.  Well, I know one of the fears for people of colour coming to the countryside, particularly  for my friends' parents, is they very much believed that going to the countryside would  be dangerous for them. There was a high possibility they would have some kind of racist experience  or experience some kind of adversity towards them. And they pass this information on down  
**[0:28:02-0:28:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:28:02):**  to their children. Therefore, the countryside becomes this scary racist place that you don't  want to go and visit. So I think the first thing is just getting people out into the  countryside to realise that's not so much the case anymore.  But another thing I mentioned earlier was that sometimes my passion can be misunderstood  for either aggression or for something else. And this is an issue I have as someone who's  
**[0:28:25-0:28:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:28:25):**  a huge nature enthusiast. I go to a lot of places birdwatching and if I see something  exciting, I'm going to be excited about it. But I am also knowledgeable. I know that if  it's breeding season and nesting season, obviously I'm not going to be vocal about what I've  seen because I'm not going to disturb the animals. There is still always a concern that  people don't know that I know how to behave in the countryside, even though that's where  
**[0:28:48-0:28:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:28:48):**  I've always lived. One of the things I always think is that better  air quality, access to green spaces, that shouldn't be restricted to the privileged  few who can access the countryside. It shouldn't matter the colour of your skin. You should  still be able to have all the benefits that you get from being outside. There have been  so many articles, particularly over lockdown, about how being outside can really improve  
**[0:29:11-0:29:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:29:11):**  your immune system as well as improving your mental health and wellbeing and general physical  fitness. There are so many benefits and it's so unfair that it is reserved for the privileged  few who are in the countryside. Now, just in terms of sort of practical steps  that could be taken, one of the things that you've mentioned to me previously is, is it,  you know, better knowledge around the countryside code?  
**[0:29:30-0:29:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:29:30):**  Yeah. So this is something that I think is really important. I really think that the  countryside code should be as accessible as the etiquette for public transport or as well  known as how to behave on the underground, like the London underground. It should be  that ingrained within people or at least that accessible so people can see it. Because I  always went to school in the countryside, we had people come in and teach us the countryside  
**[0:29:53-0:29:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:29:53):**  code. And that was a standard thing, particularly before the summer holiday, so that we knew  how to behave. And that was both primary school and high school because they know that high  school students are also going to be going out and enjoying themselves. So it's just  important we know how to respect the land properly. And I think if everyone was able  to have that opportunity to learn the countryside code from a young age, there wouldn't be as  
**[0:30:14-0:30:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:30:14):**  much fear visiting the countryside because you know the rules, you know when you should  and shouldn't leave a gate open, you know how to access things and where you should  and shouldn't be walking. So there's no chance for you even to get into trouble with the  locals because you know what you're doing. And it is straightforward, but I think a lot  of people visiting the countryside aren't even aware there is a countryside code. So  
**[0:30:33-0:30:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:30:33):**  they wouldn't even necessarily know to look it up and to read up about it before visiting  these places. Having it on public transport, on trains, when people are arriving at these  places as well as actually at the national parks. So it is yeah, as easy and accessible  as possible for people.  Thepe, are there other things that we can do to help black, Asian and minority ethnic  
**[0:30:53-0:30:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:30:53):**  communities to feel more welcome in the countryside?  So I think it's communicating with them in their spaces. So again, it's about people  from the countryside or people who advocate for the countryside going into the spaces  where black, Asian, minority ethnic people are, talking to them and working with them  and then almost supporting them and getting them out as well. So like Bushra said earlier,  
**[0:31:15-0:31:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:31:15):**  transport's a massive barrier. And so for example, I am a trustee for the Country Trust  and what they do is they take children from schools where 25% or more are on free school  meals, so low socioeconomic groups, and they take them to the countryside to give them  an opportunity on a farm or a food experience. And a lot of these children have never seen  grass. They live in flats and they live in cities where the only grass is around the  
**[0:31:37-0:31:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:31:37):**  trees on the street. And so again, but it's giving them the opportunity and that experience,  which I think was great. And another thing that we were doing was we were working, I'm  a trustee at St Wurberg's City Farms. You'd think an inner city farm in a deprived area  would have a lot of, with a large BME population, would have a lot of people coming and visiting  the farm. But what we discovered was these people didn't feel like they were welcome  
**[0:31:58-0:32:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:31:58):**  on the farm. And so we're doing work to try and go to these communities and talk to them  and find out, well, what would make them welcome? And you know, even things like the signage  was, you know, felt like they felt the signage wasn't, didn't apply to them. It applied  to other people, but not them. And so how do we change the signage? How do we get people  who work in the farm to better represent the community?  
**[0:32:16-0:32:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:32:16):**  Jason Vale, Theatrical Director, St Wurberg's City Farms, You co-founded the British Veterinary  Ethnicity and Diversity Society. What are you hoping that that society is going to achieve?  I want real change. That's what I want to achieve. I want to see positive action. So  when we started, it was more about awareness. You know, people didn't believe that racism  existed and people didn't take any, you know, the one or two experiences that came out,  
**[0:32:42-0:32:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:32:42):**  people didn't take it seriously. They felt it was a one-off. So when I started, it was  about why are the children not, why are the children from diverse backgrounds not applying  for vet school? Why are the vets not representing the population? And it started awareness and  then it moved on to action. You know, okay, you're aware there's racism, what are we going  to do about it? So at the moment, we're working with universities on wider participation and  
**[0:33:03-0:33:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:33:03):**  on inclusivity in the vet schools. And we're working with different bodies in the industry.  You know, how are we going to get more VME vets to become farm vets or become equine  vets or how are we going to get people to stay in the industry or how are we going to  get those voices out there? So, you know, working and working with nurses and making  sure it's more inclusive that way. So I think there's the thing with children and encouraging  
**[0:33:24-0:33:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:33:24):**  them and there's a thing with students and making sure they feel included at vet school  and have the best experience. And then there's the thing with the vets in practice.  Bushra, what are your priorities as Vice Chair of the BAME Ecologist Network?  We've only been going since October 2020. So we're not even that old of a network yet,  but we are growing exponentially and it's very clear this is something that people really  
**[0:33:44-0:33:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:33:44):**  desire, which is fantastic, the amount of response we're having. So our initial work  is really to help identify these barriers, much like Theva's already done within the  society. So, yeah, we're really trying to identify these barriers within ecology. We're  also hoping that the network forms a net to retain any talent so that we're not losing  all these talented people within ecology because they're not feeling included. We can provide  
**[0:34:08-0:34:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:34:08):**  them with support. So mentoring is another thing we're planning on providing. Mentorship  is really, really beneficial. It's actually how Theban I know each other is because he's  been my mentor as part of the Black British STEM scheme. And I especially benefited from  having someone who's not just in the agricultural industry, but someone who is a person of colour  so that they can understand my experiences, my imposter syndrome. And I think that is  
**[0:34:33-0:34:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:34:33):**  a really, really important and valuable thing to have. So we're really hoping to create  a pool of mentors available for whatever stage people's career paths are, whether or not  they're a postdoc or whether they're an undergraduate or perhaps just looking to do ecology at university.  Also, again, really important on representation. We really want to change the idea that a zoologist  is David Attenborough. Like, we really want to change that mindset that you have to be  
**[0:34:59-0:35:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:34:59):**  a middle class white man to go into these kind of industries. And I think, yeah, this  is where we're really starting to identify the barriers. And we'll really be looking  at how we can decolonise ecology as a whole and decolonise academia, which I know are  very big themes for a lot of people at the moment. But it's really important that we  identify ways to do that. And actually, the pandemic has been a really good way for us  
**[0:35:23-0:35:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:35:23):**  to help see some of those areas. So quite often for natural sciences, you would send  a team of researchers or you would go yourself to another country to do the research to find  the resources. Whereas because of the pandemic, what researchers were forced to do is to give  the information to locals, train them up as local ecologists. And therefore, you've not  only just got yourself a new pool of international ecologists, you've potentially inspired a  
**[0:35:49-0:35:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:35:49):**  whole community of people to go into a different career path. So yeah, really trying to find  these ways that we can decolonise ecology and make it more accessible.  Both, thank you so much for sharing your experiences and your thoughts and ideas for how we can  actually bring about and embed some real change in this country. And I'm sure many of those  ideas can be replicated around the world. Well, that's all we have time for. It's been  
**[0:36:14-0:36:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Diversity-in-agriculture--animal-sciences-et806l#t=0:36:14):**  a truly fascinating insight. I'd like to thank my guests Bushra Abu-Hilil and Navaratnam  Pathibhan. If you've enjoyed listening, please come back and listen to more. Tell your friends,  take us, review us and share our links. Farmgate is a partnership project for Farmwell and  FAI Farms. We're funded by San Calpa and you can join the conversation on Twitter by searching  for Farmgate podcast. I've been Finn low, Christine. Bye for now.  