### Farm Gate  (2021-58-30)
**[0:00:00-0:00:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to Farmgate, I'm Finnlow Costayne.  A new report, Farming Smarter, Investing in Our Future, has been published by the Food,  Farming and Countryside Commission.  The report proposes a new Agroecology Development Bank for Britain, which the authors say could  speed the transition to fair and nature-friendly farming by filling the current gap in available  
**[0:00:25-0:00:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:00:25):**  finance and building knowledge about agroecological agriculture in the financial sector.  I'm joined by report co-author Tony Greenham, Finance Research Associate for the Food, Farming  and Countryside Commission and Executive Director of Southwest Mutual.  I'm also joined by George Young, an agroecological farmer from Fobbing Farm in Essex and a former  banker in the City of London.  
**[0:00:47-0:00:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:00:47):**  George is at Farming George on Twitter and Instagram and Tony is at Tony Greenham on  Twitter.  Welcome both.  George, let me come to you first.  For producers transitioning to agroecological farm systems, is there a problem that needs  
**[0:01:02-0:01:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:01:02):**  fixing in terms of access to finance?  I think the main thing is the fact that it always takes time to build these new businesses  and a lot of these agroecological farming systems have not really been created yet.  So there's obviously inherent risk in the unknown of what these systems are really going  to end up looking like.  
**[0:01:20-0:01:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:01:20):**  Now, I'm obviously coming from a farming situation where I've got historic farming background  in family farms.  So kind of my access to finance might not be quite so limited as some other people.  But I certainly think that the big issue with how the finance system works at the moment  with regards to farming is it's based around these old school siloed methodologies of farming  
**[0:01:38-0:01:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:01:38):**  where people are doing single activities on their farm, which is kind of the antithesis  of what we're trying to get at with agroecological farming methods.  I think that there kind of needs to be something there to incentivise people taking these risks  in these new avenues and developing their businesses and getting to a point when their  new businesses become profitable, which won't be from the start of those businesses themselves.  
**[0:02:00-0:02:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:02:00):**  So Tony, in your assessment, what do you think the key barriers are that are faced by farmers  when it comes to setting up or transitioning existing farm businesses into agroecological  models?  I think it's fair to point out that, as George has suggested already, actually, that there  are plenty of farming enterprises that can access finance, either because they can release  
**[0:02:20-0:02:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:02:20):**  internal cash flows from starting to transition away from intensive methods by spending less  on inputs, basically, or because they do have a relationship with their bank and they have  plenty of security and a long track record where they're able to access affordable, appropriate  finance from existing providers.  But, and we do think it's a significant enough but to propose a new banking institution,  
**[0:02:42-0:02:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:02:42):**  we did identify several circumstances where access to credit is difficult.  So the first one is a lack of security.  So most banks find it much easier to lend against collateral.  So obviously, if you're a tenant farmer, that makes it much more difficult than if you own  your own land.  
**[0:02:57-0:03:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:02:57):**  And, you know, this significant amount of farming land is done under tenancy.  Smaller farms, so there's simply a size equation, smaller farms tend to, again, find it more  difficult to access finance because it's just smaller deals, banks are a little bit less  interested perhaps than they are in the bigger deals.  And it just so happens that quite a lot of enterprises that want to move towards agroecology,  
**[0:03:17-0:03:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:03:17):**  you know, a lot of them are at that smaller scale.  And that's a problem which varies according to which part of the country you're in, of  course, interestingly as well.  But again, it's quite significant.  Then we have new entrants.  
**[0:03:28-0:03:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:03:28):**  So this may even be, you know, the kids taking over the family business, so it's a succession,  or it could be brand new entrants where they simply don't have a management track record.  And again, as a financier, as a banker, one of the things you rely on to make a lending  decision is to be able to look at the track record with the people.  And then the final piece, you know, which I think George has mentioned right at the  
**[0:03:48-0:03:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:03:48):**  beginning, is when you might have people that you think have got a track record, then you  might even have security, and it might be a big sort of farm with a nice big loan that  you can make.  But they're talking to you about using methods with which you as a banker are completely  unfamiliar, they feel untried, they feel untested.  
**[0:04:04-0:04:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:04:04):**  That's much more risky.  You have to calculate that as being much more risky in your calculations as a banker.  And it may well simply mean that that is just you don't have the appetite to make the loan.  And that's a terrible problem, because that's precisely the point at which we do need finance  to come in behind those that want to innovate, that want to bring agroecological methods  
**[0:04:24-0:04:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:04:24):**  in.  And yet, that's precisely the sort of risk taking entrepreneurialism that existing financial  providers are going to find difficult.  So for me, if I wanted to take out a bank loan, then I'd need some kind of collateral  to put against that loan, it would be an extension on a mortgage to the house or the house would  
**[0:04:41-0:04:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:04:41):**  be the collateral in some way.  Obviously, with tenant farmers and with new entrants, that sort of thing isn't available.  So in terms of the bank that you're talking about, is that very much based on the revenue  model?  Well, in terms of the what the agroecological development bank would actually do in that  
**[0:04:58-0:05:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:04:58):**  circumstance, we're not having to reinvent anything here or invent anything, I should  say because the British Business Bank already does a similar thing for smaller businesses  whose managers can't offer collateral and that's opposite guarantee.  So it enables Barclays or HSBC and any of the big banks to make a loan because actually  they are able to go to the British Business Bank and in place of getting a security over  
**[0:05:19-0:05:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:05:19):**  some property, they can get a guarantee from the British Business Bank.  So we could simply, well what I'm proposing is an agroecological development bank could  do a similar thing.  But with the, instead of having the expertise in small businesses, its expertise is in agriculture  and agroecology and innovation in particular in more ecological methods of farming.  
**[0:05:37-0:05:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:05:37):**  George, over the last eight years or so, you've changed more or less everything about the  way that your business is structured from what you grow to how you grow it to who you  sell products to and how you sell them.  How have you financed your transition?  I mean, to be honest, I finance it in a few different ways.  
**[0:05:55-0:05:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:05:55):**  One and Tony mentioned this first of all, it's surprising when you really slash your  input costs, it's amazing how much flexibility you've actually got in your cash flow if you're  talking about a kind of reasonable scale established farming business.  But as well as that, one of the big things I've done is because I've diversified my business,  I'm not kind of using my tractors as much.  
**[0:06:14-0:06:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:06:14):**  So they might be kind of on the older end of the scale, but they don't get so worn out.  I'm actually able to mine those fixed costs over the short period of time because I don't  need to be replacing them.  There are various places you can mine your fixed costs, which is a really useful way  of short term sort of financing yourself.  
**[0:06:30-0:06:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:06:30):**  Actually then I have been utilizing BPS and stewardship, we're kind of at the end of this  halcyon period of having finance available to us in such a simplistic form.  I don't particularly believe that Elms is going to come in and give the same level of  finance as the current stewardship scheme is, but I would love to be wrong about that.  But those things I'm kind of utilizing that now to make sure I've changed my system for  
**[0:06:52-0:06:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:06:52):**  the point when those subsidy schemes don't exist.  And then actually another big one, because my main drive since I've come home to farm  has been cash flow rather than profitability.  And I think when you're making these changes, cash flow is a much more important thing to  concentrate on.  
**[0:07:06-0:07:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:07:06):**  So I've really focused on diversification of my farm business.  I'm fortunate in my location in South Essex, we're able to rent out commercial buildings.  So you know, about five years ago now, four and a half, five years ago, I started developing  my farm buildings into commercial lettings.  I haven't actually repaid that capsule yet.  
**[0:07:23-0:07:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:07:23):**  I'm probably about four years away from doing that.  It's done a really significant job of fixing my cash flow year on year and giving me a  chance to kind of be a little bit more experimental with what I'm then doing on the farm.  You mentioned basic payments there and stewardship payments, and being able to sort of use those  while they exist in order to make some of those changes.  
**[0:07:41-0:07:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:07:41):**  Of course, there's a huge degree of uncertainty going forward over the next two or three years,  which must make it not just difficult for farm businesses themselves to work out where  they're going to be.  But surely George, that's going to make it more difficult for banks to lend to farmers.  It depends on the basis of those loans.  
**[0:07:57-0:08:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:07:57):**  It will depend on the region of the country, I'm sure.  But I can't actually particularly see land values going down much because, you know,  in times of uncertainty, there are always certain things which are going to retain levels  of value.  And I think in all likelihood, farmland is going to be one of those things that people  
**[0:08:14-0:08:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:08:14):**  feel comfortable investing in.  I don't think it's going to absolutely crash.  So I think that banks will be able to invest or not invest, but I think there will be loans  available if you own farmland to some extent.  The question is, and this is back to exactly what Tony was talking about before, what is  
**[0:08:29-0:08:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:08:29):**  the appetite to risk of those lending places?  Because so much has changed in terms of regulation.  It's not just about loan to value anymore.  There's a lot more complexity in it.  There's a lot more complexity as to actually what your return is going to look like.  
**[0:08:41-0:08:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:08:41):**  A lot of these loans are looking at repayments where, of course, traditionally agricultural  loans have been interest only repayment or interest only, so no repayments associated  with them.  And so all of these regulatory changes which have hit the agricultural sector because of  loans in general are really shaping the difficulties of some of those lending around farm businesses.  
**[0:09:00-0:09:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:09:00):**  Tony, could I come back to you just for a moment on that issue of elms and uncertainty  going forward?  I wonder if you feel that if it was there tomorrow, an agroecology development bank  would be able to help with that issue of uncertainty.  Well, I think it contributes towards helping.  
**[0:09:16-0:09:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:09:16):**  I mean, obviously, what you're also referring to here are how the availability of finance,  repairable finance or even equity interplays with other forms of revenue for the farmers.  So what we've suggested is that the bank should certainly look into, we haven't suggested  any particular products, but it should certainly be able to look into ways of underwriting  risk at the farm enterprise level.  
**[0:09:41-0:09:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:09:41):**  In other words, if you're a farming enterprise, as we say in the report, all entrepreneurs  have to take risks.  But with a farmer, you're betting the house, you're betting the family farm.  When you're already possibly in a weakened financial situation because of the last few  years of difficulties in whichever markets you're in, it might vary.  
**[0:09:59-0:10:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:09:59):**  But certainly our analysis of the state of farm finances in the UK is that they are flattered  by land values.  But if you look underneath that, they're not good.  So you're starting at a position of financial weakness.  You then want to change your business models in a way where there's no certainty of success  
**[0:10:16-0:10:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:10:16):**  at all.  It is the right thing to do.  You're certain that in the end it will be more profitable and there may be strategies  around releasing cash flow that are going to get you there.  But nevertheless, it's more risky.  
**[0:10:26-0:10:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:10:26):**  Now we would like to say, well, what's good for society as a whole is that these individual  farming enterprises do take those risks.  They do because each of them needs to explore what's going to work best on their farm.  The problem is you have this economist sort of, we'll call it a fallacy of composition.  Each of those individual decisions to maybe not take those risks makes sense for the individual,  
**[0:10:46-0:10:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:10:46):**  but they don't make sense for society as a whole.  And that's a classic case for why you need an intervention like a state development bank.  George, you've taken over what's a pretty successful, if conventional, family owned  farm with a lot of land, as you were describing before.  I wonder if you're able to articulate the challenge that some other farmers will face  
**[0:11:06-0:11:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:11:06):**  and in terms of how does your financial situation differ from many new entrants and tenant farmers  in terms of the assets that they have available, the ways that they can get access to finance?  Obviously, yes, I am in a very fortunate position that I'm on a family farm, but like I don't  know what percentage it will be, but a huge percentage of family farms, I've got a, you  know, obviously got a large mortgage against that as well.  
**[0:11:28-0:11:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:11:28):**  It's not as, you know, I hear many tenant farmers complaining about people who own their  farms, but I don't know many people who actually genuinely own their farms.  It's normally a bank and much more complicated situation there.  One of the things I'm very fortunate about is the fact that obviously we do have interest  only loans and, you know, we've managed to secure that and we've got very low interest  
**[0:11:47-0:11:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:11:47):**  rates.  So we've got that ability to pivot in what we're doing.  We've got that freedom there.  One of the biggest problems I actually find with existing farm business or the biggest  things that I've struggled with is actually the cost of change management, because a lot  
**[0:11:59-0:12:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:11:59):**  of the stuff that I've got is designed to farm large scale arable acres.  Doesn't really do the small scale stuff I want to do, but the cost of me going smaller  when I've got maybe old machinery, but old machinery I've always looked after, or we've  always looked off from the farm.  So I know what's good and what's bad about that.  
**[0:12:15-0:12:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:12:15):**  Whereas I couldn't chop that in and buy an appropriate smaller version of it.  Typical example of this is my combine harvester.  It's a massive class Lexian 650, seven and a half meter cutter bar thing worth about  80 grand.  I couldn't buy a small one that I would know for sure is going to be any good.  
**[0:12:30-0:12:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:12:30):**  So I might as well keep the larger one.  And there are quite a few examples of this, and it's one of those things that then when  you do go smaller, you've then got a higher labour requirement versus the fact those machines  are already bought and paid for.  So there are some slightly funky little nuances of how you actually start changing the way  
**[0:12:46-0:12:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:12:46):**  that you farm to the mindset of that smaller, more nimble and more diversified farm when  you've got the kit and you've got the setup that you're designed for already.  You've got a lot of those sunk costs already figured in essentially.  As a former banker, I mean, you must clearly be a man who likes spreadsheets and who understands  business planning.  
**[0:13:04-0:13:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:13:04):**  How easy is it for other farmers to access financial training and to develop the business  planning skills that are needed these days?  I've always been interested in numbers.  I did mathematics at university, so I might not have been very good at university mathematics,  but arithmetic, not too bad.  
**[0:13:20-0:13:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:13:20):**  So spreadsheets have always come really easily to me.  They've always been a really kind of handy tool to work out what my finances are doing.  And I know that to a lot of people, spreadsheets are kind of a little bit double dutchy, but  I don't think they need to be.  I mean, I've never I haven't got any formal agricultural training, so I don't know how  
**[0:13:38-0:13:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:13:38):**  people at Agricultural College are taught to do gross margins or things like that.  But I do know that gross margins aren't worth the paper they're written on.  And if you're working in gross margins, stop because you're not telling yourself anything  about your business.  And I think for me, the best thing that I did was really drill down and understand exactly  
**[0:13:54-0:13:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:13:54):**  what all of my costs meant.  And also, whilst you're still stuck in a commoditized system whereby you are a price taker rather  than the price maker, you might do all this and feel quite depressed about how poor your  business is in a standard business scenario.  But I've gone through and I assign various revenue expectation percentages to each asset  
**[0:14:13-0:14:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:14:13):**  that I own.  So really simplistic thing here is to say that the land that I own, well, I expect two  percent of market rate of that land every year.  That's the equivalent land rent to me.  I don't get that for free.  
**[0:14:24-0:14:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:14:24):**  That's what that needs to pay.  And then, you know, any kind of variable input, so inputs I'm putting onto the land itself  with that has to pay 20 percent.  So I go through and do those kind of things.  But I think what would be massively beneficial is for the farming system to start working  
**[0:14:37-0:14:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:14:37):**  like a lot of other business systems do already.  Farming has always been considered almost like almost doesn't get considered like a  standard business because they tend to be family businesses and hereditary and people  don't necessarily learn proper business skills in them.  And I think, you know, one of the big things when I used to work in banking was mentoring  
**[0:14:55-0:14:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:14:55):**  people, always having mentors.  And it was mentioned in the report and I was like, well, this is brilliant.  This is exactly what's required.  And again, in terms of like how a loan's judged or managed or understood from the agricultural  development bank, there have to be experts involved in that.  
**[0:15:09-0:15:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:15:09):**  And if there's a mentor who can actually start helping someone who's taking on these loans  to really understand their business in detail, understand what it really means for that business  to actually be genuinely making money on every single asset that they have and not happening  to forget some really crucial assets, which then means they're undervaluing the output  that they're producing.  
**[0:15:27-0:15:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:15:27):**  I think it's absolutely critical to farming moving forward that we pull the socks up of  farming and get people to be really knowledgeable and savvy about the businesses that they're  actually running.  Tony, in the report, you talk about there being two very clear and distinct roles for  the Agroecology Development Bank, one being, you know, to create products and to create  
**[0:15:45-0:15:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:15:45):**  finance availability for farmers.  But the other is to develop knowledge within the finance sector, but also to develop knowledge  of what a good business plan and what a decent loan application looks like, I guess, for  farmers who are interested in transitioning or building agroecological business decisions.  Absolutely.  
**[0:16:04-0:16:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:16:04):**  In the course of our research, and indeed in previous research that I've done around  support for business finance, it comes up again and again, it's not enough to push out  financial products into a market.  You have to make sure that the businesses in that market have all the access to the  skills, knowledge, advice that they need in order to be ready to take that money.  
**[0:16:24-0:16:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:16:24):**  And if you don't get both of those sides right, then you won't solve the problem.  So we've suggested, therefore, that the Agroecology Development Bank, as well as providing the  finance, should do part of this role in terms of the knowledge around agroecology itself,  in terms of creating good, reliable metrics, which can be used both by banks and finance  companies and farmers themselves that can measure the underlying value creation of the  
**[0:16:50-0:16:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:16:50):**  business.  So that was a bit wordy, but really what I'm talking about is, is your soil getting healthier  or not?  What about the other characteristics on the farm?  Are you sequestering carbon?  
**[0:17:00-0:17:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:17:00):**  Are you producing healthier food?  Are you improving biodiversity?  A lot of these metrics now are becoming very relevant because of other conversations around  potentially trading them.  We haven't tackled that in this report, but certainly from the basic view of making loans,  
**[0:17:14-0:17:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:17:14):**  but also in terms of farmers understanding how they're generating value in the business.  I think that's completely appropriate for a bank as a national institution to work with  other knowledge institutions around bringing this all together.  And one of the things that we really do think is worth trying to pursue is just making it  as easy.  
**[0:17:30-0:17:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:17:30):**  We want to put the, we call it to putting the entrepreneur at the middle of the picture.  So that the farmer who is trying to do this is juggling a million and one things like  all small business owners have to.  So the easier you can make it for them to access, not just the money, but also the knowledge.  And if they need some formal training, where can they go to get that?  
**[0:17:47-0:17:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:17:47):**  They need some mentoring, who's going to provide that?  They need to do a cash flow forecast and a spreadsheet.  I've never used a spreadsheet before.  Who's going to teach me to do that?  And to be able to bring all these things together in a package with the finance is ultimately  
**[0:17:59-0:18:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:17:59):**  where we need to get to.  In terms of making the case for what we're talking about here, the Agroecology Development  Bank is building on past experience in terms of stimulating and economically viable, but  early stage sector.  How does this proposal for a new bank compare with past innovations in energy, housing or  
**[0:18:20-0:18:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:18:20):**  transport?  Yes, well, we do draw comparisons with the Green Investment Bank's role in renewable  energy, because it's not unusual actually for there to be a new business model or a  new technology, which fundamentally on paper looks really sound.  But then getting from it being good on paper to it being widespread practice in industry  
**[0:18:39-0:18:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:18:39):**  is a sort of implementation challenge.  It's a sort of, you know, how do you spread that innovation and the knowledge to do it?  So to give a very practical example was that offshore wind was finding it difficult to  access finance from mainstream banks that would readily finance offshore oil exploration.  It wasn't necessarily because they had anything against renewable energy, but they had all  
**[0:19:00-0:19:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:19:00):**  of the experience and skills and data sets, you know, and long sort of track record of  performance to be able to simply assess offshore oil.  And they didn't have that for wind.  So they had the assets, they understood the asset, they understood the risk and they had  the model.  
**[0:19:15-0:19:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:19:15):**  Yes, that's right.  And although they might understand in theory that offshore wind looks like a similarly  good bet, until that track record is established, and indeed the skills, the actual, but who  are the people inside the bank who know how to assess this?  And everybody has to learn and start somewhere, but who's going to pay for that learning effect?  
**[0:19:33-0:19:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:19:33):**  Well, again, a State Development Bank is a great place to help develop skills in the  broader banking market to develop a track record of historic data about performance  of certain technologies or business models.  And then what you'll find is that that knowledge gets diffused throughout the rest of the finance  system really.  
**[0:19:50-0:19:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:19:50):**  And that did happen.  So offshore wind now isn't something that really needs any kind of intervention to help  finance it.  It's motoring, right?  Because it is a sound technology and now it's a proved profitable business.  
**[0:20:02-0:20:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:20:02):**  So I think we'll have the same with agroecology in that, you know, we certainly hope that  there'll come a point where this is absolutely the mainstream way of farming.  But between here and there is a similar learning effect, a sort of implementation challenge,  a sort of familiarity and a role for the State Bank, which can take these risks and pay for  that sort of learning effect if you like.  
**[0:20:24-0:20:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:20:24):**  Just to interrogate that comparison with offshore wind just a little bit further, with offshore  wind, there are relatively few variables.  Once a site has been scoped out, the main decisions are the size of the turbine and,  you know, the way that it fixes to the seabed.  And then they often get capitalised in ones or twos or small groups across a large wind  
**[0:20:45-0:20:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:20:45):**  farm.  But it's a relatively straightforward thing to do in comparison with agroecology where,  you know, the kind of solutions, the kind of farming solutions, the infrastructure solutions,  they're many and various.  And so that's a lot of knowledge that's got to be built up within that bank.  
**[0:21:02-0:21:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:21:02):**  Do you think that's a reasonable expectation?  Well, I think you're right to point out that certainly the comparison doesn't hold true  for the nature of the technology, because you're right in pointing out that the number  of different, there is a certain standardisation to renewable energy.  Whereas part of the point, I suppose, about agroecology is, you know, we talk about it,  
**[0:21:22-0:21:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:21:22):**  you know, really being emphasising farming as a knowledge intensive industry, because  it is celebrating the skills and the knowledge and the specific contextual knowledge of the  farm itself, that particular region that you're in, bioregion that you're in and the soils  you've got.  And so that's in that sense, it doesn't compare very well in terms of there being a sort of  
**[0:21:43-0:21:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:21:43):**  cookie cutter approach, there can't be a cookie cutter approach.  But on the other hand, there's still some sort of broad principles, which are pretty  clear for agroecology, and which are different from conventional agriculture, which lending  institutions are used to.  They're used to seeing people with a high input model, with all the kit that George  
**[0:22:00-0:22:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:22:00):**  was talking about earlier, a small number of crops, and therefore a small number of  markets, you know, there's a certain spreadsheet, which will even cover all that into and it's  going to give you an answer.  And I mean, I suppose put it in its simplest, they need a new spreadsheet, which can manage  the complexity, but therefore, and of course, in the complexity lies the true economic and  
**[0:22:20-0:22:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:22:20):**  business potential of agroecology, because it's this multiple yields approach.  But that's just, it's going to require a bit of a different approach and different skill  set and different data and different ways of assessing the viability of a loan.  And in your view, the principles and if you get the model right, and can manage that flexibility,  the principles in themselves are strong enough to be able to develop enough institutional  
**[0:22:44-0:22:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:22:44):**  knowledge.  Just another thing that was brought up in the report was the question of ownership.  And there are various different models that you look at.  I wonder who you think in your perfect world, who should own the bank?  Should it be wholly state owned?  
**[0:22:57-0:23:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:22:57):**  Or would all of the investment come from the state?  Well, it should be wholly state owned.  We recommend, I mean, we go through all the key design considerations for a state development  bank, drawing on the wealth of international and domestic here in the UK experience of  development banks to sort of go through the rationale for each of the decisions you can  
**[0:23:16-0:23:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:23:16):**  take.  One of them is ownership.  And we certainly think that if we're going to be serious about hitting on net zero carbon  targets, if we're going to be serious about meeting other policy objectives, public policy  objectives around health, around access to food, about rural livelihoods and regeneration  
**[0:23:34-0:23:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:23:34):**  around biodiversity and other environmental management, water and so on, then we've got  to recognise that agroecology is a really important part of that solution to multiple  policy goals.  So this is public policy stuff here.  And it's entirely appropriate and indeed normal for development banks that are helping to  
**[0:23:52-0:23:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:23:52):**  contribute to these public policy objectives to be state owned.  It just makes a lot of sense.  Apart from the fact that in terms of financing, so your second part of the question, there's  nobody that can borrow cheaper than the state.  And in terms of how you finance it, a mixture of some capitalisation from Treasury, but  
**[0:24:08-0:24:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:24:08):**  then actually, the bank could also go and borrow other private finance, it could augment  its funds with borrowing private finance, but at very favourable rates out in the market.  So yes, we think it should be state owned and yes, partly financed directly out of public  budgets, but also able to borrow additional funds on markets.  And that point I think that you made about its public policy role, because agriculture  
**[0:24:32-0:24:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:24:32):**  and food production and land ownership and land use cut across so many important elements  of public policy.  If we can be in a situation in a couple of years time where this uncertainty around ELMS  has been tackled, where we have good funding levels maintained through ELMS, but then that's  coupled with more finance becoming available to those who want to farm in agroecological  
**[0:24:55-0:25:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:24:55):**  ways, we'd actually be in a really good situation, which will be very different from I think  the situation many farmers fear.  Certainly the plan is to make finance more available to more people, but would it also  be cheaper for farmers to borrow through the ADB?  Possibly.  
**[0:25:09-0:25:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:25:09):**  I mean, I should point out that the model that we suggest here is that the ADB actually  lends through other financial providers.  So this is the way that the British Business Bank works.  You actually access finance from the British Business Bank through another bank or finance  provider.  
**[0:25:26-0:25:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:25:26):**  So if you like, it's a wholesale bank, we would expect that some of those products would,  it's not so much that they would necessarily be cheaper because there's an ADB product,  it's more the fact that you can get it at all.  So yes, it may well be, however, that there's an additional case for additional underwriting  to lower the cost.  
**[0:25:43-0:25:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:25:43):**  So we've seen this, of course, with the response to COVID-19 and the bounce back loans and  C-bills loans that again have been made available through the British Business Bank, distributed  by banks themselves, but at an interest rate of two and a half percent of the bounce back  loan, which is far cheaper than a business would have been able to access a loan before  the crisis.  
**[0:26:04-0:26:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:26:04):**  So yes, I think we would leave it to the ADB to make specific judgments about the cost  of finance for certain things and in certain markets.  But yeah, that's absolutely part of the toolkit, is talk about the cost of finance.  But I think the biggest sort of problem to solve is actually the finances getting to  the right places quickly enough and in the right quantities.  
**[0:26:22-0:26:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:26:22):**  George, part of that toolkit is about having a really good understanding of what agroecology  and an agroecological business plan looks like.  And I wonder if you have any thoughts about how the bank would be able to ensure that  it was actually getting its financial product out to farmers that are genuinely undertaking  agroecological transition.  
**[0:26:40-0:26:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:26:40):**  For example, as with replant capital in the USA, should repayments be linked to delivery  of key metrics, for example, soil improvement, carbon quantities in soil?  It's a difficult one because I mean, Tony's mentioned the fact and you mentioned, Philo,  we're going to need more experts in the position of giving out these loans and in assessing  that these loans are in the right hands.  
**[0:27:03-0:27:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:27:03):**  And it won't just be a matter of someone showing a business plan and then being able to walk  away and essentially do what they like given the fact they've been given a lump of money.  I think there are a couple of difficulties here though.  The first one is that you might have an expert who's in a bank, but they're not the ones  working on the land.  
**[0:27:20-0:27:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:27:20):**  There are so many kind of niche versions of production all around the UK that will not  work in other areas.  And I think one of the really big, big things that something like an ADB would not want  to quash is some really innovative business models that might be completely out of the  ability of some parent expert to assess at that point.  
**[0:27:38-0:27:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:27:38):**  I get a little bit concerned when I hear about ecological and environmental outcomes just  because I think they're so hard to assess.  So it's how you kind of make sure that they're not necessarily tied to tests, which are not  always going to be perfect.  These outcomes will do better or worse given the kind of general place where someone's  
**[0:27:57-0:27:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:27:57):**  farm is.  If someone's farm is in the middle of a load of the really amazingly well-run countryside,  theirs will have much, much greater ecological benefits, much, much quicker than someone  whose farm is in the middle of an urban centre or close to urban centres.  So those are the bits I've just got a little bit of worries about.  
**[0:28:13-0:28:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:28:13):**  I think it really comes down to a bit more of a hand-holding attitude to how these loans  are delivered and some trust between the bank and the farmers to genuinely provide those  figures and their cash flows as they go through to prove that they genuinely are doing good  things.  That sounds like something that very much needs to be developed as part of that toolkit.  
**[0:28:34-0:28:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:28:34):**  There's a real sort of institutional knowledge, as you say, George, around not just saying  we're going to use these metrics because we always use these metrics and understanding  that one metric might be more appropriate for one farm or another, but you also might  be expecting quite different outcomes.  So it's having knowledge within that institution about what is reasonable to expect and how  
**[0:28:55-0:29:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:28:55):**  that farmer is able to demonstrate that in good faith they're doing their best in an  agroecological way.  Yes, I agree with George that we need to be a little bit cautious of rushing into payments  being linked to certain outcomes.  Because I'm wary of the finance tail wagging the farm top, if you like, particularly because  
**[0:29:16-0:29:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:29:16):**  finance quite likes to have a narrow number of metrics and part of what we're dealing  with here is multiple complex and interrelated outcomes.  So certainly that's why, again, we suggest that this knowledge role for the ADB, at least  in the first instance, would be to start to try and bring a bit of draw together, a knowledge  base about what are reliable metrics, how to interpret them, how they might vary from  
**[0:29:37-0:29:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:29:37):**  place to place, and start to try and build out the consistency and reliability of that.  Also I think the second thing to say is that that sort of pinning of repayments or financial  returns to outcomes is a little bit more of an equity relationship than a debt.  Now we are fundamentally have been talking about an institution here which offers you  a loan at a rate of interest.  
**[0:29:56-0:30:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:29:56):**  We do say that we should look at the risk sharing equity piece as well, but I notice  that where these have been used in other places, and it is interesting, it tends to be an investor  coming in and sort of more as a partner, I think, with the farming enterprise, that has  a sort of relationship, and that might be more appropriate because you're that much  closer to it.  
**[0:30:13-0:30:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:30:13):**  I suppose the final thing to say is that one metric you certainly can measure is what's  your purchases of fertilisers and pesticides now, if you don't know what it was, because  there are certain key big wins that we want to drive out, and maybe a test of agroecology,  progress towards agroecology is whether you're reducing those inputs.  Tony, we've talked quite a lot about the purpose of the bank and the way that it might be constituted,  
**[0:30:37-0:30:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:30:37):**  the need that there is out there in the agriculture sector, but just thinking for a moment about  the political context, this is clearly an important year for action on climate change.  The UK is hosting COP26 in Glasgow in November.  Is there a political appetite, do you think, for this sort of a solution?  Well, we believe that there is political appetite for a solution like this.  
**[0:31:00-0:31:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:31:00):**  Certainly, we've had good initial conversations with policymakers and politicians.  We see agroecology as being a nature-based solution, which the government is very interested  in as a strategy for dealing with carbon reduction.  However, we think it's more than that, because with agroecology, you don't just make progress  towards net zero, you have all these other beneficial yields as well.  
**[0:31:25-0:31:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:31:25):**  So we think it's worthy of close attention.  And as you point out, the UK has got this prominent international role.  It's for us to try and show leadership in this space.  So any solutions which demonstrate how to accelerate the transition towards nature-friendly  farming, I suppose we could call it, has got to be worthy of consideration.  
**[0:31:45-0:31:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:31:45):**  Furthermore, I think that whereas perhaps a few years ago, the case for this kind of  government intervention to get stuff done was harder to make, a combination of the fact  that we do now have a British business bank, which has been very successful and recognised  so by the government, and the current government is introducing a UK infrastructure bank as  well, which is one of the other big pieces that traditionally you have a state bank for.  
**[0:32:08-0:32:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:32:08):**  Actually, a lot of countries already do have a third type of institution, which is an agriculture  bank, for all the reasons that we set out in this report.  So the case for this, this is no longer a sort of an outlandish type of proposal.  It's pretty mainstream, actually.  So you put together, it's actually quite a mainstream sort of a proposal intervention,  
**[0:32:26-0:32:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:32:26):**  quite trying and tested really, together with this grand mission that we have that the UK,  you know, the government has committed to, which is to, you know, have a clear, globally  leading route towards net zero.  I think it should be squarely within the political appetite of this government and indeed any  other.  
**[0:32:43-0:32:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:32:43):**  It would be interesting to see, won't it, as we go forward through the year, whether  there is a big idea coming out of government in terms of COP26 and climate change mitigation  and adaptation.  And it feels, it's always felt that land use and agroecology, you know, fits squarely within  that space.  
**[0:33:03-0:33:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:33:03):**  And you know, if we think of the ugly sisters of energy transport and housing, that's where  the focus has always been in climate change.  And land agroecology, however it's dealt with, has always seemed to be a bit of the Cinderella,  and it's only in the last year or two, certainly in this country, that politicians have started  to understand that land can genuinely unlock so much opportunity for change, opportunity  
**[0:33:27-0:33:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:33:27):**  for mitigation, opportunity for helping communities and societies adapt to be able to cope with  the flooding and the drought that's likely, and the fire that's likely to come, you know,  with climate change.  Do you get the sense from government, Tony, that they are looking for a big idea, that  they want a big idea to be able to launch, and that this, you know, this could be part  
**[0:33:47-0:33:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:33:47):**  of it?  Well, I think the government is looking for any big ideas, and we'll need more than one.  I mean, this is a giant challenge that we're tackling, and there'll be more than one solution  to it.  We certainly think this is one that should be in the set.  
**[0:33:59-0:34:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:33:59):**  You know, alongside that, in terms of what you've just said, actually, in question, we're  very conscious at the Food, Farming and Country and Scientific Commission of the interplay  between this solution and the other things we're working on.  So having a land use framework in the UK, and in fact, in all its constituent nations,  is equally critical, because one of the things that we might end up happening is you get  
**[0:34:20-0:34:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:34:20):**  all these competing uses for land, you know, because somebody wants to sort of make the  land work as hard as possible to just do one thing, sequester carbon.  But if we do that, then the trade-offs we're missing in all the other land uses, you know,  we need to have that framework that can mediate this.  And that's indeed a proposal of the FFCC that we should have such a thing.  
**[0:34:39-0:34:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:34:39):**  Even though before we have this, what I'd return to, which I think is so useful about  agroecology as an approach and a development bank to help accelerate the transition towards  it is because it is a land use that does an awful lot for you.  It's not just one thing, you get your food crop, you get biodiversity, you get your carbon  sequestration, you get better employment, you get healthier food.  
**[0:34:58-0:35:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:34:58):**  That ability to do a lot of things in one go, I think does make it actually quite a  big idea.  George, just finally, as a farmer with personal experience, you know, obviously within the  financial sector as well as within agriculture, what do you think the key aspects, the most  exciting aspects of this proposal are for you?  
**[0:35:15-0:35:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:35:15):**  One of the really cool things would be that we've obviously spoken a lot about the fact  that these solutions are complex.  One of my biggest worries is the fact that whenever you talk to government, they want  simplistic solutions.  So they love solutions like plant trees to sequester carbon, which everyone knows who  
**[0:35:32-0:35:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:35:32):**  actually does research on it is way, way too simplistic.  And as Tony was just saying, like the whole point is that agroecology covers off so many  of these things.  So I think if the ADB could come in and kind of slip in there and show the fact that actually  the solution is complexity, not simplicity, that's going to be an amazing, amazing win  
**[0:35:50-0:35:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:35:50):**  and kind of almost like a backdoor way to get some of these ideas through into government.  But then personally, from a from a farming situation, my one love and the thing that  I am pushing hardest for my farm is for ecology, for nature to thrive.  And if this bank does well, and we can actually get access to finance that's driven down this  ecological environmental path, I think the benefits for the British countryside and interlinking  
**[0:36:15-0:36:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:36:15):**  genuinely nature based spaces of farm, productive farmland and fantastic wild areas together.  I just think it's going to make the UK a much, much more vibrant and amazing place to wander  around.  Fantastic.  That's been so interesting.  
**[0:36:30-0:36:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:36:30):**  Thank you both.  It's an exciting proposal.  And it's been a fascinating discussion.  That's all we've got time for.  I'd like to thank my guests George Young from Fobbing Farm in Essex, and Tony Greenham from  
**[0:36:40-0:36:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:36:40):**  the Food Farming and Countryside Commission.  You can read the FFCC report Farming Smarter investing in our future by visiting FFCC.co.uk.  If you've enjoyed listening, please come back and listen to more.  Tell your friends like us, review us and share our links.  Farmgate is a partnership project for Farmwell and FAI Farms.  
**[0:37:00-0:37:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Do-we-need-a-new-Agroecology-Development-Bank-etsabt#t=0:37:00):**  We're funded by San Calpa and you can join the conversation on Twitter by searching for  Farmgate podcast.  I've been Finn Loke stain.  Bye for now.  