### Farm Gate  (2021-09-25)
**[0:00:00-0:00:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to Farmgate, I'm Finnlow Costayne.  This programme is the first in a series in which I'll be talking to farmers actually  delivering agroecological agriculture on their farms.  The experiences of the farmers we'll be talking to will vary.  Some will run large second or third generation enterprises, while others will be new entrants  
**[0:00:24-0:00:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:00:24):**  and tenants.  The farmers in this series are working with the Soil Association as Agroecology Ambassadors.  Now, that's a grand title, but what it means is that these farmers are working with the  Soil Association as part of their 10 years for Agroecology project.  They're inviting people virtually, of course, onto their farms to help develop a better  
**[0:00:43-0:00:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:00:43):**  understanding of agroecology and to move us into a conversation about how this sort of  farming actually works in practice.  Today, we're focusing on cattle, and in particular beef cattle, and I'm joined by two fantastic  people putting agroecological principles into action.  Nikki Yoxell farms at Howl Mill in Huntley, Aberdeenshire, where she and her husband set  
**[0:01:03-0:01:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:01:03):**  up Grampian Graziers.  Nikki has a small herd of native breed cattle grazing in an agroforestry system, and you  can find her on Twitter under the handle at Howl Mill.  Denise Walton is an organic producer from Peelham Farm in Faulden, Berwickshire, and  Denise and her family farm cattle, pigs and store sheep.  
**[0:01:21-0:01:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:01:21):**  They have an on-farm butchery and they retail directly to the public.  Denise can be found on Twitter as at Peelham Farm.  Welcome both.  Thank you very much.  Thanks, Vinay.  
**[0:01:32-0:01:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:01:32):**  To start us off, I'd like to understand just a bit more about what agroecology actually  is.  So, Nikki, could you start us off with that?  What is agroecology?  How does it work?  
**[0:01:42-0:01:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:01:42):**  Yeah, absolutely.  So, agroecology is basically bringing together agriculture and ecology, and the basis of  that is thinking about the farm as an ecosystem.  So rather than thinking about nature and farming as two separate things, what we tend to do  is think about how the processes, the groups of individual organisms and communities actually  
**[0:02:02-0:02:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:02:02):**  contribute to the functioning of our farm ecosystem or agroecosystem, as you might want  to call it.  And so agroecology is about kind of harnessing that, mimicking nature, which is known as  biomimicry, and doing that in a way that promotes abundance, not only for nature, but could  also be considered as productivity from an agricultural point of view.  
**[0:02:23-0:02:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:02:23):**  Now, there's lots of talk at the moment about regenerative agriculture, and when you describe  agroecology there, there's clearly some crossover.  Is there a difference between what people think of as agroecological farming and regenerative  farming?  From my point of view, I think that there is crossover.  
**[0:02:40-0:02:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:02:40):**  I suppose agroecological farming, as I said, very much bases the farming practice as part  of an ecosystem.  Regenerative farming tends to have a number of principles, so things like maintaining  year-round ground cover, maximising on disturbance, enacting and addressing limiting factors,  trying to maximise on photosynthesis through that ground cover and various other principles,  
**[0:03:05-0:03:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:03:05):**  most of which do tie in to agroecology and the way that you would harness that kind of  ecosystem working.  But I think that there is still maybe issues around wording and definitions, and I think  we're all still trying to work that through, really.  But, you know, ultimately it's about how you can harness sunlight to produce energy and  
**[0:03:27-0:03:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:03:27):**  do that in a way that supports water, nutrient, airflow cycling, all of those things.  Okay, and Denise, I know before you were a farmer, you were an ecologist, and I wonder  if you have any particular thoughts to sort of add there?  Well, I suppose, I mean, the fact that we've got these two words, agroecology and regenerative  agriculture, in circulation demonstrates the shift in mindset that we all absolutely need  
**[0:03:50-0:03:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:03:50):**  to make the difference to the wildlife and carbon sequestration values of our farms.  I mean, obviously, I mean, when I was a practising ecologist, I spent a lot of time walking thousands  of acres of the north-east of England and southern Scotland, and I saw then the impact  of intensive farming on habitats.  That was my job.  
**[0:04:13-0:04:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:04:13):**  So, you know, I can see where agroecology and regenerative agriculture are shifting  that in a way that doesn't challenge the accepted norm of profitable agriculture.  I mean, obviously, we're organic, which is certified, and that is, you know, as we've  discussed before, that's a rules-based system, because we are making this as a contract with  our customer that we are actually what we say we are.  
**[0:04:37-0:04:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:04:37):**  We are farming agroecology and going a step further, and we are being audited.  So, organic, agroecology, regenerative agriculture, they're all very good terms, but one is much  more rules-based than the others.  But the shift in mindset that they express is very, very welcome.  And whether it's organic, agroecological, or regenerative, it's kind of a mile apart  
**[0:04:59-0:05:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:04:59):**  from what we would associate with traditional commodity agriculture.  That's really interesting.  I think that's a really good way of getting us into this.  Nicky, I want to come to you just in terms of, you know, getting into the farm systems  a bit.  
**[0:05:10-0:05:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:05:10):**  Now, in other places, you know, when we've spoken before, you've talked about being a  new entrant, a first-generation farmer, and feeling that you had no choice but to farm  using agroecology.  Where are the new entrants around who've made completely different choices?  So why do you say that you feel you had no choice but to be agroecological?  
**[0:05:29-0:05:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:05:29):**  We came onto the land, if you like, from a, I suppose, more of an ecological standpoint  or viewpoint.  We enjoy being in the outdoors.  Our background had very much been based in rural areas and in the countryside.  And so we could see and appreciate the value of healthy ecosystems.  
**[0:05:47-0:05:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:05:47):**  So I think, and also when we first moved to Scotland and we took on this land, our priority  really was around how do we ensure that that land and that ecosystem that we were then  responsible for, that part of that ecosystem, was flourishing and was healthy.  And then having kind of done some research and heard from some really inspirational people  and, you know, meeting up with farmers locally who were moving in that way, it became very  
**[0:06:09-0:06:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:06:09):**  clear that for us cattle were absolutely going to be the way into farming that also gave  us that opportunity to support the land to be as healthy as it possibly could be.  So there's that aspect of it, which is about kind of the mindset and the approach and not  necessarily just wanting to farm, but wanting to undertake land management that had positive  outcomes.  
**[0:06:33-0:06:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:06:33):**  Was it an economic decision as well, though?  Absolutely.  So yeah, I was going to say that the other option is about, you know, coming into farming  with very little capital.  And so we didn't have any barns or buildings.  
**[0:06:44-0:06:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:06:44):**  And so we had to think about, right, well, how can our animals get shelter when the weather's  bad or it's really hot?  And so immediately that pulled us into looking at agroforestry and then thinking about how  the cows fit into the life of those trees and that system.  So yeah, definitely was combining the focus from which we were coming, which was ecological,  
**[0:07:04-0:07:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:07:04):**  but also thinking about how can we farm in a way that takes as little input as possible,  make sure that we were using the natural world around us to fulfil various roles like show  shelter and nutritional benefits from trees, et cetera.  Fantastic.  You talked about there starting up a farm with almost no capital.  
**[0:07:20-0:07:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:07:20):**  I mean, this is, you know, it's a huge risk for anybody that wants to get into agriculture.  It's a huge barrier, really.  It's very difficult when you're a new entrant.  An awful lot of farmers, you know, they already have, you know, some family connection to  the land that they take on.  
**[0:07:34-0:07:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:07:34):**  So that must have been incredibly daunting.  And I wonder if you've started yet to get to the point, I mean, how long have you been  going?  And have you started to get to the point where you feel a bit more in control of the business?  Definitely.  
**[0:07:44-0:07:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:07:44):**  I mean, we've been going now for two years.  So we're very, very new to this still.  And we're looking to, well, we will be moving to a new farm this year.  We've had a great opportunity come up.  And that has allowed us to really think about expanding what we're doing and stacking different  
**[0:07:59-0:08:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:07:59):**  enterprises on top of the beef as well.  So we've definitely spent two years learning and then being able to have the confidence  to put ourselves forward for another opportunity.  So I would definitely say that we feel far more stable than when we first came into it.  And we were just, you know, every minute was a learning curve, I think.  
**[0:08:17-0:08:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:08:17):**  Fantastic.  Well, talking of new entrants, Denise, you were a new entrant, but 30 years ago, you  started out just like Nicky, really, with 20 acres.  And now you've got 650 as well as a butchery and an online retail business.  That must be quite a journey over three decades.  
**[0:08:33-0:08:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:08:33):**  And I wonder if this is where you expected to be when you started out in farming in 1990?  Well, I suppose there was always the hope that we would be here, but there was never  really the real expectation because I'm sure Nicky would recognise too that, you know,  with hope comes a lot of naivety.  And we were very naive when we started.  
**[0:08:52-0:08:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:08:52):**  And when we bought the small holding, which was £40,000 that way back then in 1989, it  had a shed.  And we saw up here because the farmers between 200 and 700 is slightly marginal, that our  way into farming was cattle.  So we bought cull dairy cows and multiple suckled continental cross dairy is how we  
**[0:09:12-0:09:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:09:12):**  started.  But we always had this desire and vision to sell direct.  We were lucky in that Chris was working on a farm locally at the time.  So we were already considered part of the local farming community.  But I think had we come in afresh to the small holding, to the area in Berwickshire where  
**[0:09:29-0:09:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:09:29):**  we live, it would have been very, very difficult for us to have got under the skin of the farming  community and farming system at the time.  Interesting you talk about sort of being part of the farming community and your husband,  Chris, sort of working on other farms because you decided clearly that the mainstream, the  way that other farmers were doing things, that the mainstream commodity approach wasn't  
**[0:09:50-0:09:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:09:50):**  for you.  And I wonder why that was?  Well, I suppose really, because I spent a lot of time trampling over quite a lot of  North of Cumberland and North East of England and Southern Scotland.  And so as I've mentioned earlier, the effects of commodity farming, my background is as  
**[0:10:06-0:10:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:10:06):**  a postgraduate ecologist and an absolute passion for plants.  A lot of my work was in rare species and habitat management.  You know, just literally filled my heart with sorrow to see the impact of conventional farming  on wildlife at the time.  So we came into farming, I mean, neither of us come from farming backgrounds.  
**[0:10:28-0:10:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:10:28):**  Both of our respective parents were all medics.  You know, we came into farming without any baggage, but with this clear vision that we  would sell direct, be as independent as possible.  The friends that we had made when Chris was working on a local farm, they all thought  we were crazy.  
**[0:10:43-0:10:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:10:43):**  You know, we were hairy toed hippies is what we were considered as.  And they actually advised us against it.  But we were very clear about what we needed to do, but we couldn't be organic initially.  But that's another story.  Yeah, and we'll come on to that because obviously there's a process of transition quite apart  
**[0:11:01-0:11:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:11:01):**  from anything else, which takes time and takes commitment.  But when you started farming, you said that you found that your land was pretty tired  and the land around you was tired.  I wonder what you mean by that, what you mean by tired and how you went about restoring  the productivity and the energy into that land.  
**[0:11:21-0:11:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:11:21):**  Well, it's the initial sense, very visually.  The first thing that would strike me on these farms and the small holding was actually decrepit  infrastructure, sheds falling, fences not being maintained, walls falling, because it  just wasn't, you know, I don't know if farming was losing a sense of prosperity, infrastructure  was not being maintained.  
**[0:11:41-0:11:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:11:41):**  I think that probably had quite a lot to do with the subsidy system.  And then obviously with an eye into the biological, ecological health of habitats and having an  eye very much tuned in to indicator species, which is what I was assessing, I could see  that it was bereft of any kind of indicator species.  And also we were very conscious of the amount of vet and med that our neighbouring farmers  
**[0:12:05-0:12:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:12:05):**  and our farming friends were using on their livestock.  So you kind of think, well, you know, what's going on?  So yeah, there was a sort of general jaded sense of, you know, of the small holding the  farms around us.  Initially we couldn't afford because we didn't have the capital, we'd kind of spent it on  
**[0:12:20-0:12:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:12:20):**  actually buying the land to go organic.  So we did start on a conventional footing, but I soon identified biodiversity hotspots  on the farm that we avoided when we were top dressing, we avoided those completely.  And actually I might also add, Chris and I met at Y College and Chris's tutor was actually  the John Nix.  
**[0:12:38-0:12:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:12:38):**  So Chris was, his initial training was very much in the conventional agricultural principle.  So it's been a much stronger, a bigger transition for him than for me.  But we very much had this vision of being independent and market, well, price makers,  not price takers, which drove our vision.  It's a great phrase and certainly one that I'm hearing more and more, this idea of being  
**[0:13:02-0:13:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:13:02):**  price makers rather than price takers.  And I'm struck there, you know, when you're talking about this idea that, you know, kind  of post-war the drive for volume production and that sort of growth of commodity agriculture,  which was never fully rewarded, which relied an awful lot on state support because the  farm gate prices themselves were being driven down and down and down.  
**[0:13:26-0:13:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:13:26):**  That just kind of leaves people feeling a bit sort of tired, even though they've put  their life and soul into the farm that they're working.  Whereas agroecology and what you're trying to do and what so many other people around  the country now are trying to do is to find their own passion, find their own vision and  reconnect with customers.  
**[0:13:43-0:13:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:13:43):**  And Denise, I just wondered when you're talking about species and talking about ecology on  the land, I wonder if you feel that the best way to regenerate land, the best way to deliver  that agroecology is to target keystone species.  So for example, trying to focus on the curlew and bring the curlew back, or whether it's  to focus on the soil and habitat management more generally and naturally let the species  
**[0:14:08-0:14:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:14:08):**  take care of themselves.  I wonder if you have a view as to where the balance should lie.  Well, the keystone species won't occur or won't reappear unless you've got the habitat  right.  And it is, you know, while we all have passion and vision, there's also a lot of common sense  
**[0:14:21-0:14:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:14:21):**  that has to be exercised.  And very definitely we have to look at the habitats.  And the first habitat, number one, is soil.  So soil management comes first and then simultaneously, if it's affordable from all sorts of perspectives,  it's habitat infrastructure.  
**[0:14:37-0:14:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:14:37):**  So habitat infrastructure had been degraded.  We came onto a decrepit farm with very diminished habitat structure.  So we started very early on, thankfully, we started very early on with grant aid to improve  the habitat structure and viability of our farm.  And over the last 30 years, you know, it really is, we can see the dividends.  
**[0:14:59-0:15:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:14:59):**  It's quite extraordinary, much more than I would ever have expected.  But soil too, that's an interesting one.  And we've spent, we've pushed the boat out and we've had a very thorough soil survey  done of every single factor of soil analysis on every single field on the farm as a baseline  to work with.  
**[0:15:15-0:15:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:15:15):**  And again, that's showing, you know, really good terms and really good results in terms  of microbial biomass, carbon, organic matter.  So we know what we're working with.  You know, I suppose a lot of conventional farming and you know, this isn't, it's never  about blame.  
**[0:15:29-0:15:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:15:29):**  This is not about pointing the finger.  We were all part of it.  When Chris and I first came into farming, we're very much part of a conventional system,  but just with a different vision, it's about rebuilding a natural asset.  We've been degrading a natural asset and we're now seeing the consequences.  
**[0:15:45-0:15:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:15:45):**  We've now got to take a grip of that.  Just going back to the land and land as an asset.  You know, it's an expensive one, Nicky.  And you know, you're starting out with 20 acres and obviously you want to be able to  grow your herd.  
**[0:15:58-0:16:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:15:58):**  And you said to me in the past that because renting is, you know, is expensive and you  don't have the capital there, you've managed to sort of set up a system, almost a barter  system for the land that you graze from other farmers by promising soil improvement from  the way that you manage your cattle, which is, which feels very innovative.  And I wonder if that was something that was difficult to convince other farmers to agree  
**[0:16:20-0:16:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:16:20):**  to.  We're really lucky that we've got some very open minded neighbours.  And there are people out there who are very open minded and are willing to try things  at least once and see if that makes a difference.  So, and I think also, you know, our cows probably do a bit of a good sales job themselves.  
**[0:16:38-0:16:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:16:38):**  We have native Shetlands and also white Galloways and they're particularly beautiful looking  cows.  So I think any landowner would be quite happy to have them on their ground and you know,  they're quite nice to look at.  So I think that helps a little bit.  
**[0:16:49-0:16:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:16:49):**  But yeah, definitely we've approached neighbouring farmers who have got very marginal land, which  is perfect for our native cattle because they really do, you know, get fat and fresh air.  They, they're very, very good doers in terms of, in terms of being able to eat kind of  quite what would be considered marginal or poor, new to value grasses and plants and  you know, and they do very well on them.  
**[0:17:13-0:17:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:17:13):**  So we've got neighbours who either don't have the confidence around having livestock or  haven't been able to, to invest the time or their own money into kind of the infrastructure  that you need.  And so we've been very willing to, to welcome us onto their grounds, either at a very reduced  rate or for free, given the work that we're doing.  
**[0:17:31-0:17:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:17:31):**  And it is great when you then go for a walk around the land with the landowner and they,  you know, they're very excited about what they're seeing.  They're seeing the changes.  And whether it's, you know...  And what are those changes?  
**[0:17:40-0:17:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:17:40):**  What are they actually seeing and how quickly do those changes come in?  Well, we're seeing initially, we've only been at this for two years, so it'll be interesting  to see what changes happen over a longer time period.  But what we are seeing is just an opening up of some of the sward.  So some of the grounds that we're grazing is very much tufted grasses, which are fantastic  
**[0:17:57-0:18:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:17:57):**  for voles and other small mammals, which then in turn are great feed for birds of prey.  But quite often that means that those areas get taken over by these tufted grasses.  So with the cattle going in and disrupting that, we're seeing these niches being created  that are allowing wildflowers to come through, an abundance on one particular bit of ground  of self-heal, orchids, birdsfoot trefoil, all coming through on land that had been very  
**[0:18:21-0:18:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:18:21):**  heavily grazed previously.  And the landowner absolutely delighted to see that and just couldn't believe that these  beautiful flowers were in their fields because they'd never seen them before.  So why is that?  Is that sort of a combination of resting, but also having the heavy, heavy impact of  
**[0:18:37-0:18:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:18:37):**  the hooves sort of getting down to seeds that were perhaps deeper down in the soil?  Yeah.  Well, the main thing is rest and rest is an incredibly powerful tool.  We are practicing mob grazing through holistic management, so holistic planned grazing.  And the tenets of that is exactly what you just said, which is this idea of high density,  
**[0:18:58-0:19:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:18:58):**  high impact on a small area with the cattle and then moving them on.  And they might not come back to that particular piece of ground for 30 days on the shortest  sort of rotation.  And some places we only graze once a year.  So, you know, that rest is absolutely the thing that is allowing those plants to come  
**[0:19:15-0:19:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:19:15):**  through.  And like you say, it's that soil disturbance.  So we're creating optimal disturbance that is giving that space, that niche for those  plants to come through into the sward and offer additional habitat.  So that's a really good example of how the community around you has been supportive of  
**[0:19:32-0:19:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:19:32):**  you as a new entrant.  It's helped you out.  It's made the finances doable because you've been able to work with that local community.  And I wonder if there are other ways that the community supported you or other ways  that you've supported the community.  
**[0:19:45-0:19:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:19:45):**  Well, the community have absolutely supported us in terms of buying our beef, which has  been amazing and really very keen to engage with short supply chains.  They see the cattle, they know that it's us and it's our cattle.  They see the work that we're doing with them.  And so very keen to support from that point of view.  
**[0:20:03-0:20:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:20:03):**  But the wider community are absolutely right.  They've been really supportive.  And we work with a number of farmers locally, good friends of ours now to share equipment,  whether that's trailers, livestock trailers, having to move our cattle around when we have  to take them to the abattoir.  
**[0:20:17-0:20:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:20:17):**  And then in return, doing things like fixing tractors or supporting them with moving animals  or whatever it is that they need help with.  And I think that kind of local community based support structures are just so important.  And you'll find those in all farming communities.  But for us as new entrants, it's been particularly valuable.  
**[0:20:34-0:20:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:20:34):**  It's interesting, isn't it, because I think when people think of farmers, and often I  think what farmers think of themselves and certainly the conversations around mental  health and seclusion and loneliness in farming, there is a sense that a farmer may not see  somebody from one day, one month to the next.  Whereas actually, what you're saying is that there's a really strong community, a real  
**[0:20:54-0:20:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:20:54):**  sort of push and pull where people are chipping in and helping each other out.  And as a community, you succeed.  And that's fantastic.  I wonder how important the community has been to you and your business.  While there was the initial doubt about what we were doing, because what we were doing  
**[0:21:11-0:21:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:21:11):**  was really bucking the trend, you know, going organic, setting up a butchery in Berwickshire,  which is very precision farmed apart from our little outlier up here.  Very definitely when it comes to very human issues of illness, grief, loss, the community  locally is absolutely indescribable in terms of the support.  So these very human things are always there.  
**[0:21:34-0:21:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:21:34):**  When it comes to accidents, for example, you know, if there's a, you know, our neighbouring  farm had a fire, we all went in and helped him some years ago, our cattle got out, we're  wandering up the main road during the summertime, we had a fantastic, really fun community support,  including our local police force came out.  So it was a really great community gathering in the middle of lockdown, borrowing lending  
**[0:21:57-0:22:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:21:57):**  machines, we have a very good relationship with our closest neighbouring farms in terms  of helping out when they're pushed to borrow machines.  So that's really important.  That's always been there and always been helpful.  Now, you're just south east of Edinburgh, and Nikki talked about the way that the community,  
**[0:22:13-0:22:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:22:13):**  you know, quite a lot of the retail customers for her are from that local community.  Do you have an understanding of where your customer base is?  Are you selling all the way down to London and beyond or are you sort of largely within  a 50 mile radius?  Well, actually, I think it's got probably quite a lot to do with when we started, because  
**[0:22:32-0:22:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:22:32):**  when we started, there was quite a lot of doubts and scepticism about selling direct  as a farmer.  So we found very early on, we had to go beyond our local community to sell.  And you know, we have a regional farmers markets, a monthly one, but we really had to go to  Edinburgh and Glasgow to sell our meat way back then and develop a website.  
**[0:22:51-0:22:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:22:51):**  So in a way, we had to go beyond our locality to sell because our locality wasn't ready  for us.  So yes, absolutely.  Most of our stuff is Edinburgh, Glasgow, online and ethical retail all around the UK.  I was just reflecting on what Denise was saying about having a local community that's kind  
**[0:23:10-0:23:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:23:10):**  of ready and open to shopping locally and supporting local farmers.  And I'm thinking that that's probably also linked to this, you know, the last year and  Covid-19.  And so, you know, in Aberdeenshire, there's very much a beef system based on barley, because  you know, it's beef and barley up here.  
**[0:23:27-0:23:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:23:27):**  And I think that maybe locally people would have, you know, supported the local butcher,  and it would have been quite conventional beef that was coming through to them and they  would still be supporting, you know, local farmers.  But I think within with Covid, people are out and about more in their very local area.  And that really helped because they were getting to see us moving our cows every day.  
**[0:23:45-0:23:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:23:45):**  And we come and have a chat and say, what are you doing?  And this is a bit different.  We've not seen this electric fence before.  Why are you doing it this way?  And that would give us an opportunity to have that conversation that if we weren't in the  
**[0:23:55-0:23:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:23:55):**  middle of a pandemic and people, you know, didn't have anywhere to go, they might not  have seen us during the middle of the day doing that because they'd have been at work  or school or whatever.  So I think that there's been a real shift in the last 12 months around how people view  the importance of local supply chains linked to empty shelves in the supermarket, but also  
**[0:24:11-0:24:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:24:11):**  having the opportunity to get out and about in rural areas and talk to farmers and understand  why they're doing what they're doing.  It really makes the point, doesn't it, that it's so important for customers to be able  to interact as directly as possible with the producers that are making the food that they  eat.  
**[0:24:28-0:24:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:24:28):**  And obviously for people being able to get out into the countryside, you know, whether  that's on footpaths in England or on, you know, on tracks and trails in Scotland, you  know, critically important, just sort of seeing how things go, being able to ask questions  and hopefully chat to a farmer that's prepared to actually take the time to talk to them,  which is always important as well.  
**[0:24:48-0:24:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:24:48):**  Denise, Nicky is farming just the beef at the moment.  You've got cattle, sheep and pigs in rotation.  Was that always the case?  Did you start out that way?  And how does the rotation work in practice just in general terms?  
**[0:25:01-0:25:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:25:01):**  So yes, we always were going to be, because we always had this vision of selling direct,  we were always going to have beef, cattle, sheep and pigs.  So we've always had that mix.  And we've, I mean, we had a traditional rotation, and then of course going organic, and now  we're pasture for life certified.  
**[0:25:18-0:25:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:25:18):**  So we practice a more holistic rotational grazing and we're putting in the infrastructure  to do more mob grazing.  So the actual rotation, the pigs, we rotate them from one 20 acre field to another 20  acre field on a 12 to 18 month basis.  And sheep have come behind cattle.  
**[0:25:36-0:25:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:25:36):**  So yes, it's been a pretty traditional rotation, but we are reviewing all of that.  And not least, we are reviewing the impact of outdoor, I mean, our pigs are free range  and we've had Tamworth and Redge Rock Cross for 30 years.  But we are looking critically at the impact of outdoor pigs on our soil quality.  And we started actually working in order to spread the environmental burden of pigs and  
**[0:26:01-0:26:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:26:01):**  we need pork for our butchery.  And we're now discussing, we're sort of sharing the environmental burden of producing pork  and are in discussions and actually have started using pigs from organic farmer on sandier  soils in Aberdeen.  And you produce cereal, don't you, for your own pigs?  
**[0:26:18-0:26:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:26:18):**  I wonder, do you plough to do that or is it no till?  We're looking, we're going to minimum till.  There's a slight issue.  We've heard, we've done minimum till actually, sown grassland minimum till and that was fairly  effective.  
**[0:26:32-0:26:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:26:32):**  But we are in the early stages of reducing tillage and we're finding some of our min  till, no till, not as successful as we would hope.  But we are moving more to, we're increasing cattle numbers significantly.  So there's a lot more going under grass.  It's really interesting because I think one of the sort of principles when we talk about  
**[0:26:51-0:26:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:26:51):**  that at a sort of policy level is that you're sort of looking at the land and what the land  can best produce.  And it sounds like you're sort of going through that process at this stage with the pigs,  looking at whether the land that you have is best suited, whether it's better to import  the pork from a more local farm and trying out lots of different ways of managing that  
**[0:27:09-0:27:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:27:09):**  cereal production, which sounds fascinating.  It'd be really interesting to hear how that goes on over the next year or two.  Yeah, it's really, it's basically learning the biological or ecological capacity of your  farm.  And we found when we were completely self-sufficient in cereals for our pigs, our farm was suffering.  
**[0:27:26-0:27:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:27:26):**  So we had to cut back on cereal.  So we actually started buying in organic barley from local farms to buying in the acres.  But even then there was an issue.  So it's really looking very critically at the way we farm in terms of the agroecological  benefits.  
**[0:27:42-0:27:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:27:42):**  Denise, the retail side of your business was always central to your vision.  When you set up in 1990, you said that it was very much, you know, it was big.  You wanted to sell direct.  Customers were very much part of your approach to farming and the way that you were going  to make a living.  
**[0:27:57-0:28:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:27:57):**  And do you think that you'd be able to farm profitably and agroecologically if you didn't  have that retail side of the operation?  Oh yeah, I think so.  I mean, when we, first of all, when we first went organic and that was in 2005, immediately  we didn't have that 10, and that was 2010 to 15,000 pound annual cost for agrochemicals.  
**[0:28:18-0:28:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:28:18):**  So, you know, when you start farming agroecologically and start recognising and learning the sort  of natural capacity of your farm, you're cutting back costs.  And I think in fact, there's been some really significant work done recently on the pathway  to profitability from an agroecological nature friendly farming perspective.  And it is very much a refocus on profit margin as opposed to productivity at all costs.  
**[0:28:44-0:28:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:28:44):**  And it's showing some very interesting results.  So the answer is, okay, it's not, it's sort of a bullet, but very definitely farming with  this changed mindset that it's actually, it's profit margin management, not productivity  management that matters, that you can actually start finding ways to farm financially sustainably  and obviously environmentally sustainable too.  
**[0:29:04-0:29:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:29:04):**  And you know, just another thing, you know, vet and med on parasite management, that's  changed completely.  So we don't have the same need for vet and med either.  So that's interesting that you feel that even if you weren't having your own butchery and  selling direct, that just the fact that you're farming in an agroecological way helps to  
**[0:29:23-0:29:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:29:23):**  reduce the costs of the inputs, including the medications, meaning that potentially,  even if yield reduces a little bit, that there's still more profit there.  But by the time you've built in that butchery in the retail business, part of the business  as well, then that's the point at which you really become price makers rather than price  takers.  
**[0:29:45-0:29:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:29:45):**  Yeah, yeah, absolutely.  I mean, you know, as organic pasture for life, I mean, we're producing fats, cattle, 500  to 600 kilo live weight within 24 months.  And you know, we're not, you know, by no means, you know, highly productive farm, we've, you  know, we have to manage marginality.  
**[0:30:01-0:30:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:30:01):**  It requires a different mindset, but it's very definitely possible.  Having the butchery has increased turnover, because we're adding value on farm.  So we're actually shortening the food and management and financial chains to good effect.  I want to come back to your butchery and online business in just a moment, Denise, but Nicky,  I wonder how you as a new entrant, you know, with a relatively small herd, how you've gone  
**[0:30:25-0:30:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:30:25):**  about building up your customer base, because I think, you know, part of it is from your  local community, but part of it isn't.  Yeah, some of our customers live all over the UK.  And it's been interesting seeing how many actually live in the sort of in the East Anglia.  Interestingly because their feedback is that they're struggling to get hold of really decent  
**[0:30:43-0:30:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:30:43):**  grass fed or pastured beef in that area.  So there's definitely a market there if anyone listening is considering that.  But yeah, so Twitter for us has been a key way of raising awareness using Instagram.  So that social media aspect really, really important and building that story and that  community online has been key to broadening our reach, I suppose, which has been fantastic.  
**[0:31:05-0:31:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:31:05):**  And interestingly…  Do you get a sense of who you're selling to?  Are they people, you talk about East Anglia, but are they largely rural people who know  a bit more about the way the countryside works already?  Or do you have urban customers as well?  
**[0:31:18-0:31:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:31:18):**  Yeah, we have both urban and rural customers, some who are just really interested and love  our cows and love what we're doing and just really engage with the story that we share  and others who are aware of the ecological damage that some types of farming is causing  and want to still eat meat, but eat it in an intentional way where they know that they're  able to have a positive impact.  
**[0:31:42-0:31:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:31:42):**  And I think it's also about recognising that shorter supply chains mean that the farmer  is secured more of an income in terms of the percentage of the money that's going directly  to the farmer rather than through longer supply chains like supermarkets, etc.  I think the other thing that links back to the community is that we've got some good  friends who are farming in a very similar way, who have really been an inspiration to  
**[0:32:03-0:32:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:32:03):**  us when we moved up here.  And they sell out of their beef immediately, you know, within an hour of beef being available  from them, it's gone. And they've been really supportive of then signposting customers whose  orders they can't fulfil by signposting them to us and saying, well, no, we can't provide  you with any beef, but you know, Nicky and James have got a couple of 10 kilo boxes left  
**[0:32:26-0:32:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:32:26):**  that's available, why don't you contact them? And that collaboration and cooperation over  competition is absolutely central to the success of our way of farming for sure.  So, Chinese, why do people come to you rather than going to the supermarket? Do they talk  to you about animal welfare or environmental impacts or nutritional content of the meat?  What is it that you think's most of interest to your customers?  
**[0:32:51-0:32:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:32:51):**  Well, all of the above. I mean, we have customers contacting us direct about all those different  aspects. My feeling is that health is quite a big driver. You know, we, funnily enough,  we get quite a lot of individuals perhaps who've been vegan, who have then had health  issues and have been advised that they really ought to improve their hemoglobin or the iron  levels of their blood and they need to get meat. So, yes, I mean, the longest conversations  
**[0:33:17-0:33:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:33:17):**  are with customers who are converting to meat from being vegetarian or vegan for many years.  And that's not a plug, that's actually how it happens, but it's still also environmental  and we also get quite a lot of customers asking us about the slaughter process and welfare  and how we handle our animals before they go to the abattoir. So, I think probably the  health at the moment seems to be driving most of the conversations that people have with  
**[0:33:43-0:33:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:33:43):**  us. And certainly at farmers markets, we do a lot of direct customer facing at farmers  markets. As one of Denise's customers, I'd say it's  also because they make the best charcuterie in Scotland. It's phenomenal. So, that's the  definitely one of the reasons that we buy. Fantastic. I know that we're doing other podcasts  around now about meat alternatives, you know, the growth in things like the Linda McCartney  
**[0:34:10-0:34:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:34:10):**  burger and plant-based versions like that, but also cellular meat that's sort of being  grown in a lab. Do you think that there is a genuine nutritional difference?  Oh, yes. If you're growing meat from a stem cell origin in a petri dish, without really  understanding exactly what the nutritional content of that stem cell is, you don't really  know what you're developing. Whereas what we do and actually published by Newcastle  
**[0:34:39-0:34:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:34:39):**  University, which looks at four different farming systems, actually doesn't include  stem cell meat, but no doubt that will be looked at at some stage. And very definitely,  this is a peer reviewed published paper that demonstrates that all grass conservation grazing  has a higher nutritional content of omega-3 than the three other systems of supermarket  organic, supermarket non-organic and conventional. So, absolutely yes.  
**[0:35:06-0:35:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:35:06):**  Because we're doing this podcast to try and help other farmers to sort of see themselves  in the agroecology space, I wonder if we just quickly talk about your butchery. Obviously,  it sounds like a substantial investment and I wonder where the money came from for that,  whether it came from within your business because of the savings that you'd made through  reduction in inputs because of the additional profits you were making through the retail,  
**[0:35:28-0:35:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:35:28):**  or whether you needed to take out additional bank loans and how big a decision that was  for you. It was a huge decision and it actually coincided  with us completing our organic conversion. So, it wasn't that we'd actually, we'd only  just started reducing farm costs, but no, it was a combination of a European grant,  food and processing marketing grant through the Scottish government and a bank loan. It  
**[0:35:49-0:35:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:35:49):**  was very squeaky bum initially, but we were very driven by our vision. So, it was difficult,  not least convincing people to buy our meat, chefs and restaurants. So, yeah, it was a  big investment. It was a big risk, but we are actually, and we would never have done  it without the support from the bank or the support from grant aid. But wow, we are glad  that we've done it. We are really glad. Just as a final question on your system, Denise,  
**[0:36:18-0:36:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:36:18):**  obviously you are organic. You've jumped through those hoops in order to make the transition  in order to pass the inspections. How important is your organic certification?  Oh, it's crucial. With the logo on our label, it actually confirms the promise we are making  to our customers about the fact that every mouthful they take will have an environmental  benefit and not impact welfare and will also be healthier. So, it actually verifies our  
**[0:36:47-0:36:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:36:47):**  promise to our customer and it gives us market traction for our products. So, it's absolutely  essential that we have both organic certification and pasture for life certification. So, it  takes us a bit further. Those two certifications are the gold standard, the gold standard in  terms of farming and meat production. And of course, Nikki, your pasture for life.  No, we're not certified, but that's something that we're aiming towards and it's purely  
**[0:37:13-0:37:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:37:13):**  at the moment just because of the size of our herd and the costs of going through certification.  But it's absolutely something that we're working towards. If we look at the standards, we're  pretty much doing all of that already. But actually going through that process isn't  something that we've done yet. But I agree with Denise that it is absolutely the gold  standard. And at the moment, we're having to rely on people trusting us and knowing  
**[0:37:38-0:37:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:37:38):**  us and getting to know what we do to recognise that we are 100% pasture-based. But no, having  that certification will make a big difference to us.  I'd like to because, Denise, you mentioned the importance of the health of your livestock  and the way that you can reduce some of those medications because when you started out,  you were seeing an awful lot of expenditure on vet medications in surrounding farms. Agroecological  
**[0:38:02-0:38:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:38:02):**  systems rely on diversity and they promote abundant nature. And obviously, parasites  are part of nature. And I'm wondering with liver flue and other parasites specifically,  because I know that they can be quite a problem for farmers in wetter parts of Britain. Are  these things problems for you? Do you think that agroecological systems make it easier  or harder to manage parasites like liver flue?  
**[0:38:24-0:38:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:38:24):**  Well, if I can relate our experience from pre-organic to post-organic. So pre-organic,  we prophylactically treated our cattle for Rotavirus and Cryptosporidia and also thought  coccidiosis. When we went organic, which meant that we were no longer top dressing our grass  fields, coccidiosis stopped. And I mean, absolutely stopped. Okay, we've had a little bit since  because we increased our herd by buying another organic herd from a different part of the  
**[0:38:49-0:38:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:38:49):**  country. And obviously, they came with a different set of immunity credentials to ours. So we  no longer have to prophylactically treat for anything. And that is organic, agroecological.  And I think really what we are witnessing or part of is a natural increase in the natural  immunity of our livestock.  It's remarkable, isn't it? Because it clearly is a big worry and a big expenditure for a  
**[0:39:15-0:39:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:39:15):**  lot of farmers. And so if you're partly building up immunity and partly sort of building up,  you know, the rest of nature, so more insects and birds that predate on parasites, then  that has to be a bit of a win. Nikki, any thoughts on this at all?  Just to say that I've never warmed my cattle, but we have done fecal egg counts and they've  come back as zero. So I think for us, the combination of mob grazing and agroforestry,  
**[0:39:40-0:39:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:39:40):**  where the cattle are getting access to trees, which have got natural tannins, which is offering  kind of a natural and fermentic, is those are the things that are making the difference.  And the fact that we graze very tall sward, so tall grass, and sometimes the grass is  taller than our cattle. I mean, they are small cattle. But you know, we've got festives and  cocks that stand above five foot, so that the cattle are eating the seed heads and they're  
**[0:40:04-0:40:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:40:04):**  keeping their heads high and they're well out of the parasite zone down in the bottom  of the grass. So we absolutely believe that this approach is enabling us to not have to  give any medication to our cattle.  Just bringing us to the end, then I wonder, Nikki, let's start with you. Are there mistakes  that you think you've made over the last couple of years, even, you know, before you actually  
**[0:40:24-0:40:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:40:24):**  went into farming when you were just thinking about going into farming, things that you'd  do differently in retrospect, if you had your time again?  Absolutely. So many mistakes, but so many learning opportunities. And would say that  the, it's a bit cheesy to say it, but the community and the people around us and the  people that supported us have been absolutely invaluable. And always having somebody to  
**[0:40:44-0:40:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:40:44):**  go to for advice or just to kind of throw ideas around with has been so, so important.  But yeah, always making mistakes, always learning from them. And just, you know, I suppose the  benefit of that is that, you know, if you are going with this learning open mindset,  then yeah, you can make those changes. And you can reflect on how you can do things differently  rather than putting it down to something that, oh, well, that's just the way the soil is,  
**[0:41:12-0:41:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:41:12):**  or that's just because the weather's the way it is. Actually, it's about how can I adapt?  How can I change what I'm doing to make sure that the outcome is as positive as possible?  Thank you, Nicky. And Denise, you've been in this business for 30 years and, you know,  you talked about being a new entrant. Now you're into succession. Your son is working  on the farm and his family as well. If you had your time again, are there things that  
**[0:41:33-0:41:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:41:33):**  you'd do differently? Were you broadly happy with where you are?  Well, I think definitely we would have started planting quicker, getting hedgerows, getting  the farm infrastructure improved much more quickly. And very definitely we wouldn't have  had continental cost cattle. We would have gone straight into native breeds immediately  and started building up immunity immediately. And of course, going organic straight away,  
**[0:41:54-0:41:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:41:54):**  that would have been fantastic, but it just wasn't affordable at the time. So, those are  sort of three things possibly. Fantastic. You've both been wonderful. It's  been so good to talk to you about your systems and your experiences. I'd like to thank my  guests, Nicky Yoxell from Howl Mill and Denise Walton from Peelham Farm. Denise and Nicky  are agroecology ambassadors for the Soil Association. There are going to be more programmes in this  
**[0:42:19-0:42:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farming-Beef---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-epev4d#t=0:42:19):**  series coming soon. And if you've enjoyed listening, please come back and listen to  more. Tell your friends, like us, review us and share our links. Farmgate is a partnership  project for Farmwell and FAI Farms. We're funded by San Calpa and you can join the conversation  on Twitter by searching for Farmgate Podcast. I've been Finn low Costain. Bye for now.  