### Farm Gate  (2020-31-06)
**[0:00:00-0:00:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:00:00):**  Welcome to Farmgate, I'm Finnlow Costayne. Farmers from across the world have issued  a joint statement calling for governments to recognise the importance of the metric  GWP star. Signatories to the statement include the NFU, CLA, the National Sheep Association  and Beef and Lamb New Zealand. While recognising that climate change is one of the most urgent  challenges we face, farmers' leaders are calling for the role of agricultural methane  
**[0:00:34-0:00:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:00:34):**  to be accurately recognised in policy and accurately accounted for in the footprinting  of agricultural emissions. In a moment I'll speak to Andrew Morrison, the Chairman of  Beef and Lamb New Zealand, and to Phil Stocker, the Chief Executive of the UK's National  Sheep Association.  Methane is a short-lived gas, and its warming potential should be considered differently  
**[0:00:55-0:01:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:00:55):**  from carbon dioxide, a long-lived gas. The new metric, GWP star, allows us to accurately  measure the impact of ruminant methane for the first time because it focuses on the warming  rather than simply the rate of the emissions themselves. While carbon dioxide and nitrous  oxide are active in the atmosphere for many generations, methane is broken down in about  a decade. This means that the methane emissions from a herd of 100 cows today are simply replacing  
**[0:01:22-0:01:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:01:22):**  the emissions that were first produced when that herd was established by a previous generation  of farmers. There was an initial pulse of warming when that herd was first established,  but there is no ongoing warming from that herd.  If you want a full explanation of the role of agricultural methane and the science behind  the new metric, then we have a whole podcast on the subject featuring the Oxford Martin  
**[0:01:44-0:01:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:01:44):**  scientists that developed GWP star. So you can just go to FAIFARMS.COM forward slash podcasts and scroll down.  Back to the joint statement. Beef and lamb New Zealand have signed and Andrew Morrison  is their chairman. I asked him why GWP star is so important.  It's important to all ruminant producers because you know the global debate on climate  change it's at a period we get the science right. Now what science is, you know, the  
**[0:02:13-0:02:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:02:13):**  team at Oxford Martin led by Professor Miles Allen has done a great job in identifying  the different warming potentials of the gases. Now that becomes important because the metrics  in relation to what we have to achieve if we start the debate with the right metrics  it delivers the right result.  And you say in the joint statement that continuing with GWP 100 could lead to bad policy decisions.  
**[0:02:36-0:02:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:02:36):**  And I wonder if you could give us an example of just what you mean by that.  Well I think the explanation is, you know, the simple terminology of net carbon bills  or zero carbons or whatever, it's the warming potential or the impact on the environment  we're concerned about. It's the relevance of its warming potential and what you have  to do to reduce that. The other reason why this is really important, this GWP star, is  
**[0:02:59-0:03:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:02:59):**  the fact that it also identifies that if you're actually increasing your methane it's a highly  effective guess in driving the warming potential up. So like there's a corresponding recognition  of its decrease we also have to acknowledge the corresponding risk if we are increasing  the methane figures.  And so if we're thinking in terms of policy then a continued focus on the emission rate  
**[0:03:22-0:03:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:03:22):**  of methane rather than recognising the warming potential of that continued emission. What  do you think that leads to and why is it so important to change the metric to GWP star?  Well simplistically some of the gases have to go to effectively either net or gross zero  depending on how you construct your bill. If you take methane to a zero position you  are delivering significantly more than effectively going status quo, you're going global cooling.  
**[0:03:52-0:03:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:03:52):**  And so you would have to recognise that in the policy construction otherwise you're asking  methane and ruminant producers to do significantly more than the other gases. And no issues with  that as long as that is recognised.  And so from that perspective agriculture would be the only industry on the planet that is  being asked not only to deliver net zero but to go further and deliver cooling within that  
**[0:04:16-0:04:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:04:16):**  same time frame.  If you got your metrics using GWP 100 versus the GWP stars I would say the answer is yes.  And so we just have to be mindful of that and as I say we all have to look at our options  and comfortable to do things as long as the steps we're taking lead to the targets that  we're setting.  
**[0:04:35-0:04:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:04:35):**  So really it's about honesty, it's about having metrics embedded that recognise the most up  to date science and make sure that farmers the same as the rest of the population, other  industries, other citizens around the world are just being treated fairly. Now it's interesting  in the UK the UK government now accepts the science largely because of the work that FAI  and Farmwell have done working with government departments to help them understand that issue  
**[0:05:02-0:05:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:05:02):**  but they're still not yet prepared to embed and use the GWP star metric. I wonder how  the New Zealand government's approaching this issue.  So we've just hit a zero carbon bill or a zero carbon act down here and they've recognised  the contribution of split gases and recognised that those gases will be treated differently.  Now we're still having discussion on what the appropriate percentage reduction is that  
**[0:05:27-0:05:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:05:27):**  delivers no additional warming or keeps the climate change under the two degrees. So that's  where it becomes quite crucial. So it is recognised by the UK Climate Change Commission and we  have recognised that the split gas debate down here, what we have to do is get this  recognised at the international level and the IPCC and have it accepted globally. What  we've got, we've got a very mature government over here who has recognised that to get the  
**[0:05:53-0:05:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:05:53):**  outcomes we need that they will work with farmers and in the next five years we will  partner with government to come up with accurate on farm measuring systems so that we can take,  you know if you refer to this as assets and liabilities, we have the liabilities which  are the gases being carbon, nitrous oxide and CH4 methane. The assets that we've got  to look at is ways that we can either sequester in soil, sequester with trees etc or use some  
**[0:06:22-0:06:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:06:22):**  of the technologies we're looking at, genetics, vaccines, inhibitors, all those sorts of things  that we would build a system that recognises the assets in this debate as well as just  not only recognising the liabilities.  So it sounds like the New Zealand government is slightly ahead of the UK government in  so far as it's not only recognising the metric exists, it's recognising the difference that  
**[0:06:44-0:06:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:06:44):**  this potentially makes for farmers on the ground and there's a dynamic partnership that's  now grown up so that over the next five years the best ways of accounting for that additional  sequestration that you were mentioning there, that those systems can be developed.  Yeah well we're doing ourselves disservice in this debate if we don't use science to  inform it and science is informed as to the risks of climate change. But science also  
**[0:07:10-0:07:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:07:10):**  informs us as I say the global warming potential of the different gases, let's use it accurately.  And when you talk about dynamic partnerships, you know I'm really pleased, this is a non-border  specific issue, climate change and recognition of the appropriate metrics. So I'm really  proud to have signed off this with these UK farming groups. This is really good stuff  and this is exhibiting global leadership in this space. So yeah we're lucky in New Zealand  
**[0:07:37-0:07:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:07:37):**  dynamic partnerships with government, but dynamic partnerships with UK farming leaders  too is excellent. I really want to commend all these groups who have signed up to this  to understand the relevance and importance of as I say a non-border issue.  And you mentioned the global statement that's been made by multiple partners from around  the world. What is it particularly that you hope that the global statement will achieve  
**[0:08:00-0:08:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:08:00):**  beyond simply saying that you know we as a global network of farmers believe that this  is the metric that should be used?  Yeah we'll sort of put it in farming terms. A lot of times the general public or different  sectors think oh well if these guys are just trying to play the get out of jail free card.  And the other thing that they say well of course you would say that you want to protect  
**[0:08:20-0:08:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:08:20):**  your sector or your industry. But you know it goes beyond that when we see that a lot  of the agri sector community globally are all challenged with the same issues and so  when you know we're looking for the science that will inform the answer. And so that's  where you know we're very proud as I say to partner with all these groups and ask this  global leadership question that we can actually this not only informs the metrics this then  
**[0:08:46-0:08:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:08:46):**  helps inform the solutions as well.  Andrew Morrison from Beef and Lamb New Zealand. What's exciting about the joint statement  is that it not only highlights the issue of methane and the change in our understanding  of the way that it functions, it also recognises the fact that land can produce multiple public  goods. If livestock is farmed extensively on grass and farmed well, then not only can  
**[0:09:08-0:09:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:09:08):**  we produce high quality food, but we can also deliver carbon sequestration, good water management  and the restoration of nature. Phil Stocker is the chief executive of the UK's National  Sheep Association. I spoke to him about the importance of land use in delivering those  combined public goods.  If you think about it over this last 50 years, 60, 70 years, we've had policy drivers that  
**[0:09:32-0:09:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:09:32):**  have almost been single in terms of their output or their interests. From food production,  a need to feed the population and to make food available to people as readily and as  affordably as possible. And then our policies swung almost entirely towards environmental  policies. And we're at a point now where I think there is a really widespread recognition  of the need for multiple outcomes from our land management. And we are talking about  
**[0:10:00-0:10:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:10:00):**  producing food at the same time as producing a great landscape, good habitats for nature  and biodiversity, good levels of natural capital, air, soil and water. So we're having to deliver  all of these things and people are starting to think now of broader sustainability assessments  that take into account all of those things collectively. And as an example, it's something  you mentioned there about the fact that if we look too much at methane alone, if you're  
**[0:10:28-0:10:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:10:28):**  not careful, you'll end up with negative unintended consequences. If we want to push all of our  land production to the optimum level of methane output, methane reduction, we would end up  with all of our lands being slaughtered within something like a 12 or 16 week period. And  we would end up with a glut on the market and we would end up with an absence of animals  to be able to graze our land throughout the rest of the year as well. So we've got to  
**[0:10:59-0:11:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:10:59):**  start looking at these things through a lens of multiple outputs and outcomes and it has  to be measured in that way. So it's not all about carbon and climate change. It is about  nature and biodiversity. It is about food production. It is about health and wellbeing  of people. Carbon footprinting and methane is one really crucially important aspect of  that, but it's not the be all and end all of everything.  
**[0:11:23-0:11:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:11:23):**  No, it strikes me, I mean, the conversations I've had with farmers over the last couple  of years since this science first emerged, farmers always knew that there was an anomaly,  that methane behaved in a different way. So what this science has done is to kind of,  is to firm up and stick some foundations underneath what people already thought. And when we're  talking, we're talking about the way in which we can deliver improved climate change impacts  
**[0:11:47-0:11:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:11:47):**  and biodiversity restoration, better soil health, better economic diversity by maintaining  sheep and cattle in the countryside. It seems like a no brainer that government should adopt  this. So why do you think that it is, that government hasn't just taken this on? It's  accurate science, it's accepted by government and by the IPCC. Why hasn't it yet been integrated?  Yeah, that's a really good question. I think climate science is still relatively new, I  
**[0:12:16-0:12:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:12:16):**  guess. So there's still an absence of understanding of how the whole thing works. And we're also  working increasingly on a global scale. So to have so many nations across the world,  and I agree with you entirely that the whole rationale behind GWP Star is something that  no one can really argue against. And the science is there now to show that we should be moving  away from the previous model. But these things do take time and people are very, very nervous  
**[0:12:44-0:12:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:12:44):**  about making changes to things that are established. And I would also say that we have to be very,  very careful about the fact that there will be people that are part of this agenda, this  whole agenda that have got a bigger or wider aims and objectives. And I hate to say this,  but there has been an anti livestock farming movement that has been part of this. So there  will be some people that want to hold on to, in a way, ways of measuring livestock production,  
**[0:13:12-0:13:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:13:12):**  to paint livestock production in a bad light.  So what's really important is that government takes a science based approach that they are  rigorous about that science based approach. And now that the science has moved on, government  policy needs to move on to  I think again, that that is absolutely right. And I would also say that it doesn't end here  
**[0:13:32-0:13:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:13:32):**  because whilst GWP Star has looked at and recognise the different behaviour of methane  in the atmosphere, you know, we're still a long way away from really been able to understand  and measure levels of carbon sequestration in our in our grassland and our grassland  soils. So even if we resolve this issue of accepting the different way that methane is  behaving, we've still got further to go in terms of really, really understanding that  
**[0:13:58-0:14:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:13:58):**  carbon cycle and understanding the important role that grassland plays in that carbon recycling.  Now obviously, this this coalition has come together to promote GWP Star and to call on  government to to do something. And I wonder what it is you want government to do? Are  we expecting climate laws to be rewritten? I mean, I noticed that the Committee on Climate  Change has already recognised GWP Star in its latest land use report, which which had  
**[0:14:27-0:14:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:14:27):**  a very different approach as a result from the report they put out only a year ago. So  are you looking for big legal changes or for some kind of discounting mechanism just around  biological methane?  I think we're looking at there could be some elements where there needs to be some legal  changes but I would see this more in terms of a recognition at policy level, it would  
**[0:14:51-0:14:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:14:51):**  influence and affect policy drivers in the future, it would have an impact on our agri-environment  schemes and maybe lead to incentives for an encouragement for farming in certain ways.  And it would lead to disincentives for types of industries that had a really heavy carbon  footprint. And, you know, just remember that agriculture and livestock production has for  a long time been criticised as having a heavy carbon footprint. And GWP Star suggests that  
**[0:15:22-0:15:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:15:22):**  the majority of beef and lamb production that goes on in the UK is nowhere near as bad as  the picture has been painted in the past. So that in itself could have a clear, could  signify a clear change in the direction of agricultural policy. If you look at our British  sheep industry, it's almost a semi-natural system. In essence, lamb production in the  UK is done primarily from grass and forage crops. And in the majority of the case, in  
**[0:15:53-0:15:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:15:53):**  the majority of cases, the grass and those forage crops are being grown by not very much  more than solar energy, sunshine through photosynthesis, rain and soil nutrients. And the whole thing  is a circular economy, if you like, a renewable technology whose reliance on fossil fuels  is very, very low. And I think, you know, we've felt, agree for a long, long time that  the metrics that have been used to measure our industry have painted us in a very bad  
**[0:16:24-0:16:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:16:24):**  and disadvantageous light. And now with this GWP Star, we're starting to get a very early  recognition that producing food from beef and lamb production from grass, the way we  do in the majority of cases here in the UK, is not just a good and efficient way of producing  a high quality food, but it's actually got a positive contribution that it can make to  climate change, our environment, our biodiversity, our natural landscape, habitats, you know,  
**[0:16:52-0:16:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:16:52):**  all those things, you know, this is producing a good quality food product while also producing  a wide range of public goods. And it is, I've said for a long time that the way we go about  producing lamb here in the UK is almost the ultimate in renewable technology.  Phil Stocker from the UK's National Sheep Association. The joint statement shows that  farmers across the world have recognised the importance of climate change, of reaching  
**[0:17:15-0:17:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:17:15):**  net zero, but they've also recognised that a science-based approach using today's science  and not yesterday's is critically important. Farmers are now working together, calling  on governments and the IPCC to listen to the science and to work with agriculture to deliver  the best possible land use solutions. That's all for now. Farmgate is produced by Farmwell  and FAI Farms, and you can join the conversation on Twitter by searching for Farmgate Podcast.  
**[0:17:44-0:18:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Farmers-unite-for-global-statement-on-GWP-eba6km#t=0:17:44):**  I've been Finn LoKerstain. Bye for now.  