### Farm Gate  (2021-42-05)
**[0:00:00-0:00:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to Land Unlocked, a collaboration from the Food Farming and Countryside Commission  and the Farmgate podcast. I'm Finnlow Costayne, the chief executive of Farmwell, and in this  series, I'm talking about land use, with influential figures from the UK and around  the world in the run-up to COP26 in Glasgow this November. In this programme, we focus  on the power and importance of communities and community-led change. While governments  
**[0:00:30-0:00:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:00:30):**  and businesses play a critical role in addressing the climate emergency, there is also an urgent  need to cede power and resources to ordinary people so that they can design and deliver  the changes necessary in their own lives and in their neighbourhoods. Poverty in particular  remains a significant barrier for all governments in achieving net zero, and community-led projects,  for example centred on food, electricity, transport, leisure and energy efficiency can  
**[0:00:56-0:01:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:00:56):**  all deliver carbon reductions while also rewarding people with a lower cost of living and the  experience and confidence to work together for even greater change. We have a busy panel  of guests today. James Goodman is director of partnerships and learning for the local  trust. Brian E. Boyle is the administrator of the Big Local Project in Selby in North  Yorkshire. Chris Blake is founding director of the Green Valleys, a community interest  
**[0:01:21-0:01:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:01:21):**  company based in the Brecon Beacons in Wales, and a catalyst behind Project Skyline. Welcome  all. Hello. James, let me come to you first, if I may. What is the local trust and what's  the Big Local Project? Hi there. It's great to be on the programme. Local Trust is a charity  that was set up about 10 years ago by National Lottery with a significant endowment to spend  basically directly on communities. The main thing that Local Trust does is it coordinates  
**[0:01:50-0:01:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:01:50):**  a big local programme and a way of thinking about the Big Local Programme is it is a major  experiment in simply trusting people in communities to make the best decisions that they can for  their community to improve where they live. It was designed and come up with as a way  of getting money into communities that weren't, that perhaps were missing out on funds in  the past, that weren't applying for grants from the Lottery or weren't successful in  
**[0:02:14-0:02:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:02:14):**  applying for grants. And so rather than asking people to participate in competitive grant  application processes and so on, which can be quite difficult and excluding, the Lottery  said, well, why don't we just give people the money? And so a million pounds is allocated  to each of 150 local neighbourhoods across England. So when you say an experiment and  a bit of money, that's a, that is a big experiment and a big load of money. It's a bold experiment  
**[0:02:39-0:02:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:02:39):**  that we're learning from, trusting people with power, resources and time to make decisions  and shape their own communities. We're learning that it works. And so that's quite convenient  for the, for the experiment. It was also, you know, definitely an investment in building  community. So yeah, there's a million pounds to spend in 150 places across England, the  places are neighbourhood level. So in contrast, a lot of local work, which tends to sort of  
**[0:03:01-0:03:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:03:01):**  stop at the local authority level, these are neighbourhoods population around 8,000 real  communities and tending also to be in the top 20% of wards communities in the index  and multiple deprivation as well. They're on average more deprived than the average  in England.  And I'm guessing that these communities also are the communities that tend to be pretty  
**[0:03:22-0:03:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:03:22):**  avid players of the National Lottery.  Yes, that's right. So that's another paradox is that people are playing the Lottery and  putting money into this amazing resource, but that resource wasn't necessarily getting  back to the communities. So it's a way of tackling that.  Dryony, clearly, you know, Big Local is a magnificent idea. It's a really quite remarkable  
**[0:03:42-0:03:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:03:42):**  experiment. You actually managed the project in Selby. So how does it work in practice?  I think one of the things that's so special about Big Local is that every Big Local area  in England is totally different. So each place is shaped by the place itself, the people  that live there and the priorities that they identify. And I think that is one thing that  makes Big Local really unique. Yet we're all part of a programme where you can get support.  
**[0:04:09-0:04:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:04:09):**  In terms of how it works, we have a resident led partnership board. So that's a group of  individuals who are responsible for the decision making. So how that how that million pounds  is spent. So in Selby, we have about 14 residents from across our area. And as well as residents,  we have a few members of kind of other agencies. So we have representation from, you know,  the county council and the district council and the town council. And that partnership  
**[0:04:36-0:04:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:04:36):**  works alongside the volunteers and the workers to talk to residents to deliver activities,  this sort of ongoing resident engagement and development work, what we call a community  action plan. So that's really our framework for delivery for the short and medium term.  And we review that every couple of years to sense check that we're doing the things that  residents really say are important to them.  
**[0:04:58-0:05:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:04:58):**  And in terms of that development plan, I'm curious because you've talked about these  other stakeholders that are in the room kind of, you know, helping out with that. To what  extent are the ideas and the projects genuinely coming from the community? And to what extent  are they led by these other stakeholders?  I can only speak for Selby, but I have to say in Selby, our other stakeholders are really  
**[0:05:17-0:05:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:05:17):**  there as enablers and sounding boards and to provide local context. You know, the decisions  really are being led by the residents themselves. And those other stakeholders, along with  staff are there to support residents and to create conditions whereby we can help residents  identify the issues that are important and then support them to think through what the  solutions might be. And then hopefully kind of to take that through to take action and  
**[0:05:44-0:05:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:05:44):**  create the kind of long term change that Big Local is all about.  And obviously you're just working on the one in Selby, but every community is different,  isn't it? Every community has its own needs and understands its own needs better than  any, any sort of broader national, regional stakeholder.  Yeah, absolutely. I mean, you're right. You know, you live in a place, you understand  
**[0:06:05-0:06:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:06:05):**  that place, you have insights, not only your own life, but you know the lives of your,  your neighbours and your colleagues and your friends. And that lived experience enabled  you to have an opinion and a view on what solutions may be appropriate to the issues  that you identify in your area.  Yeah, I think that that's absolutely right that local people understand the problems  
**[0:06:26-0:06:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:06:26):**  that they're facing and what the solutions might be. But they also, I think, see things  in a different way from remote public agencies, government and so on, which have a tendency  to silo issues. Think about an issue being a social issue, an environmental issue, a  mental health issue, a food issue. But when you're actually living the reality, you can  see actually how everything comes together and is, you know, in a way it's interconnected  
**[0:06:47-0:06:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:06:47):**  and it's the same thing. Do you get a much more holistic way of working when you're doing  it in a place, I think?  So on that basis, Bryony, do you think that the community is better at making decisions  in the end, having gone through this process and in spending the money that they have more  effectively than if it was allocated and managed by more traditional charities and agencies  
**[0:07:06-0:07:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:07:06):**  in the local council that James was just mentioning there?  I think it's a good question. And I think James articulated it really well. I think,  you know, residents understand the issues facing them and that lived experience, as  I say, kind of enables you to think about what the solutions. I mean, what's different  about Big Local is it sort of marries up or matches that lived experience with money and  
**[0:07:27-0:07:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:07:27):**  support. But I'd say it's not without its challenges. I mean, the communities that we're  working in typically have very little history of being listened to or being trusted with  decisions and a million pounds is a lot of money. And our partnership, and I have no  doubt other partnerships, can really feel the pressure to spend that money wisely and  effectively. And I think this is where the Big Local kind of model of having what's called  
**[0:07:53-0:07:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:07:53):**  a local trusted organisation for each Big Local is really important because a lot of  partnerships really benefit from what I've called infrastructure support, but essentially  support to develop skills or confidence or to bring in specialist staff if it's needed  or access, you know, access to partnerships or other organisations that I think, particularly  at the beginning of the journey, is really challenging. So I think we need to kind of  
**[0:08:19-0:08:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:08:19):**  create these sort of platforms where communities can participate on their own terms and that  lived experience is valued equally to any other professional sort of experience. But  I think the two together are important.  Jason Vale,  I  
**[0:08:57-0:09:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:08:57):**  think we can't afford not to wait. Those sorts of shifts need to take place with people  and communities involved and participating. It's not even a question of bringing communities  with. It is a question of designing, redesigning systems so that communities are at the heart  and are creating that change. So without that, we're not tankering the fundamental change  we need. So we're just skirting around the issue, I think, in a way. It's interesting  
**[0:09:20-0:09:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:09:20):**  you mentioned climate. It's a huge, obviously the issue of the day in many ways. But if  you look across the 150 Big Local areas, it's only a very small minority of areas that are  actually mentioning it in their action plans and their work plans. I think it's six out  of 150. And those six are doing great stuff. But actually, if you take a step back and  look at what Big Locals are delivering, a lot of it actually aligns with the sorts of  
**[0:09:44-0:09:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:09:44):**  changes you'd want to see as part of the transition to a net zero economy. So 143 out of 150 doing  something on food. That's a big part of what Selby Town is doing. There's almost nothing  that connects the Big Local partnerships more than that really. And so there's growing food,  there's educating people about food, there's using food as a way of bringing the community  together and so on and so forth. It's not explicitly around climate, but it is climate  
**[0:10:11-0:10:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:10:11):**  aligned. And it's the same with natural spaces, natural environment. So that's another priority  for a lot of Big Local partnerships. There's a lot of sort of taking over bits of land  from the council and tidying them up, stripping out the layers of litter, the needles and  so on, making sure they're safe places, well lit, good access, people can actually use  them, start connecting with the natural environment in their area. It's not explicitly about climate,  
**[0:10:34-0:10:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:10:34):**  but it is climate aligned because it's connecting people to their local spaces and nature. And  it's making a more resilient local ecosystem. That is absolutely essential if you think  about what sort of communities we need to navigate effectively the transition, you know.  So you're building there, you're building social resilience, you're building the capacity  to take opportunities and navigate change and uncertainty. Basically, you're building  
**[0:10:56-0:10:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:10:56):**  powerful communities.  I agree. In Selby, you know, if I think back over the last four or five years, you know,  in every focus bit of engagement we've done, climate change doesn't come up. And it hasn't  yet. What does come up is fuel bills, access to open space, job insecurity, local skills,  what young people are going to do in the future. So all of these issues are connected to that  
**[0:11:21-0:11:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:11:21):**  big issue of climate change. And I think a lot of it is around communication and the  very fact that if you are facing multiple types of hardship, you know, if you are in  financial hardship, you know, you don't have a job. You've got less headspace to think  about global issues because it feels so disappearing. But you can think about the issues that are  affecting you and your family and your neighbourhood. And it's about those conversations, I think,  
**[0:11:46-0:11:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:11:46):**  to tie those together into what we might think of as the bigger conversations around climate  change.  James, just coming back to you, when we spoke prior to the podcast, you used a fantastic  phrase. You said that we have moved out of the state paradigm into the market paradigm,  but now we move into the community paradigm. What did you mean?  
**[0:12:05-0:12:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:12:05):**  Well, community paradigm is actually a phrase, it's not my phrase, it's a phrase that the  think tank New Local came up with. And they, yes, you're right, they observe and they say  that, you know, somewhere around the 1980s, we shifted out of a state paradigm where,  you know, you basically, the default is to look to the government to solve problems and  into a market paradigm where the default is to look to the market and the market frameworks  
**[0:12:28-0:12:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:12:28):**  and market incentives and business, particularly big business to do stuff. And that is probably  where we still are. New Locals analysis is, it starts with local public service delivery,  actually. And it argues that demand for public services is massively up because of population  growth, because of greater complexity to problems and so on. But resources are down. So the  way we have solving problems and doing things now just cannot sustain that. It's not broken  
**[0:12:55-0:13:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:12:55):**  out will be broken soon. And a much more efficient way of doing things would be to shift power  to people and communities to help them shape those solutions in partnership with local  government and local business and so on. So it's not saying everything gets displaced  and so on. It's sort of the community first sort of mindset change. And Brian, he was  talking about earlier how people in their community understand problems and issues and  
**[0:13:16-0:13:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:13:16):**  how they connect. They've got that in depth knowledge and heritage and history and also  care. And, you know, we're discovering how place based problems are, you know, look at  health inequalities and how life expectancy differs from community to community. There's  so much specificity in problems to place. Do you need a place based response and so  you need communities to be involved in that. So their argument, New Locals argument around  
**[0:13:40-0:13:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:13:40):**  community paradigm, it starts with a public service delivery piece, but you know, it extends  right across the whole levelling up agenda, the response to the climate crisis, the response  to food system transition. So it's a sort of a vision for a new and radical way of doing  things where in which we need to devolve power, we need to devolve with determination, basically.  So every nation's different, I guess, but in the UK, the idea is that in the past, we've  
**[0:14:05-0:14:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:14:05):**  looked to the government to sort things out for us. We then changed from a situation where  government actually, I suppose, during the 80s was taken away to a very great extent  and the market was expected to deliver. And now what we're moving towards is something  which is hopefully more joined up where, you know, the state is still involved. There's  still a role for the market, but actually it's shifting that power to communities so  
**[0:14:26-0:14:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:14:26):**  that communities can take responsibility and receive some of the funding that's necessary  to do what they feel that they need to do for their own neighbourhoods. Chris, the big  local project is very much England. You're in Wales and what you're doing is obviously  therefore working under a different system. You're in the Brecon Beacons and you've secured  funding for Project Skyline, which is a fantastic name from the National Lottery. What is it?  
**[0:14:51-0:14:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:14:51):**  What is Project Skyline?  What we're trying to do here is not give money to communities. And we're talking about the  same poor communities, the same communities that haven't had a fair break in the recent  years. And we're trying to give productive land assets to communities so that they can  actually make their own income. And a lot of the same themes about self-determination  
**[0:15:11-0:15:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:15:11):**  and control come in here. But rather than giving cash, we're trying to give land assets.  And particularly we're looking at forestry. And we're partly inspired by the Scottish  Land Reform Movement. There are now over 200 communities in Scotland who actually own land,  own productive land, which they can use for forestry, for tourism, for energy generation.  And that's been an enormous change. And we tried to see whether we could learn from that  
**[0:15:35-0:15:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:15:35):**  and apply it into the Welsh context. And we're working in the South Wales valleys. We're  working in some of the poorest communities in the South Wales valleys, the old post-industrial  coal mining areas, where the coal mines went 30, 40, 50 years ago. And the hills are now  covered in forestry, publicly owned forestry. But that forestry has, there's no economic  or cultural or social connection between the communities, which are still thousands. One  
**[0:16:00-0:16:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:16:00):**  of the communities we're working with, Trahear but Neronda, is 6,000 people. But there are  no jobs in that forestry. That forestry is managed corporately, publicly, lowest price,  felling tender every 40 years. And there's no connection at all. So what we did with  Skyline was to say, well, we did a feasibility study, first of all, and we just wanted to  ask four questions. Would communities like some control and state interest in that landscape?  
**[0:16:26-0:16:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:16:26):**  Are there sustainable business models? Because if you don't, then you don't get away from  this grant dependency. And for me, this is a really big issue and right at the heart  of empowerment. Would communities be best, do a better job for nature? And are there  good governance models? And I'm pleased at the end of this feasibility study, we worked  with three communities and we came to a very strong conclusions. Yes, the communities,  
**[0:16:46-0:16:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:16:46):**  once they understood what they were talking about, very keen on doing this. There are  sustainable business models around food production, energy generation and forestry. And so you  can create self-sustaining employment and involvement. And one of the things that was  really striking the communities, we didn't use a climate change very well, but they wanted  a better home for nature. They wanted in the one memorable resident of Merthyr that we  
**[0:17:10-0:17:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:17:10):**  were working with, he said, so the thing is, Chris, what we need, we need more round trees  and less pointy trees. And it's simply put, but actually it's a, he didn't say no pointy  trees, because pointy trees are income, it's jobs for the next generation, but he wants  a balance. And I suppose we concluded that local people are the best stewards of landscape  and of place. And is this one project or is it several projects under the Project Skyline  
**[0:17:36-0:17:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:17:36):**  banner? We did the feasibility study in three places. We're developing it up to realising  it in one place. We've got some funding in Trahearne and Rhondda, but it's a model which  could be applied everywhere. And it could be applied in England. I mean, it's already  being delivered in Scotland, 200 communities, but giving communities some control, some  economic access and control, design control over some landscape and forestry is a very  
**[0:17:59-0:18:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:17:59):**  good form of land, but there are other forms that farmland could be done, other forms of  land. We're treading a new path outside of Scotland where they have a different land  history and a different governance structure to try to do this. So this is the first pilot.  Jason Vale – You've talked about the way in which left behind communities often feel  that they lack influence and this control over their own lives and their surroundings.  
**[0:18:21-0:18:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:18:21):**  And you've talked about there being a sort of a learned helplessness. And I wonder what  you mean by that. And I wonder how Project Skyline is aiming to address that in particular.  Simon Rimmer – Well, okay. I just want to start with a quick anecdote. So one of the  consultation exercises we did in the Rhondda, it was quite interesting. An older lady with  the blue rinse hair came up to me and she poked me in the chest. It was a big one. We  
**[0:18:43-0:18:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:18:43):**  had 100 people in the hall and she poked the finger in my chest and said, it's all very  well Mr. Blake, but I can tell you that this project, it'll end, the funding will stop,  the offices that you've appointed will disappear and we'll be left and nothing will have changed.  You know, that is the thinking, you know, this has happened, there's millions and millions  of pounds has been spent on community development on all sorts of projects, there's been over  
**[0:19:04-0:19:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:19:04):**  investment in, mainly through the EU, ironically in transport infrastructure, in health and  educational infrastructure. And it hasn't made much of a difference to life expectancy,  to incomes, to educational levels, it hasn't altered. And so actually we've got to do something  different and to me, control is the difference. Actually giving a community the right to control  something, to break this learned helplessness where all of the decisions are made far away.  
**[0:19:31-0:19:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:19:31):**  And I think one of the things that's happened over the maybe the last 50 years is that decisions  over land have moved into boardrooms and into national governments. They've gone further  and further away from locality. In farmland, the globalisation of the farm infrastructure,  the capital investments in farmland means that those decisions about farm management  strategies are being taken in corporate boardrooms, which might be another continent. Forestry  
**[0:19:55-0:20:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:19:55):**  driven by global market forces and a forestry manager in the case of 50 miles away from  the people in the South Wales valleys are making decisions and barely consulting, I  mean really barely consulting at all with the people who actually live surrounded by  that forestry. It's also true of land development for housing and the recent proposed changes  to the planning laws in England are again a taking away of local power into a central  
**[0:20:22-0:20:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:20:22):**  government and so this all just adds up. And what we're trying to do, I think we're all  trying to do is to relocalise control, to bring control back to people who are the most  impacted and what we found through the work we did on Skyline is that actually naturally  people want a balance. They don't want just to make the most money, they don't want the  timber just to be the most productive. Yes they want jobs, yes they want a long term  
**[0:20:45-0:20:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:20:45):**  future for their jobs, yes they want to engage with the landscape but they also want a better  place for nature, they want better flood prevention, they want better carbon capture and these  are all of the things that a local community with multiple values can give you which a  corporation whether public or private pursuing a single value will not deliver. The evidence  from Scotland and also what we're finding in Wales is that you need grants and you need  
**[0:21:09-0:21:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:21:09):**  some big grants to get these communities set up. You know to set up a forestry enterprise  needs capital equipment, it needs support, you need training, you need all sorts of things.  We're looking to do some work on controlled environment agriculture. We need knowledge  inputs, we need investment inputs to do that. So that is needed. My long term goal would  be to make communities independent, take them off grant dependency because grant dependency  
**[0:21:34-0:21:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:21:34):**  is another form of remote control because the panel that makes the decision about the  grant do not live in that community, they live somewhere else always kind of by definition.  And so actually if you can say okay you've got a means of making an income, you've got  forestry, you've got food production, you've got energy generation, you're making a surplus.  How you spend that surplus actually is entirely up to you. You don't have to do a grant application,  
**[0:21:56-0:22:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:21:56):**  you're not dependent on a panel decision, it's you and you can make judgments about  the short term, the medium or the long term. And that's why economic assets and economic  sustainability I think in the end are really important, but grant income is very important  in getting to that grant independence.  Jason Vale-  
**[0:22:13-0:22:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:22:13):**  James, obviously with Big Local the decision has been taken to take that panel away so  that the grant applications don't have to be made in the same way, that money is just  available. But in just the same way that Chris is there talking about the fact that their  focus is land but there is a need to create self-sustainability, I wonder whether land  plays a role in the way that you're thinking about how Big Local might develop in the future.  
**[0:22:38-0:22:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:22:38):**  Chris  Yeah, I mean I would say about, that's absolutely right, that Big Local perhaps is one example  of a charity programme where the decisions aren't made by a board remotely, but all the  decision making is in the local area. And it's critically, it's a long term programme,  so it's 10 to 15 years. So there's a lot of opportunity there for mistakes to be made,  
**[0:22:59-0:23:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:22:59):**  for reversals, for conflicts to be overcome and so on, which you don't get in short term  grant programmes. Quite often we find it isn't just about the money, you know the money is  an enabler, but money is in a way the thing in Big Local at least that brings people together  and that gets people a foot in the door with other organisations and so on. It's kind of  a bargaining chip, but a lot of successful Big Local partnerships haven't actually spent all  
**[0:23:25-0:23:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:23:25):**  of their money. The money is in a way a starting point, but it's not the be all and end all by any  means. You asked about assets and you know it is, we do see that across the 150 Big Local partnerships,  whether it's very low in social infrastructure in the community, where there aren't the places  to meet, then that is almost invariably a priority for the partnership to actually get somewhere  where they can come together and make those decisions and also be a community. You know,  
**[0:23:51-0:23:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:23:51):**  see other people, run events and support young people, run a nitta matter, coffee morning,  cafe, whatever. In that sense, that aspect of assets is incredibly important.  Land comes into the question a lot when we're talking about food and so it's something like  as a result of the lockdown from Covid, two thirds or more Big Local partnerships are doing emergency  food provision, about half of Big Locals are doing some sort of food growing and so on. A big barrier  
**[0:24:17-0:24:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:24:17):**  actually to scaling that work up. We understand through working with the Food, Farm and Countryside  Commission, researching what was happening across the network, that access to land is a bit of a  barrier and so you know there's a desire in many communities to grow more, to connect the growing  with you know engagement programs and sort of mental health programs and so on, but also food  delivery and consumption and celebration of food to carry that up. But quite often just the land  
**[0:24:45-0:24:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:24:45):**  isn't available, the rents are too high, farmers are unwilling to allow their land to be used for  that because they're holding it in case it might be available for development. Or they're very  urban areas, you know, there's patches here and there but not on the scale that you could actually  go beyond sort of small community garden or allotment. So we're interested in exploring that  and how we can connect with others, perhaps sort of borrowing from some of the approaches that  
**[0:25:11-0:25:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:25:11):**  Skyline has. Just going back to Wales for a moment. Wales of course famously has the  Well-Being of Future Generations Act which was passed by the Welsh Parliament in 2015.  It's regarded jealously by progressive governments around the world. I know for example New Zealand  is very interested in how they can follow Wales example. How has the Future Generations Act made  a difference to your project, to Project Skyline? Well I think it's been essential. I mean it's  
**[0:25:39-0:25:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:25:39):**  meant that we've been listened to by public bodies, by the Welsh Government, by the local  authorities, by Natural Resources Wales who are the land managers, they're not the land owners,  the land we're talking about is owned by the Welsh Government but managed by Natural Resources Wales  which is effectively in for these purposes the Forestry Commission in Wales. And what it  enshrines these obligations on public bodies to balance multiple goals. It isn't just about  
**[0:26:04-0:26:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:26:04):**  maximizing income and so much of legislation is within the public sector is about maximizing  benefit and not talking about long-term benefits, not talking about community, not talking about  health and other other well-being benefits. And so it creates a balance seven competing goals that  have to be taken into consideration in decisions that public bodies take. But also just as  importantly has these five ways of working and we're talking about 100-year time scales. If a  
**[0:26:29-0:26:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:26:29):**  forestry planting to harvesting cycle is 40 to 50 years you need a 100-year time scale and that  enshrining of long-term thinking, of bottom-up, of partnership working, of doing the right things at  the right scale, all of those are the principles enshrined in the Act. And so to be honest I don't  think without the Act I don't think we'd have got as far as we have got. We're building on those  principles and then applying them to local communities. And it's interesting when you  
**[0:26:55-0:27:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:26:55):**  think about the well-being of future generations you're looking ahead and in the same way Project  Skyline is doing that in quite a literal sort of sense isn't it? Because when you talk about  a Project Skyline you're literally talking about what you can see to the Skyline.  No that's right and the Skyline name, the right, I mean it was a bit of a cheeky name by me. I  anticipated what the objections would be and they would say, well we're not sure we can trust the  
**[0:27:18-0:27:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:27:18):**  community and we don't think so why don't you have these three hectares over here and you look at  that for five years and we'll see how you get on and then maybe we'll come back to it. And I was  going no, no it's all you can see it's to the Skyline and it's for the long term and unless  you deliver on that we're not going to be able to deliver the benefits that really matter.  So it's a project title as an advocacy tool. Brian E, Selby has a population of around 90,000  
**[0:27:41-0:27:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:27:41):**  citizens who are surrounded by rather wonderful farm landscape up there in North Yorkshire and  you've said that you feel that there is an invisible boundary around Selby that cuts  people from, particularly from the deprived areas and backgrounds, off away from the countryside,  stops them accessing that countryside. What sort of form does that barrier take?  It's interesting. I was reflecting on this question and I mean I used to work in London  
**[0:28:09-0:28:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:28:09):**  working with deprived communities there and I was thinking of it in that context and often,  you know, the countryside was geographically distant but you're right. I mean in Selby,  I mean the big local area which is sort of the heart of the town centre is just 9,000 people.  We are in a rural district, we are surrounded by lovely countryside with access to wilder countryside  and yet, you know, a lot of the people that we work with and a lot of young people have very  
**[0:28:37-0:28:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:28:37):**  limited exposure, connection, experience of that countryside. So in terms of what that boundary is  and why is it there, I think some of it is still physical access which seems strange in such a  small community but, you know, within our big local area, 37% of households don't have access  to a car which is significantly higher than the sort of regional average. So that really is a  barrier, you know, public transport is poor, it's not flexible and quite expensive. It's expensive,  
**[0:29:10-0:29:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:29:10):**  it really only goes to other urban areas. To get into the countryside on public transport from  Selby is really challenging. You have to really want to do it. You know, the other thing is  something to do with sort of cultural experience or the sort of, you know, the norms of your family  and your neighbourhoods and I think there isn't that collective experience of being in the  countryside. So I think it takes a lot to change that, you know, that kind of it's not for me  
**[0:29:38-0:29:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:29:38):**  response or that potential apathy to something different. You know, that's a real sort of  psychological barrier. Do you think there's a degree to which people are kind of nervous,  they're not sure what to do when they get to the countryside, they're not sure how they're  going to be received, how people will treat them? I think there definitely is something about not  knowing what it's going to be like or feeling like you need permission to be somewhere that  
**[0:29:59-0:30:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:29:59):**  you're not normally. It's interesting thinking about how you sort of tackle that invisible  boundary. I mean, quite a few of the projects that we've been working on through Selby Big Local  have some sort of connection to local space and aspirations. So, you know, we deliver a  programme called Big Aspirations, working with local primary schools, all about having the  opportunity to experience, this is around careers and employment, but you know, trying something  
**[0:30:25-0:30:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:30:25):**  new or seeing what's sort of beyond local environment. We're also working on a community  going project, so transforming a disused piece of land into what we hope is a small but lovely  green oasis in an urban area. You know, it's connected to a school that doesn't have any  green space, it's connected to a church, it's connected to houses. And we're also kind of,  you know, beginning to use some of those projects and conversations to, you know, stimulate projects  
**[0:30:54-0:30:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:30:54):**  around food growing or make the connections between wellbeing and nature and working with some  sort of more specialist organisations in our area. So I kind of hope that by focusing on local spaces  and enhancing local spaces and making local spaces more accessible, maybe you can inspire and create  that feeling of comfort that enables people to perhaps explore further afield. Our biggest food  project at the moment is a community fridge. So we launched Selby Community Fridge at the beginning  
**[0:31:25-0:31:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:31:25):**  of January, at the beginning of the third lockdown. And that is all about taking waste food donations,  primarily from supermarkets, but other food retailers and members of the public and making  that fresh food available to anyone. And I think what's really interesting about the community  fridge model, and it comes back to some of the kind of discussions we had earlier about kind of  connecting to climate change is that the kind of the key message is really about reducing food  
**[0:31:54-0:32:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:31:54):**  waste. It obviously does address food poverty, but it's an environmental project. And we really want  to use that community fridge model to do something bigger. So we want it to be a sort of a hub for  social connection. We want it to be a hub of developing sort of food education and knowledge  and nutrition. We've just launched our first community cookery course kind of on the back  of it. And we've got plans for several more. And we see this being at the heart of a new community  
**[0:32:26-0:32:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:32:26):**  space that we're developing in the heart of our big local area. We have aspirations for using the  fridge as a bit of a catalyst to strengthen local partnerships and to develop our understanding and  support communities to think about their understanding of where food comes from. Look at  local access to high quality nutritional food. I mean, we're lucky in many respects. Selby is a  town, you know, there's lots of places to choose from, you know, when you're doing your shop,  
**[0:32:54-0:32:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:32:54):**  that isn't the case for many communities and probably not the case for many big local  communities. But I think our position in a rural district means there's lots of opportunity to  build better connections with local farmers and link up different bits of the food system. You  know, we sort of think about climate change and sustainability and community resilience. You know,  these are all parts of the same. Chris, we talked a little bit there about land in towns and cities.  
**[0:33:21-0:33:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:33:21):**  We've talked about the way in which you can take control of unused spaces and try and make them  into oases and then connecting those people using those spaces with other places in the countryside.  But access to land, of course, is critical to your project. And you've talked about the Forestry  Commission as being one of those key landowners. And I wonder in your experience how difficult it  is to unlock access to land for the sort of projects that you're talking about,  
**[0:33:48-0:33:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:33:48):**  to persuade landowners to delegate power and resources to communities.  I will answer that. But just quickly coming back to Brian is the point that Brian was saying,  we're working, there's a young couple who spent three years trying to rent a smaller piece of land  to set up a regenerative vegetable food growing process for local food production. And they  couldn't do it. It took them years to do it. The farmers are very reluctant because they're  
**[0:34:16-0:34:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:34:16):**  bizarrely doing regenerative agriculture would mean that they lost some of their grant income.  And so some of this is structural. It's in the system of grants. I know this is all changing  both in England and in Wales. But some of this, we get these perverse incentives against local  control. It's been, not surprisingly, it's been very difficult. And it's difficult because  organizations, corporations, public corporations, it is about control. And the one thing if you  
**[0:34:45-0:34:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:34:45):**  like, which the public bodies don't want to give up anymore, as they're losing influence,  they're losing cash to make change themselves. But the one thing they still have got is control.  And to take away that control is a very, very difficult thing. So it's not been easy. I would  say it's been very hard. It's taken us, I've been four years at this and we're making progress.  In the end, it's about building trust. And I think the one thing that we've had to do,  
**[0:35:11-0:35:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:35:11):**  and it takes time, building trust takes time. If you're going to get a public corporation,  or a private individual corporation, but let's say public corporation, to give up some control,  they have to trust the people that you're going to give control to. And trust isn't something that  you can just turn on. It has to be earned, it has to be established. And that partnership is  probably the most important thing that we've been working on in the last few years. Working  
**[0:35:37-0:35:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:35:37):**  in partnership, not taking an adversarial position, allowing trust to be built up over time,  so that eventually some control and some decision making control can be transferred to the  satisfaction of both parties. And of course, that trust is both ways. You mentioned your old lady  with the blue rinse earlier on. She has to trust, your community has to trust that having been given  this opportunity and having invested their own time in this opportunity, that it's all not just  
**[0:36:03-0:36:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:36:03):**  going to fade away, become another grand idea that didn't work. So I want to just go into that  in slightly more detail, Chris. How have you managed to convince the community, but also  convince the Forestry Commission to support your project?  Chris Binns Persuading the community was an interesting one, because this is an idea that didn't start within the community.  This is, I was the agent, I was the seed. So I took an idea that's been flourishing in Scotland,  
**[0:36:29-0:36:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:36:29):**  and I brought it into some of the valleys in Wales.  Toby  Did Scotland's success kind of help to de-risk that for the community that you're working with in Wales?  Chris Binns Absolutely. And the one, the biggest single thing that we, the most beneficial thing that we did is we took 15  people from three different communities in the South Wales valleys, and we took them to visit  
**[0:36:49-0:36:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:36:49):**  self-managing land-only communities in Scotland. And that was the turning point. Before it was,  well, it all sounds very big idea, Chris, but it's not really for us, is it? And to some extent,  they didn't trust themselves. The community didn't trust that we could deliver it, that they could  deliver it, that they could manage it, they could govern it in the right way. We went to Scotland,  we spent three, four days with communities. And the comment was, but they're just like us, you know,  
**[0:37:14-0:37:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:37:14):**  they're no different. And they did this. And they've set up a forestry enterprise, and they're  selling firewood, and they're building social housing out of timber that they've harvested,  and they've got growing projects, and they've got a hydro scheme. And if they can do it, or we can do  it. And that was the, that was absolutely the turning point. It was the communities talking to  each other. It wasn't me. I just, I just said, hey, what about this? And why don't we go out and meet  
**[0:37:37-0:37:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:37:37):**  them? And that was the catalyst. Then that, so that was about the community thinking, hey, yeah,  we can do this with there's no reason. We've then got to, we've then got to convince the public  authorities that this isn't lunacy, that this isn't going to result in unnecessary risk. And,  you know, civil servants for very good reason are very averse to risk. They, they, I've had it  quoted to me several times, what they call the daily mail test, you know, you say this, but what  
**[0:38:04-0:38:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:38:04):**  happens if it goes wrong on the date and we're on the front page of the daily mail? What then?  And one, and we, and this has come up very recently, it was being fed back to me that  they were very scared because what if, you know, if this is a community forestry project,  and somebody has kills, you know, dog walker is killed by a tree, then oh, it's cool. It's,  it's going to look bad on us, us, the civil servants for having let you have control.  
**[0:38:25-0:38:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:38:25):**  And, and then you have to point out, well, no, no, we're not going to be, it's not going to be a  bunch of OAPs running around on a Sunday morning with chainsaws. This is going to be a properly  managed health and safety approved forestry standards approved operation, which is just  under community control. It's not about letting a bunch of DIY as loose with, with, with chainsaws.  Although now that you mentioned that, that does sound like a fantastic movie franchise.  
**[0:38:54-0:38:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:38:54):**  The, the thing I was wondering as well, I mean, I was looking at one of the articles that you've  written online and there was, there was a comment underneath it, which I thought was just priceless.  It was, it was somebody saying, well, this, this project Skyline is all very well, but what we need  here is jobs. And it kind of missed the point that what you're doing is, is empowering that community  and giving that community the power to say, well, yeah, our priority is jobs. So let's create some.  
**[0:39:16-0:39:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:39:16):**  And well, and what I've been very careful to do is to say, it's not for me to say that Skyline is  about jobs. It's not for me to say that it's about nature. What it is is it's giving and empowering a  community to make decisions that they want to make that based on their situation and their  circumstances and their priorities. So actually I'm trying to give a capacity to make decisions,  but what that decision is, it could be about jobs. It could be about flood prevention. It could be  
**[0:39:43-0:39:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:39:43):**  about nature. It could be about, it's not for me to decide. It's for you to decide. And it's for you  to decide not just now, but in the future as well in 50 years time, and your children might make  different decisions about that landscape management than you might. And that's fine. And to me,  that's the most important principle. And that's, that's where the power of it lies.  James, Big Local is based on that idea, that idea that communities know best, that communities in  
**[0:40:09-0:40:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:40:09):**  and of themselves are powerful. Now food, we've discussed this off and on throughout the programme.  It's at the heart of any community. People come together to eat meals, to spend time with each  other as families, as friends in pubs, restaurants, church and community halls. So how can we make  that connection even stronger, even more creative and more vibrant as we work together in communities  to achieve net zero? I mean, food is something which definitely brings communities together.  
**[0:40:38-0:40:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:40:38):**  And I think the work we've done with Food, Farming and Countryside Commission shows that working with  food as a way of building community is a lens through which to see, strengthening communities,  you know, aligns beautifully. But in a way, it isn't about food in the same way that it's not  about jobs. It's not about the economy. What we need, I really hear what Chris is saying about  the need for trust. And there's a mindset shift that needs to take place right across the economy  
**[0:41:03-0:41:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:41:03):**  and society, you know, in central government, in local government, in business and so on,  that it's okay to trust people to take decisions that will shape their own lives. But that also  means changing your own behaviour and relinquishing some power. So there's a mindset shift, we then  need to create the conditions for communities to thrive. We need to invest in the foundations  for successful community, communities that can function where people feel able to participate,  
**[0:41:28-0:41:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:41:28):**  come together, make decisions, get on with each other, you know, organise and do stuff, and, you  know, create enterprise and create jobs and create brilliant food projects. And then, you know,  away you go. Amazing things can be achieved, as Chris and Brian have been describing.  Fantastic. What a great way to end. That's all we have time for. I'd like to thank my guests,  Chris Blake, Brian E. Boyle and James Goodman. If you've enjoyed listening, please subscribe to  
**[0:41:52-0:41:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Food-builds-community-e13un20#t=0:41:52):**  the Farmgate podcast so that you never miss an episode of Land Unlocked, which is being  broadcast on the same channel. And then tell your friends, like us, review us and share our links.  Land Unlocked is produced by the UK's Food Farming and Countryside Commission and the Farmgate  podcast. You can find out more about us online at FFCC.co.uk. And you can join the conversation  by following us on LinkedIn and on Twitter. I've been Finn Loke Steyn. Bye for now.  