### Farm Gate  (2021-12-17)
**[0:00:00-0:00:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to Farmgate, I'm Finnlow Costayne.  The Isle of Man is an independent nation and home to one of the most successful sustainable  shellfish fisheries in the British Isles. Developed over a period of 30 years, the Marine  Nature Reserve now accounts for 52% of Manx coastal waters inside the three-mile territorial  zone where the Isle of Man government has the greatest control.  
**[0:00:28-0:00:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:00:28):**  My guests today are Phil Gorn and Peter Duncan. Phil Gorn was elected to Tynwald, the Manx  Parliament in 2003 and was Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry from 2005 until 2010  and then Minister for its successor, the Department of Environment, Food and Agriculture from  2011 to 2014. Peter Duncan is the Isle of Man government's Senior Marine Environment  Officer at the Department of Environment, Food and Agriculture. Phil Gorn is on Twitter  
**[0:00:55-0:01:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:00:55):**  as at Phil Gorn and the Isle of Man, due to its designated UNESCO Biosphere status, is  on Twitter and Instagram as at BiosphereIOM.  Hello both. Phil, perhaps I could start with you. Isle of Man Fisheries has been on a remarkable  journey. Could you perhaps describe for us the state that things were in when you first  became Fisheries Minister in 2005?  
**[0:01:18-0:01:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:01:18):**  Yes, certainly, Phil. Things weren't wonderful, it's fair to say. We had a stagnating fisheries  industry. There was no real innovation, no particular drive, a lot of dependency on government  to provide fisheries subsidies at that point. There were a lot of people who had geared  up their business purely based on the subsidy. Just before I think I became Minister, the  subsidy was removed. So we were in a fairly difficult position. The fishermen were quite  
**[0:01:51-0:01:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:01:51):**  concerned as to how they were going to survive now that they weren't going to get the government  support. We were lacking a strategy.  You say that the fishermen were quite concerned. That doesn't necessarily sound like fishermen.  I can imagine they were pretty hopping mad.  Yeah, they were very angry at the thought of losing their subsidy. But by the time I  
**[0:02:09-0:02:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:02:09):**  became Minister, the subsidy had already been removed. At the time, it was expected that  you would have boom years and bust years. And this was just considered to be a natural  part of the fishery. There wasn't really very much by way of planning about trying to develop  a more sustainable fisheries model.  Peter, things have clearly changed. And I wonder if you could give us a brief overview  
**[0:02:34-0:02:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:02:34):**  of what the fishery is like today.  We actually have five fisheries, and they're all shellfish fisheries rather than traditional  whitefish cod had at place type things. So we have king scallops, the largest species  of scallop. We've got queen scallops. And we also have three different pot fisheries,  which is lobster and crab, and then an offshore whelk fishery, which is a more recent development.  
**[0:02:57-0:03:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:02:57):**  In terms of what's changed, I think we now think a little bit further ahead. There is  a long term strategic document. Developing a science base for several fisheries is a  complex and expensive thing. And it does take time. And really, that probably started in  the mid 2000s, 2006, 2007. Although there was a big database before, it hadn't really  been applied to fisheries management. And so that's been a big change. We've now moved  
**[0:03:24-0:03:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:03:24):**  to a position where in one of the fisheries, there's an actual stock assessment, which  is unique around the UK for queen scallops. We do surveys every year, we look at what  we've got, and we set a total allowable catch accordingly. Now that sounds fairly fundamental.  But in fact, in some of the fisheries that we're talking about, it's quite revolutionary.  We have comprehensive management measures for almost every aspect of the fisheries.  
**[0:03:50-0:03:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:03:50):**  And not only do they manage all aspects of it, but they're actually quite responsive.  So instead of using statutory instruments or legislation, which take quite a while to  change if you so desire, we tend now to manage via license condition, which means every fisherman  has a license and on that are a series of conditions. And we can actually change that  overnight. And so that allows us to respond quickly. But it also allows us to respond  
**[0:04:16-0:04:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:04:16):**  to the different states of the fishery during the year. So as one season finishes, another  season comes in, we can introduce management measures based on the science, based on requirements.  There were 159 scallop vessels in 2016, we're now down to 73. And there are 40 of those  vessels with which fish queen scallops and that's a mixture of mines vessels and UK vessels.  The grounds are not wholly within mines territorial waters. The queen scallop fishery got Marine  
**[0:04:46-0:04:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:04:46):**  Stewardship Council certification 10 years ago or so. Several of the requirements to  get that certification and maintain it was that you had management measures in place,  that you had stock assessments in place and that you had industry participation in the  process. I mentioned that we've got science based management, but we also introduced a  queen scallop management board that is now morphed into a scallop management board. And  
**[0:05:11-0:05:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:05:11):**  that's been really important in enabling the industry members to have a say in the management  of the fishery. I think that's really critical.  Jason Vale-  Right, well the north to three or the three mile limit is the part of the territorial  agency of the Isle of Man, which has always been deemed to belong to the Isle of Man,  
**[0:05:51-0:05:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:05:51):**  certainly for generations. Three to 12 mile was something that was negotiated. And I think  it's probably one of the first examples of the Crown Estate actually being ceded to a  different party. This was a negotiation that took place, I think in the early 1990s. And  it was agreed that the Isle of Man could manage its seabed from three to 12 miles. So effectively,  our three mile limits became a 12 mile limit. But between three and 12 miles, there was  
**[0:06:24-0:06:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:06:24):**  a requirement that the UK fisheries authorities would have to agree to any measures that would  be introduced. Now we renegotiated that fisheries agreement in the last 10 years. And that agreement  now just requires the Isle of Man to consult with the UK fisheries administrations and  to not do anything that would be deemed to be unreasonable. What we've tended to do is  recognize that if we exclude visiting fishermen from our waters, it's not unreasonable then  
**[0:06:57-0:07:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:06:57):**  of their administrations to exclude us from their waters. But I think generally the approach  that we've taken has been we want to work collaboratively and collectively to develop  really good, truly sustainable fisheries. And if that involves visiting fishermen, then  so be it. And possibly that's not a bad thing in general, because they'll see the positive  results of the measures that we introduce and hopefully lobby their own governments  
**[0:07:27-0:07:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:07:27):**  to do something similar when they get home.  Mason Thank you. Thank you. And Peter, if we can get into the history, the origins of  the Marine Nature Reserve predate Phil as Fisheries Minister, and they begin in Embryo,  I think, as a small protected area in Port Erin Bay, down in the southwest of the island.  Do you think you could give us a quick history lesson? Why there? And then what happened  
**[0:07:50-0:07:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:07:50):**  next?  Peter Robinson Yeah, you're right. It did start off as a very small area down in Port  Erin Bay, not significant, because the Port Erin Marine Lab was based there for over 100  years. And what they really required was an area of peace and quiet, where they could  conduct their experiments, and they wouldn't be disturbed by by visiting fishing vessels,  
**[0:08:09-0:08:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:08:09):**  etc. And so as you say, it started off as a small area back in 1989. And that was expanded  a little bit. And it gradually, I think, became recognized that if you leave an area alone,  then either more scallops in it and be those scallops start to move out naturally. And  over the longer term, it was generally recognized that those scallops within the protected areas  were actually contributing significantly to the surrounding fishing grounds, to the extent  
**[0:08:39-0:08:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:08:39):**  that after a few years, first of all, people started to fish around the edges of them and  got better catches. So the assumption was that there were better numbers inside the  areas. And there were certainly a few transgressions legally, early on in that process, and that  probably made the point. But I think ultimately, it was perceived that the southwest fishing  grounds were a bit more reliable and bounced back quicker than those grounds on the east  
**[0:09:05-0:09:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:09:05):**  coast. But as the first ones became recognized, and the science started to indicate that areas  were connected by larvae, and so that if you protect the adult stock in one area, you could  improve recruitment processes and others. And so in 2008, 2009, Douglas Bay was closed  to mobile fishing gear, so dredges and trawls, and then Laxey Bay and the Arable Bay were  also closed. For other reasons, they were marine protected areas, but they were set  
**[0:09:35-0:09:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:09:35):**  up to trial hatchery-produced scallops and see what the growth rates were. And they were  relatively small areas. But I think, again, that concept that they were seeding offshore  fishing grounds became established.  So that's taken us out of Port Erin and into Douglas, out there on the southeast, I suppose  it would be, of the island, and the Arable on the west. And you mentioned one or two  
**[0:09:59-0:10:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:09:59):**  transgressions there. I wonder if you would say that the fishermen had always been supportive  of the concept of marine protected areas, or whether there was initial resistance.  I wouldn't necessarily say it was resistance. I think there was a bit of opportunism from  time to time. But ultimately, in order to prove something, there has to be evidence  of it. And perhaps with hindsight, the fact that people were going in and looking and  
**[0:10:24-0:10:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:10:24):**  finding, actually, in the end, supported the value and the benefit of the concept. When  the results started to become more apparent that there was resilience provided by these  areas, and importantly, that the fishermen could use them, that they weren't closed off  exclusively for other purposes, that the fishermen could still have access and that they were  being used for the benefit of the industry. It started 30 years ago, and it certainly  
**[0:10:51-0:10:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:10:51):**  took 10 years before the concept became ingrained, and important enough for it to be accepted.  Now, I know we're going to talk about two of the really important and quite dramatic  marine protected areas, or parts of the Marine Nature Reserve later on, specifically Ramsey  Bay and Bayner Carricka. But Phil, just looking back at the politics of this, your job as  a minister, as a politician, was to shepherd people towards this new approach to fisheries.  
**[0:11:19-0:11:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:11:19):**  And you needed, clearly, the support of the fishers themselves, not least because it's  kind of difficult to police the seas in the way that you can on land. And you also needed  to get your changes through Tynwald, the Manx parliament. How did you approach that challenge?  Sadly, the getting the changes through Tynwald bit was relatively easy because there wasn't  really that much interest in fisheries politics. The amount of people who weren't fishermen,  
**[0:11:46-0:11:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:11:46):**  who ever lobbied me about fishing as a general constituency matter, were very, very few and  very far between. So it wasn't a big deal getting it through parliament, but persuading  the fishermen was the most important part. And I always took the view when I was minister  that there was little point in me trying to introduce new laws, new rules, new regulations,  new policies if I hadn't won over the fishermen in the first place. So I always took the view  
**[0:12:13-0:12:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:12:13):**  that we had to work with the fishermen. I engaged with them. We held loads and loads  of meetings. We had the seeing is believing exercises where we were taking fishermen to  different parts of the British Isles and Europe to find examples of really good practice.  So it was very much on those lines. We were obviously helped a lot by the science. And  certainly when I think it was Bangor University finally demonstrated without any doubt that  
**[0:12:43-0:12:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:12:43):**  tagged spat from the Port Erin closed area were receding the southwest fisheries, that  seemed to be the light bulb moment for the fishermen, whereby in the past they had recognised  that Port Erin closed area was doing something. Once the science was there to prove once and  for all that this was helping replenish the stocks, they really went for it.  Mason of course, Bangor University took over that responsibility for fisheries science  
**[0:13:13-0:13:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:13:13):**  on the Isle of Man from Liverpool University, didn't it? And I believe that Peter, actually  you, you were with Bangor in the first place before you then came across and worked for  the government.  Peter  That's correct. Although I had a background in scallop fisheries, I actually did a couple  
**[0:13:29-0:13:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:13:29):**  of years working on the pot fisheries for Bangor. As you say, it's been a really critical  part of the fisheries development over the last few decades is having that science base  and an independent science base. So the data is what it is. It's collected, it's presented,  you can take it or leave it, but the results speak for themselves.  Mason of course. Now Phil, we've touched on this already, but you know, much as the Isle  
**[0:13:53-0:13:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:13:53):**  of Man is an independent nation with its own government, with its own ability to, you know,  make its own laws and control its own seas, the Irish Sea is shared by many different  vested and indeed national interests. So on different sides of the Isle of Man, you're  faced by England, Ireland, Scotland and Wales. How does that relationship with these other  nations work in practice at sea?  
**[0:14:11-0:14:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:14:11):**  Peter  I think generally, wherever you go in the world, whether it's the Isle of Man, the Irish  Sea or further afield, the fishermen from different communities have a healthy mistrust  of each other, but also a certain amount of respect for each other as well. So in terms  of the actual fishermen, they get on, they recognize compatriots in the industry, they  
**[0:14:32-0:14:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:14:32):**  recognize that they're going through the same trials and tribulations. As far as the administrations  are concerned, I think it's fair to say that England, UK generally felt that it was far  too big to be really bothered about anything that's happening in the Irish Sea and the  Isle of Man's territorial sea, but we always persisted and kept bringing our issues when  we needed UK support. Ireland and Scotland, it's fair to say that the relationship with  
**[0:15:00-0:15:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:15:00):**  Scotland had been quite tense for quite a while. But I think that relationship has improved  and certainly by the creation of the Queen's Scollop Management Board, inclusion of Scottish  fisheries department or fisheries ministry members, as well as Scottish fishermen certainly  helped us demonstrate that we were being as transparent as we possibly could be about  decision making. And I think that's really important for the future. To be fair, our  
**[0:15:31-0:15:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:15:31):**  shellfish industry is more static than pelagic fisheries, but even with the shell fisheries,  it's very obvious that the spat from our mature scallops, some of it lands in our seabed,  others appear in Scottish and Northern Irish fisheries in their territorial seas. So we  need to be working with each other, overcoming the mistrust which exists between different  fisheries administrations, I think. And that really is vitally important because one of  
**[0:16:00-0:16:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:16:00):**  the problems we've had with the Queenie fishery in the last five or six years is most likely  to have been created by very intensive fishing in Liverpool Bay, removing, almost annihilating  the Queen's scallops there, so that there was no spat arriving on the east coast of  the island, which had quite a dramatic impact on our fishery there. So yeah, it's important,  vitally important to work with our partners in managing the whole of the Irish Sea.  
**[0:16:29-0:16:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:16:29):**  We've talked quite a lot in general terms now, haven't we, about the development of  the Marine Nature Reserve, but let's get into specific detail now. And two bays in particular.  Let's start with Ramsey Bay off the northeast of the Isle of Man. Now this is, it seems  to me, it's a rather spectacular case study. And I wonder if you could take us through  what happened there, Peter, starting from its emergency closure in 2009. Why was it  
**[0:16:53-0:16:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:16:53):**  closed?  It's a very big bay and it's also well sheltered from the prevailing southwesterly winds being  in the northeast of the island. So it was always a place where people could guarantee  a day's fishing. And so it attracted quite a lot of particularly smaller vessels from  all over. And the consequence of that, when you look back at that time, and that was the  
**[0:17:14-0:17:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:17:14):**  2000s, where the restrictions on it were not particularly comprehensive, and we ended up  with a situation which is, I don't think it's happened since, but there was an emergency  closure put on the fishery in 2009. There simply wasn't anything there left to catch.  At the same time, there was another process going on, which was the Mainsbury Nature Reserve  Project. And that had identified over the previous years where the key habitats and  
**[0:17:40-0:17:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:17:40):**  species were located around the island. And Ramsey Bay was one of the areas that really  featured highly on that list of important places to protect for biodiversity and conservation.  So that process was going on parallel when the fishery was closed. And one of the really  common features of marine protected areas is zonation for different purposes. And so  during the public consultation processes, the idea developed of having a fisheries management  
**[0:18:09-0:18:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:18:09):**  area within the larger marine nature reserve. And because the fishery had closed, and it  wasn't certain that it would recover, then the fishermen were open to that idea that  if they agreed to the wider protection, that they could have a higher degree of management  of the specific area within the reserve itself, as and when it actually recovered. And so  the marine nature reserve was established in 2011. And that was really important because  
**[0:18:36-0:18:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:18:36):**  it was actually established under Manx law. So under the Wildlife Act, and it's the  equivalent of a national nature reserve, marine nature reserve, and it has statutory protection,  it has bylaws associated with it, and that was the first time that had ever happened.  So what we had in 2011 was an area with five different zones, four of them were zoned for  conservation and protection, and one of them was zoned for fisheries management. And so  
**[0:19:02-0:19:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:19:02):**  over time, surveys, again, back to that importance of scientific assessment, surveys demonstrated  that the scallops had started to come back in that way. And so by 2013, there was a bit  of an experimental fishery. Now, part of the deal, if you like, was that the industry members  would have a much greater say in managing that area. And so they took a very cautious  approach when scallops came back, they said, right, we don't want to mess this up, we don't  
**[0:19:31-0:19:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:19:31):**  want to lose the opportunity again. So they took a very conservative approach in the first  year to fishing. And that has really, it has expanded over time. But that same conservative  approach has remained since 2013, up to the present day. And so we now reach a point where  so about 50% of the whole marine nature reserve is technically given over to the fisheries  management zone. But in actual fact, ever since 2013, the amount of area, the footprint  
**[0:20:02-0:20:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:20:02):**  of the fishery has been significantly less than 10 square kilometres. So it's a it's  an absolute fraction of the total 50 square kilometres that could be fished where we are  now as the fishery now produces the same amount of value in terms of money, the same amount  of product that they used to produce over a whole 12 month cycle, it now produces that  in two to three weeks. It's very amazing. Yeah. And it happens every year just before  
**[0:20:30-0:20:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:20:30):**  Christmas. So it targets the high value Christmas market. So the fishermen get more for their  catch. And as I said, the footprint is a matter of somewhere between three and five square  kilometres out of the total 50 that would be available. The footprint is less the amount  of effort that goes into it is less, the fuel bills are less, the value of the catch is  higher. As you said at the beginning, it's a fantastic model of co-management and considered  
**[0:20:55-0:20:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:20:55):**  strategic management of a fishery resource.  Jason Vale And when we were talking before the podcast,  you were saying that it's not every boat that goes there, that for those two or three weeks  of the year before Christmas, it's just it's a small number. And then the proceeds, the  profits get shared across the scallop fleet.  
**[0:21:13-0:21:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:21:13):**  Ian Marber Yep, that's correct. The very first time  it happened, it was actually only about two or three boats that went and they fished on  behalf of everyone else. And as you said, the proceeds were divided amongst members.  What's happened since then is that number of boats have increased a little bit. And  I think it is important to say why that's probably happened. If fishermen are to embrace  
**[0:21:35-0:21:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:21:35):**  and support the idea of having areas restricted or removed from from that general free fishing  type behaviour, then they need to see what is producing what the value of it is. And  I can guarantee that there is probably no fishermen in the whole of the British Isles  that has ever seen the scallops in numbers and size that occur in Ramsey Bay. So by being  able to see it, it really is a unique experience. And it convinces the fishermen, the people  
**[0:22:05-0:22:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:22:05):**  involved in it firsthand, that this is what's possible. That said, many of the fishermen  once once they've witnessed it, and will happily collaborate and then use a single vessel to  to fish the shares, if you like, of multiple fishermen.  I think I'm right in saying that the area around Ramsey Bay is around 140, 150 square  kilometres. You're saying that the fishery itself then comes down to about 50 square  
**[0:22:29-0:22:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:22:29):**  kilometres. And it's about between 10 and 20 per cent of that that gets fished for those  two or three weeks each year. And I'm just wondering, you know, when we think about scallop  fishing, we generally we think of dredging. Is that still the way that that's happening?  Yes, it does still occur. But one of the options that protected areas with high densities provides  is that you know that they're there. You don't have to go looking for them. And they're there  
**[0:22:57-0:23:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:22:57):**  in quantities that there isn't the financial risk of experimenting with new types of gear.  So it opens up opportunities for, for example, reducing the impact of the gear on the ground,  say by raising it up off of the ground on sleds, by increasing the distance between  the teeth, which you're dealing with a bigger animal, so you can select the bigger animals  by modifying the gear by modifying the gear, you reduce weight, you reduce the impact on  
**[0:23:26-0:23:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:23:26):**  the seabed. And over time, you can start to consider concepts like even manage diving  for scallops. So you can you can alter it basically by having a guaranteed stock on  the ground, you can start to experiment more safely with with alternatives. Whereas if  you're scratching around for a living, you have to do the traditional methods.  Fantastic case study. Thanks so much for that, Peter. Phil, Baynacharica in the south of  
**[0:23:52-0:23:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:23:52):**  the Isle of Man, pretty much framed by Paul Vash on the left and Port St Mary to the right.  Now this is without doubt a spectacular bit of coastline. But out of sight and out of  mind, the seabed in Baynacharica was a different story. Could you tell us what happened there?  Yes, we were, I suppose, geed up by some successes in relation to marine protected areas elsewhere.  Baynacharica was our next big opportunity. We looked into various opportunities for closing.  
**[0:24:25-0:24:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:24:25):**  In the end, what we ended up with was a closed area to dredge fisheries, but it was still  open to the crab and lobster fishery. It's fair to say that there wasn't a huge amount  of dredge fishing taking place, but what there was was particularly damaging to some fairly  important habitats. So it was felt that this would be a really useful thing to get closed  off. My only regret was that we weren't able to do this and allow for a dive to scallop  
**[0:24:59-0:25:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:24:59):**  fishery. I always took the view that it was wise to go with the fishermen and not to push  them too far. I know Peter was involved in some of the negotiation with the fishing communities  in Port St Mary. I'm sure he could probably tell better than I how there was quite a lot  of opposition to what we did there initially. Now, of course, it's been quite a successful  exercise, and particularly the crab and lobster fishermen are delighted with the results.  
**[0:25:30-0:25:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:25:30):**  Phil, just moving on from the case studies, the Isle of Man, it's a relatively small nation.  People know each other. You can just knock on a government minister's door. And there  are, as Peter said, in the 70s anyway, fewer than 80 licensed scallop fishing vessels.  Do you think that the size of the Isle of Man and the size of Manx communities in general  are an advantage when it comes to tackling problems like this, environmental problems  
**[0:25:56-0:25:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:25:56):**  and problems like overfishing?  I certainly think it's an advantage having the scale of the Isle of Man in as much as  it is possible for us to have a really good idea and within 12 months have an act passed  by 10 months to make parliament. I mean, that would be pushing it, but it is possible for  us to do things like that. Whereas in much larger countries, larger jurisdictions, it's  
**[0:26:19-0:26:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:26:19):**  much more difficult. The distance between the ultimate decision maker and the people  who might have the ideas can be quite extensive. There are lots of processes to go through.  Whereas in the Isle of Man, we have a relatively small team who do fisheries policy and the  distance between them and the ministers is about two or three yards between their offices.  So it's a good thing. And yes, of course, this makes good decisions easier to take and  
**[0:26:48-0:26:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:26:48):**  easier to make. And again, you know, my sort of view in terms of futures for any large  coastline is to try to divide your fisheries into small manageable units. If you can see  it, then you can, you're far better to be able to understand it and manage it.  It's interesting. We come across this again pretty frequently. The idea that, you know,  food systems in general have become so big that when you start breaking things down and  
**[0:27:15-0:27:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:27:15):**  those communities start to become smaller, whether they're, you know, food customer communities  or brand communities or indeed, you know, physical communities in terms of where they  live, those communities can be much more responsive.  The added bonus of course is it's much easier to get more responsible actions from the fishers  as well, because you live in a smaller community. If one rogue fishermen chooses to go and fish  
**[0:27:40-0:27:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:27:40):**  in closed areas and do all the breaches of regulations, it's very easy and quick to find  out who that person is. And it's also, you know, very easy for the fisheries community  in which they operate to actually start saying, well, hang on there. Why are you doing this?  You can see the advantage of doing things in the more sustainable way and in the correct  way. Why are you risking this? And I think, you know, I'm not saying necessarily that  
**[0:28:10-0:28:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:28:10):**  small communities are more responsible per se, but in a much larger area, you know, you  could have someone fishing from a community that's several hundred miles away from somebody  else. Why would they be as responsible as the person who effectively, the fisheries  right on their doorstep? They can come in, do a sort of the equivalent of slash and burn  on the fishery and then disappear off and do it somewhere else because the territorial  
**[0:28:38-0:28:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:28:38):**  sea in the area that they're governed by is so much bigger. In the Isle of Man, if you  took that approach, you could quickly wipe out any sort of thoughts of sustainable fisheries,  which would be damaging to the community in which you live.  Fascinating. Peter, we're coming towards the end of the programme and I wonder if you could  help us just look into the future for a moment. What's next for Isle of Man fisheries?  
**[0:29:02-0:29:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:29:02):**  So I think there's a few important concepts that we need to consider for the future. One  is diversification and building in some resilience. We have a relatively low number of species  that we rely on and Phil alluded to the idea that you really need to manage for multiple  areas and multiple types of activity. It's one of the ideas within the marine nature  reserves that you can zone for different activities. If it's a bit of a free for all, then the  
**[0:29:29-0:29:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:29:29):**  biggest and strongest win. But by maintaining space for everyone, whether that's marine  conservation, biodiversity, pot fishing, mobile gear fishing, recreational angling, whatever  it might be, we have to be able to make space for everything. So for example, having marine  nature reserve management plans, we talked a little bit about the knot to three in particular,  which is an area of the territorial sea that we can manage more comprehensively. And we  
**[0:29:58-0:30:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:29:58):**  have recently introduced a knot to three management plan for fishing. So what that will enable  us to do is take the concepts and the lessons learned from somewhere like Ramsey and expand  them into a larger area of sea, providing some options for co-management of the fishermen  themselves. The industry have a bigger say in that, but at the same time abiding by the  general principles of evidence-based setting some limits and managing what you have and  
**[0:30:29-0:30:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:30:29):**  knowing with confidence that the stuff is still there. So there's no race to fish it  out immediately.  Jason Vale And to what extent does climate change feature  in your plans and the idea of blue carbon? Because I think the seabed in the same way  when you plough a field, you release carbon, the same happens with the seabed. And yet,  
**[0:30:49-0:30:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:30:49):**  there are seagrasses that can help to sequester carbon very rapidly.  David Tingley Exactly. And I think increasingly, the last  five to 10 years, I've seen a marked recognition of these bigger issues such as climate change  and reducing, you know, our carbon emissions. We have an advantage in that we have 50% of  our knot to three already within statutorily protected marine protected areas. And so really,  
**[0:31:16-0:31:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:31:16):**  that means that we have the capacity to manage habitats for purposes such as carbon sequestration  and storage. And I think that would really well be critical. But we are facing large  scale threats to the supporting environment for all of our fisheries. They are really  fundamental to both the ecosystem services that they provide the animals and algae etc.  that live there, but also to the future productivity of the fisheries themselves.  
**[0:31:44-0:31:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:31:44):**  Jason Vale And of course, you know, as climate change  progresses, if we're not successful in keeping global temperatures below 1.5 degrees centigrade,  the seas will continue to warm and that could have an impact on the fishery going forward  as well.  David Tingley Precisely, you know, all species and particularly  
**[0:32:02-0:32:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:32:02):**  species which are not particularly mobile, such as scallops and queenies, etc. They have  a temperature tolerance range. At the moment, we're right in the middle of their range.  If things change, then we could be on the edge of it. And even things like ocean acidification,  our key species are all shelled animals. If you change the pH of the oceans, then it starts  to present difficulties for animals to survive. And so as I said, I think a lot of things  
**[0:32:31-0:32:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:32:31):**  are coming together and a holistic approach to how we manage the sea is going to be a  really key component to this.  Jason Vale Phil, just finally coming to you, the big  difference between farming and fishing is that farmers own land or they tenant land.  So they have a greater potential to be able to change and take control of that change.  
**[0:32:50-0:32:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:32:50):**  Fishers don't have that capacity. They don't own the seabed. Do you think that there might  be an opportunity to do things differently in the future in the Isle of Man's territorial  waters? For example, renting out sections of the seabed to individuals or to small groups  of fishers, perhaps for polycultures and for regenerative ocean farming?  Yes, absolutely. My only regret is probably too strong a word, but the one thing that  
**[0:33:14-0:33:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:33:14):**  I would have liked to have achieved and didn't quite make it was to get part of our territorial  sea leased out to the fishermen so that they could actually manage a particular area specifically  for themselves. I think there's great opportunity here to do more of this kind of thing. Government  needs to be very careful that it doesn't create too many policies and get into too much detail.  To my mind, government is there to set the overall parameters to have the vision and  
**[0:33:45-0:33:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:33:45):**  the goal. Clearly, the goal in this case would be sustainable fisheries and as much carbon  sequestration as you can manage to fit in. Beyond that, the people who are usually best  at coming up with ideas for their industry are the fishermen themselves. They know how  it works and with a little bit of encouragement along the educational side, seeing us believing,  seeing how other projects work, we could do some really quite dramatic and innovative  
**[0:34:18-0:34:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:34:18):**  things in our territorial sea. Certainly, getting different sections of the seabed that  the territorial sea rented out for different activities sounds to me like an excellent  idea. We must get a dive scallop fishery. The opportunities for growing kelp and other  shellfish as well in a farmed way, in a sustainable way, regenerative way as you suggest, are  massive for the island. I'd love to think that in 20 years' time, the whole of the island  
**[0:34:54-0:34:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:34:54):**  will be surrounded with such enterprises.  It's been a fascinating conversation. Thank you so much, both of you. But I'm afraid that's  all we have time for. I'd like to thank my guests, Phil Gorn, former fisheries minister  for the Isle of Man government, and Peter Duncan, senior marine environment officer  at DEFAA. This programme is part of a series in which we're talking about the future of  
**[0:35:14-0:35:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-emergency-closure-to-success-e1123ur#t=0:35:14):**  ocean food. And if you've enjoyed listening, please come back and listen to more, tell  your friends, like us, review us and share our links. Farmgate is a partnership project  for Farmwell and FAI Farms. We're funded by Sancalpa and you can join the conversation  on Twitter by searching for Farmgate podcast. I've been Finn low, Kustein. Bye for now.  