### Farm Gate  (2021-27-19)
**[0:00:00-0:00:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to Land Unlocked, a collaboration from the Food, Farming and Countryside Commission  and the Farmgate podcast. I'm Finnlow Costayne, the chief executive of Farmwell, and in this  series, I'm talking about land use, with influential figures from the UK and around  the world in the run-up to COP26 in Glasgow this November. In this programme, we're  discussing corporate sustainability and greenwash. Is it possible for large companies to become  
**[0:00:31-0:00:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:00:31):**  genuinely sustainable, or will greed always triumph over green?  Bennett Northcote is a senior advisor at Seahorse Environmental and the deputy chair of the  Conservative Environment Network. Prior to that, he was the director of corporate responsibility  for the John Lewis Partnership, and before that, he worked as deputy private secretary  to the Prince of Wales and as chief policy advisor at Greenpeace UK.  
**[0:00:54-0:00:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:00:54):**  Ed Gillespie is a facilitator for the Forward Institute and a co-founder of the sustainability  agency Futera. Ed has travelled the world to deliver talks and inspiration to hundreds  of companies and other organisations, and is the co-presenter of the podcasts John Richardson  and the Futrenauts and The Great Humbling. Ed is also a director of Greenpeace UK. Welcome  both.  
**[0:01:16-0:01:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:01:16):**  Thank you very much for asking us.  Bennett, I want to come to you first. There is a fallacy that companies have a duty to  maximise profit, when actually, and quite explicitly in UK law, there is instead a duty  to promote the success of the company for the benefit of its members as a whole. In  the face of climate breakdown, and with biodiversity also in crisis, what does a successful company  
**[0:01:38-0:01:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:01:38):**  look like?  It's really interesting, this debate about the profit versus the purpose. I'm firmly  of the view that you can't separate them out and put them in opposition to each other.  The members of a company are also the shareholders and the investors and the people who have  lent it money. There's no question that a company has to continue to be profitable in  
**[0:01:57-0:02:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:01:57):**  what it does if it's to survive, and basic economics tells you that. The question really  is, where are those profits coming from, and what are they doing to the people involved  in generating those profits and to the natural resources that are used in making and generating  those profits? And that's the question that needs to happen for a company to be successful.  I think there's two things I'd say. The first is just building on that point that obviously,  
**[0:02:22-0:02:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:02:22):**  a good company, a successful company, one that is leaving in its wake, a horrendous  destruction of people's likelihoods, the destruction of nature and biodiversity on a grand scale,  can't pass any test of value or sense of long-term value creation in a self-sustaining way because  companies have to exist within the ecosystems in which they operate. So if they're destroying  that ecosystem, they're not going to have any real long-term survivability. They might  
**[0:02:49-0:02:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:02:49):**  make a lot of money on the way, of course, and that's one of the tensions because a company  can continue to make a lot of money while doing bad things. One thinks about tobacco  companies. I remember somebody from a tobacco company talking years and years ago, and they  said, yeah, we recognize this business model is bad and people die from it and all these  sort of things, but it's a melting iceberg, right? That's a lot of money to be made while  
**[0:03:08-0:03:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:03:08):**  the iceberg melts. So the final point really is understanding what sort of actually companies  are going to need to succeed. And I'm really sort of quite an optimistic phase actually,  which I think we're at the start of a really great transition on sustainability and the  economy is transitioning to become more sustainable and more sustainable. And so for companies  to be successful, they're going to have to become sustainable to operate within that  
**[0:03:31-0:03:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:03:31):**  economy. Otherwise, they're just going to simply be left behind. It's a bit like the  dot-com boom and the technology boom we saw where the internet was a fringe activity and  sitting on the side of everything. And now you can't even publish a parish magazine without  using the internet in some form. And I think sustainability is on that same journey. So  ultimately, this is a set of profitability and sustainability will just be the same thing.  
**[0:03:51-0:03:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:03:51):**  That get rich quick sort of model that you've talked about with tobacco companies or even  oil companies as it would be at the moment, you know, just keep on making as much money  as we possibly can until we can't do that anymore. Is there a sense to which that simply  isn't serving the shareholder? I think that's really the nub of what you're saying that  shareholders may get rich quick, but in terms of the company itself, it's just sort of setting  
**[0:04:12-0:04:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:04:12):**  itself up for a failure in the future. Yeah, without doubt. I mean, and I think if  you look at the returns from the international oil measures, they're not necessarily being  consistently great. I don't think Exxon has done fantastically well with its share price  over the years. So actually, you could argue for some of these companies, they've misjudged  it already in terms of the change. But yeah, that's absolutely got to be true. But you  
**[0:04:32-0:04:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:04:32):**  know, if you're going to do disaster capitalism, you've got to be very fleet of foot with your  time, how you're going to do your investments, right? So it's more about the basis of the  way that the economy fundamentally operates, I think is the only way through this.  So we talked there about economics sort of more generally in companies in the round,  but you were director of corporate responsibility at the John Lewis Partnership. So in layman's  
**[0:04:51-0:04:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:04:51):**  terms, what does that mean? What did you actually do?  John Lewis Partnership, of course, a large retailer, two of the major UK brands, John  Lewis shops and Waitrose supermarket. So I was in this group function in the middle.  And we also had quite an old fashioned job title. I was sort of director of corporate  responsibility was quite old fashioned. And a lot of my colleagues were chief sustainability  
**[0:05:11-0:05:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:05:11):**  officers or purpose visionaries, all these kind of things. I rather like the job title  actually, because I think it comes down to actually, you know, this point about, you  know, actually how you in any society, you have rights and you have obligations, right,  and you have to discharge your obligations to access your rights. So you know, really  what the job was, was responsible for three big areas. The first obviously, sustainability  
**[0:05:31-0:05:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:05:31):**  across both the John Lewis retail supply chain and the Waitrose supply chain. So that's 350  to 50,000 products across both brands. So there wasn't really anything we sold that  didn't have some sort of footprint to it. And so you're always thinking about the management  and how you would be in that school. Secondly, the very important, you know, D&I agenda,  and the whole question of how do you ensure the business is both inclusive for society  
**[0:05:57-0:06:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:05:57):**  as a whole, and inclusive for people working, partners working in the business. And then  finally, operational health and safety.  Jason Vale, The Guardian, I'm interested in the way that you frame the job titles there.  And I wonder, Ed, if you've got any thoughts, you know, because you've spoken to a lot of  companies over the course of your career, whether there is a degree to which having  
**[0:06:15-0:06:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:06:15):**  a corporate responsibility director is just sort of inherently putting those things in  a silo and separating them out actually, from the rest of the business.  Well, I think it really depends on the business. I mean, the example I always use is the financial  function, which had no influence at all over what the bank was doing, and, you know, made  good noises and was very credible. But the trouble was, it wasn't influencing the engine  
**[0:06:54-0:06:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:06:54):**  at the heart of the organisation and hence the crisis. I think that's changed now. And  I would sort of agree with Bennett in one sense, it's like once you get board accountability  and responsibility for these type of functions, then it can act as an aggregator. The problem,  again, has always been when it's been in one or two tiers below the C-suite, where it doesn't  necessarily have the voice. And I think now, I'm not necessarily an optimist, I would term  
**[0:07:15-0:07:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:07:15):**  a dark optimist, because I think it's going to get messy. I think it's going to get painful,  because the time for a comfortable transition has kind of passed, you know, we are at a  pace and scale and urgency of change, which is going to mean that the ground shifts underneath  organisations far more quickly than they're comfortable with. I'm playing to Bennett's  sort of melting iceberg point. I think that's the problem, particularly executives in organisations  
**[0:07:41-0:07:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:07:41):**  can see that business models continue to make money. And they're reluctant to wean themselves  off those practices, even though they can see where the future is perhaps going, but  we're still sort of hobbled by a degree of short termism. And I think, you know, the  oil and gas sector is not a bad example of this, because, you know, they've seen, they've  seen what's coming for decades. And they've actively obfuscated, resisted, dug their heels  
**[0:08:06-0:08:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:08:06):**  in, tried to slow the pace of change, even if it's not active denial, it's sort of denial  of the swiftness required. And now they're in a really, really painful position, because  the world, and this is where I agree with Bennett, I think there is a big seismic movement  going on now where suddenly, it's going to be really horrible for them. They've had the  opportunity, they've had the escape routes, they've had the avenues of diversification,  
**[0:08:30-0:08:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:08:30):**  innovation available to them, and they haven't taken them. And that's because they've made  very good money out of the status quo. And, you know, particularly when you can see so  called alternative energy in the form of renewables now making up 37% of the grid mix, you know,  you're starting to get to these tipping points where demand will peak. And the problem from  their sort of executive perspective, and you know, you're seeing these shareholder evolts  
**[0:08:54-0:09:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:08:54):**  now in excellent places where shareholders are going, hang on, why have you not seen  the way that this agenda is unfolding? And actually, that's irresponsible. And that's  not serving either the shareholders or the wider society. I mean, big oil and gas wrote  down $100 billion worth of assets during the pandemic, because of negative oil prices.  You know, the issue has been, it's not that you can't make money out of renewables, it's  
**[0:09:19-0:09:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:09:19):**  that you couldn't make quite as much money as you could out of conventional oil and gas  at the time. I think there's lots of stuff going on. And what's really required now is,  you know, some genuine courage in our leadership, where we're not necessarily going to be able  to see every step of the journey that has to be undertaken. And particularly, we might  not always have the data to justify it.  
**[0:09:39-0:09:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:09:39):**  So, Ed, I'm interested in where that change comes from. Because, you know, some companies  like John Lewis, they are blazing that sustainability trail, but others, as we've already identified,  not so much. So, do you think the corporate world is going to change in the same way that  somebody who's had an unhealthy diet of pizzas and chips for most of their lives and has  suddenly started getting heart problems, suddenly then decides they need to start eating lettuce?  
**[0:10:03-0:10:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:10:03):**  Do you think the corporate world is going to change by itself enough in time and of  its own accord? Or do we need to change the law? Do we need tougher laws and greater public  pressure?  Well, I've sort of said, you know, voluntarily, no. There are some enlightened pioneers who  say have read the rooms, can see where the world is going. And also, I do think there's  
**[0:10:22-0:10:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:10:22):**  a distinction here between sort of legal and moral responsibility, because there's often  an argument within large corporates, so we're not breaking any laws here. I said, yeah,  but it's not just about that legal bottom line. It's actually, what's your moral responsibility  and how is that legal framework likely to shift around you? You know, the landmark ruling  in the Netherlands requiring Shell to cut its carbon emissions in scope three by 45%  
**[0:10:46-0:10:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:10:46):**  by 2030 is potentially game changing. And it's going to involve probably years of litigation  and counter appeal. But this responsibility is now being forced onto companies. And you  know, if you're not at the table, then you're on the menu. So I do think there will be a  drumbeat now of increasingly hardcore regulation, legislation and litigation. You know, that  Netherlands case was bought by 17,000 Dutch citizens in conjunction with a bunch of environmental  
**[0:11:13-0:11:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:11:13):**  groups. So that is going to increase. We're going to see that happening in the run up  to COP26 and probably after because it's the only way that that pressure will come on.  Public pressure plays a role, undoubtedly, but I don't believe it's just customers. I  mean, my old buddy John Grant used to say, you know, there's a dark, mysterious and insidious  force, you know, that has enormous influence in the world. And when it moves on mass, it's  
**[0:11:38-0:11:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:11:38):**  irresistible. And it's called public opinion. But harnessing that and focusing that is a  dark art, you know, and that's what organisations like Greenpeace, Extinction Rebellion, Friends  of the Earth, everyone else has been involved and Client Earth have been very good at is  actually using the law, exposing the Achilles heels, you know, making it transparent where  businesses are behaving irresponsibly, even if it is just about legal. And I think there  
**[0:12:06-0:12:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:12:06):**  is some public outrage that comes from that. I mean, that's the whole notion of boycotts  and trying to bring these things into the public imagination. But, you know, it's got  to be both. It's got to be about public pressure and it will be this kind of quite sharp legislation  and regulation at the same time.  Bennett, I'm going to come back to you because Waitrose is different. It's always been the  
**[0:12:25-0:12:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:12:25):**  leader in this area for decades anyway and taken a, you know, a leadership role. And  I wonder who was driving the change within that brand? Was it coming from the staff?  Was it coming from the customers? Was it coming from the farmers?  Waitrose is a wonderful, wonderful business. I was fortunate to, in a sense, just be a  steward of a culture that would preceded me and will live long after me. And you asked  
**[0:12:50-0:12:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:12:50):**  why. I mean, a lot of it comes down to the rather unique ownership structure that the  John Lewis Partnership has because it's an employee owned business and it's unique, I  think, in corporate that is actually governed by a constitution. It's not unique, but it's  only in large businesses and it's your largest employee owned business. But it's governed  by a constitution which sets out sort of the principles on which the business will operate.  
**[0:13:13-0:13:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:13:13):**  You know, starting with happiness of partners to worthwhile employment in a successful business.  You know, sharing the benefit, you know, the benefits of ownership, profit, knowledge and  power and that sort of sense. But then drives through about responsibilities to the community.  And there were a set of rules that included, you know, the rules on minimising waste and  ensuring sustainable outcomes as best as possible. So I think you've got why there's a lot there.  
**[0:13:36-0:13:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:13:36):**  You can go deeper into why that's commercially successful. I don't think you can ignore that  for Waitrose, there is a healthy dynamic between the price customers are prepared to pay for  the product, the higher standards that go into the production of those products and  the quality, therefore, that comes with the products and the higher production standards.  So there's a very economically, there's always been a good virtuous circle. And so Waitrose  
**[0:13:59-0:14:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:13:59):**  has played a role without any question in pulling the rest of the UK food industry behind  it. It's very easy to say Waitrose, that's fine, premium supermarket, super serve in  the top 5%. And you know, it's wonderful, if only everybody could afford to shop in  Waitrose, but they can't. And actually, I would argue Waitrose is actually pretty price  competitive in a lot of skews. But what it does do is it enables, it sort of raises the  
**[0:14:20-0:14:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:14:20):**  bar. There is really a question that does raise the bar for a lot of the industry and  set standards and set approaches, which others can then follow. And then it does come from  customers. It comes from all those stakeholders you talk about, it comes from the farmers  and so on. And it does come from a culture internally of actually wanting to start by  trying to do the right thing. You know, the partnership does not seek to maximise profit,  
**[0:14:41-0:14:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:14:41):**  it seeks to make sufficient profit.  For other companies, you know, there's always a lot of talk about customer power, and shoppers,  you know, from NGOs telling us that we need to put pressure onto the brands that we like  to make them more sustainable. My question head is, does it work? Do companies, especially  big companies, really listen to us, the little people?  
**[0:15:00-0:15:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:15:00):**  They do a bit. It's not a simple binary. It's not that yes, they do and it's incredibly  influential or no, they don't at all. I think somewhere in the middle there, you get the  defensiveness, you know, so when companies can feel like they come under attack, then  that can often drive change in a way which is faster and more systemic than they might  have previously planned. And the trouble is those points tend to be quite focused, you  
**[0:15:26-0:15:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:15:26):**  know, so if you look at it from an NGO campaigning perspective, you've got to try and keep it  simple. And yeah, and sometimes that reductive simplicity can also be part of the problem.  You know, as well, you know, about some of the issues in terms of farming and agriculture  and land use, you know, the debate is often actually in reality, quite nuanced, but a  campaigning organisation will go, we need a simple message that we can take out there.  
**[0:15:47-0:15:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:15:47):**  So you know, we need to talk about the problem with so-called dolphin friendly tuna. So you  get a very sharp spike, which will then target a John West or a large producer or the retailers  that are selling that product. And that can be quite effective, but it's much more difficult  if you're saying, well, actually, we want to run a campaign on soil health, you know,  which could be interpreted through a hundred different lenses about how do we actually  
**[0:16:14-0:16:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:16:14):**  cultivate and culture a beautiful, diverse, fertile soil underneath our feet, you know,  and that might involve permaculture, you know, the right type of regenerative livestock farming,  you know, a very diversified agrarian, arable crop type of rotation system, you know, and  suddenly all that suddenly you're dealing with some very, very difficult stuff to which  there are, to be honest, not very clear and simple answers. Again, you have to have the  
**[0:16:40-0:16:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:16:40):**  courage.  Just kind of save the worm. That's what we need.  Almost. I mean, almost, you know, and then again, this is about leadership, isn't it?  It's about leadership in that organization and say, we don't necessarily have all the  answers here. We know we're going to have to experiment. We're going to have to have  
**[0:16:54-0:16:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:16:54):**  lots of different pilot systems, which are going to have to be implemented quite quickly.  We're going to have to do a bit of suck it and see. And I think that's also where the  confidence comes from about moving on from existing practices, because no one wants the  risk to blow back in their face either. And so we have to have a more forgiving corporate  culture which allows errors and failures to happen at the same time as hopefully progressing  
**[0:17:21-0:17:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:17:21):**  things in the right direction. But, you know, the final point I'd make on that is I just  think we're not in the era of incrementalism anymore. You know, I do think the ambition  of transformation is really starting to unfold now. And so you can't just tweak, especially  if we start to look at something like net zero, we've got to halve emissions by 2030,  which is only just eight and a half years away. And that's on everyone's watch. You  
**[0:17:46-0:17:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:17:46):**  know, I do a lot of talks to CEOs and you see them when you're going, this is your tenure,  you know, and you're going to halve the emissions of your organization in your tenure. And most  of them have not comprehended the fact that that will not be achievable through existing  business models.  Do you find, do you find it, do you find that just thinking about that, you know, we've  
**[0:18:05-0:18:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:18:05):**  been told there are only 10 years to save the planet several times now over the course  of the last 30 years, are companies actually really genuinely listening to it and say,  oh yes, no, this, this time you really mean it.  Yeah, well, I know Bennett and I are sort of long enough in the tooth to have remembered  as you say, many of those warnings. I've always been a little bit adverse to them, but I do  
**[0:18:26-0:18:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:18:26):**  think, you know, something began to shift about three years ago after the IPCC, the  British Governmental Panel on Climate Change report in 2018. You know, we know that the  IPCC has an inherent conservatism to it. And actually what they talk about publicly is  probably worse in reality. But that report, I think, and certainly for me personally,  as someone who had worked as a sort of campaigner and consultant and activist for the best part  
**[0:18:49-0:18:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:18:49):**  of two decades was like, oh, that really brought me to my knees and went...  I mean, just, just in defense of these 10 year, 10 years to save the planet, the science  is all true. So had we, when we were launching, you know, a hundred months or whatever, was  it Andrew Sims' 100 months report campaign back in the day, right? That's true, right?  Had we managed to hit B commissions by then and then to be coming down there, we would  
**[0:19:10-0:19:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:19:10):**  not be in the same trajectory that we're on now for three to four degrees, right? So,  so we are, I think, I think it's just like, they're ways of engaging.  Yeah, and they're supposed to sharpen...  I do agree with Ed on the fact we're now in a disruption. There's a great book, which  really influenced me for about, I guess, 2008 or nine, maybe something like that, by Paul  
**[0:19:29-0:19:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:19:29):**  Gilding, who was actually at Greenpeace Australia called The Great Disruption. And what he wrote  largely is playing out now, which is, you know, you get to this point where suddenly  humanity decides to deal with this issue and at the point it starts to deal with this issue,  then it becomes the goal of society. Once it becomes the goal of society, then it becomes  the use of profit and it becomes the generate for why you do it. You know, in some ways,  
**[0:19:50-0:19:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:19:50):**  if you take the idea of safety, you know, not having knife crime has been a goal in  society, right? So we sort of think it's okay in a business, obviously you can't go around  encouraging people to do knife crime because that's a bad thing to do. If the goal becomes  being sustainable as a society, then the disruption to the business model is more followed.  Okay. Okay. So the world outside is changing. We can see that there is this disruption that's  
**[0:20:09-0:20:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:20:09):**  already underway. Companies are starting to listen. They're starting to wake up. And as  I look, look around, you look around a supermarket or look around, you know, online shops, you  know, I can see that. And it seems these days as though you can hardly move actually for  the green claims that are coming out from one company or another. And so as customers,  as citizens of a planet in crisis, I wonder how we can tell the difference Bennett between  
**[0:20:33-0:20:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:20:33):**  a company that's genuinely delivering change, delivering sustainability in its supply chains  and a company that's just talking the talk and painting a green glass over business as  usual to try and drive its sales. How can I tell the difference as a consumer?  So the first thing I say is I think I have a slight nervousness about all consumer behavior  change type work and campaigning because I'm just not convinced it works. I think we need  
**[0:20:55-0:20:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:20:55):**  more systemic change. That said, I think it's, it's, and I think we are seeing elements of  this coming toward, it's a combination of appropriate regulation. Okay. And then the  role of civil society to help galvanize pressure. So on the, on the regulation side, I mean,  I think you have to look at some of the ways that mandatory disclosures in formal corporate  reporting driving a transparency about corporate behavior. That's the first one. So the modern  
**[0:21:19-0:21:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:21:19):**  slavery act, you know, actually really important TCFDs. I mean, they're probably not ambitious  enough in terms of what you can disclose, but sorry, the task force on climate related  financial disclosures, which mandates reporting on the level of risk your business faces in  the face of climate change and global heating. And so that sense of mandrically describing  what would happen to your company in a one and a half degree scenario and a two degree  
**[0:21:45-0:21:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:21:45):**  scenario and a four degree scenario. What that mean for your business? What that does  is allows company makes companies, but the data out there, which then allows civil society  to galvanize that data and score it. So if you look at FMCG and retail, the work that  Oxfam have done on behind the brands and then behind the barcodes as two campaigns, I think  is absolutely brilliant. Similarly important because they've taken a lot of that publicly  
**[0:22:08-0:22:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:22:08):**  disclosed data and that stuff that's been reported and they've used that to pull together  their scorecards to then put pressure onto corporates for change. And the last thing  I'll say is it's absolutely true. You're sitting at your desk and suddenly, you know, 50,000  emails for a group piece arrive in the managing director's inbox. Certainly someone in my  position slightly smiles and goes, oh good, fine. Yes, good, fine. Now we can go and do  
**[0:22:29-0:22:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:22:29):**  this because it does create some space and it does create some pressure because senior  executives are humans too, right? They're all humans and they have feelings and emotions  and they don't like to think that they're doing the bad thing.  You make it sound as though chief executives are kind of just waiting for those emails  to come in in order to make the change. I think often they are, you know, I think often,  
**[0:22:48-0:22:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:22:48):**  you know, you've got to remember that organizations are large and complicated and there is only  so much bandwidth that chief executives can use of where they set priorities and how they  can drive change in the list of priorities they've got, how many things they need to  get through. And I think often that actually quietly is a bit of a, okay, actually this  does help me get that done in a way. So there's a degree to which having that ability  
**[0:23:08-0:23:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:23:08):**  to demonstrate that this is of interest to the public because there are 50,000 emails  that are telling you it's of interest to the public is helpful.  Exactly. Interesting. And I wonder this whole issue  of actual sustainability in the supply chain or greenwash, I wonder if there's a degree  to which we can look at greenwash in a slightly different way. And at least there is a recognition  
**[0:23:26-0:23:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:23:26):**  from a company that there is a public desire for greater responsibility. And I wonder whether  greenwash, annoying as it may be, may actually just be a first step towards trying to get  a more honest and genuine embedding of sustainability. Yeah. I mean, I mean, it echoes what the point  that Bennett was making about, you know, people genuinely wanting to do the right thing, you  know, and I think mercifully we do have some, obviously some rather Machiavellian corporate  
**[0:23:50-0:23:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:23:50):**  behavior, but I think broadly, you know, most people are trying to be responsible and there  are some instances of greenwash which are a little bit painful, but I think most tend  to be down to kind of rather over enthusiastic and overexcited PR and marketing and comms  teams who go, oh, we've done something or the company's just done something, let's go  out there and really shout about it. And so I think sometimes they could just get a bit  
**[0:24:15-0:24:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:24:15):**  carried away and not appreciate the fact that there hasn't actually really been a substantive  or systemic shift in the organization. But the point you're making, Fionn-Lo, is like  there is an appetite from the customer. I hesitate to use the word consumer. John Alexander  from the New Citizenship Project puts it best. He said, you know, when you prime people as  citizens they become much more altruistic. Looking at the bigger picture, broader context,  
**[0:24:37-0:24:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:24:37):**  if you prime them psychologically as consumers then it's all about their own rights. So it  does actually make us more selfish. But the point is, you know, there is an appetite out  there, which is why companies are orienting this. I was talking to, you know, John Richardson,  the comedian who I do the future talks with, and he said, you know, he gets invited to  do a lot of adverts and voiceovers and those kind of things, he turns most of them down.  
**[0:24:58-0:25:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:24:58):**  But he said all of the ones he's getting at the moment are for some kind of green, responsible  or ethical product or service. You know, he said, you know, even just the stuff that's  coming from his agent has a particular tone and flavor to it. And that suggests, again,  as Bennett said, you know, there is a sort of sustainability shift going on, the economy  is beginning to re-engineer itself. And clearly people want to play to that emerging opportunity.  
**[0:25:22-0:25:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:25:22):**  When you talk about, you know, a PR company that gets excited, I wonder in your experience,  Ed, what usually happens? Is it usually the case that the PR company has got excited and  therefore the company thinks, oh, oh gosh, I'd better shift in order to make sure that  we're delivering what the PR company has been talking about? Or is it actually that there's  there's kind of pushback and there's a bit of a slap on the wrist for the PR company?  
**[0:25:45-0:25:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:25:45):**  Is there a rule of thumb?  No, there's a bit of both. I would say in my experience as a consultant, you know, the  client would often come to us and say, we want to talk about our sustainability strategy.  And then we'd look at their sustainability strategy and go, the strategy is awful. You  need to go and do something that's worth talking about. So inevitably, we became a sort of  
**[0:26:04-0:26:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:26:04):**  strategy and creative agency. It was like going, well, let's fix the strategy. So there's  actually something authentic, credible, and transformative going on here. And then you've  got a legitimate reason to go out and engage your customers. And I don't think that's always  the case, unfortunately, I think the very nature of the way that piecemeal PR tends  to work, it's like, what little aspect can we really amplify here? And what can we shout  
**[0:26:26-0:26:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:26:26):**  about? And unfortunately, that can then be used in a quite misrepresentative way, which  seduces the customer, unfortunately, to think that a lot more is going on than actually  is because the other point you made, Findo, about, you know, people in the supermarket  aisle. I mean, you know, people are not necessarily lazy, but they're busy. And it's exhausting  and overwhelming to try and understand what's going on. You know, in a way, this is where  
**[0:26:50-0:26:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:26:50):**  the great shifts like Mark Suspense's plan A we're trying to go just to say, look, when  you walk through the door of M&S, we've tried to sort out a lot of that stuff for you, you  know, the environment and the ethics and the responsibility. We're trying to make sure  that and Waitrose and John Lewis are similar. It's like, you know, we are a credible, responsible  brand. So you don't have to worry about making decisions inside our shops, because we're  
**[0:27:13-0:27:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:27:13):**  trying to look after that holistically. I think it's difficult, because especially with  online shopping, perhaps this is sharper as well, it's like, cost and convenience still  triumph a lot. And if you can make the responsible proposition simple, and cost comparable, you  know, so whether that's turning your whole shopping to the responsible brand, or it's  just saying, you know, you can have something here, which won't cost you any more. And it's  
**[0:27:40-0:27:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:27:40):**  a straight shift or swap for you, but actually will have huge implications in the supply  chain and the people who work in it, etc, etc. And for the environment and biodiversity,  that people will take that because people aren't stupid. But the trouble is, it's complex,  it's hard, and people don't get the information in a way which is digestible, which enables  them to make the empowered decisions.  
**[0:28:00-0:28:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:28:00):**  I want to move on a little now from companies and onto politics. Ben, you're the Deputy  Chair of the Conservative Environment Network. And so I want to take advantage of having  you here and talk a little bit about climate change and the centre-right. Because even  just a few years ago, and I'm thinking back to say 2014-15, climate change denial was  rife across the UK Conservative Party, MPs and councillors. And now that's changed. The  
**[0:28:24-0:28:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:28:24):**  debate over whether climate change exists has disappeared. It's no longer party political,  and we're now in a much more interesting and urgent discussion around what on earth we  actually do about it. But this change hasn't happened in the United States, in the Republican  Party. It hasn't happened in the National Party of Australia. So what's different about  the UK?  
**[0:28:42-0:28:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:28:42):**  Right. What do you mean by rife? Was there lots of it? Yes. Was it everywhere? No. And  it never was. And I think it's really important in the Tory party to sort of understand the  history that it comes from. And I think it's very easy to forget that it was Michael Howard,  who was the Secretary of State for the Environment, who signed us up at the Rio Earth Summit in  1992.  
**[0:29:00-0:29:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:29:00):**  So, let me define rife. Let me define it because you've asked me to. So back in 2014, if I  was sort of talking to Conservative MPs, I can think of about five that were prepared  to stand up and say that climate change was a clear and present danger. And the others,  whether they actually deny climate change or not, just kept their heads down because  it was too much of a political football.  
**[0:29:17-0:29:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:29:17):**  Yeah, yeah, yeah. Okay. Well, I think that's certainly right. So the politics of it. But  I just think it's important to recognise the Tory Party. There is quite a long standing  tradition. And one of the things, you know, when we set up this story, no one remembers  about this formation of set. It was set up in the Greenpeace garden when I was at Greenpeace  back in the day, because I got some friends around, we said, no, we need to, some other  
**[0:29:38-0:29:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:29:38):**  great people who did it. And over the years, we've iterated it. And now it's brilliantly  led by Ben Goldsmith. So that the roots of the Conservative environment, I would actually  start with Greenpeace. It's not a very well known fact. But I do think there is still  this tradition that has gone all the way through it. And I think the reason why you have more  councillors and MPs prepared to stand up and to take their lead is I think I would say  
**[0:30:00-0:30:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:30:00):**  in the UK party, twofold. One, I humbly would suggest that actually the work the Conservative  Environment Network has done over the years has been really about building safe spaces  for these people to be able to walk into to have these conversations. That's really what  we did is we created lots of most of the Conservative Environment Network's work happens behind  the scenes. It's about having private meetings, private discussions, bringing people together  
**[0:30:23-0:30:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:30:23):**  with, you know, senior intellectuals and academics, and putting them in rooms where they can have  discussions and walk forward and feel confidence to talk about it as it goes through. I think  secondly, you know, maybe this is a bit of criminology going on here. But I do think  the way the climate skeptics have played the argument has changed in different territories.  And so they have the sort of easy clip, it's not happening answer. The climate skeptics  
**[0:30:45-0:30:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:30:45):**  have sort of given up trying to push that line. And you see Steve Baker's intervention  from the Global Warning Policy Foundation the other day, where he was talking about  the hidden costs of net zero. So he's moved off that climate change isn't happening into  oh, this is all too expensive, or we can't do anything, you know, the market should clear.  So the debate has shifted. So a lot of those voices who are coming basically from a kind  
**[0:31:05-0:31:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:31:05):**  of libertarian sense that environmentalists are somehow conflicted with their ideology  are being given another route out of it in terms of talking about market economics will  deliver environmental outcomes on their own without the need for any government intervention  whatsoever or change. That's where a lot of that libertarian debate, which has taken heat  out of the principles of going to net zero, because they are largely out of that, but  
**[0:31:26-0:31:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:31:26):**  it takes it I think potentially into more dangerous places, but we don't need to do  anything or tax anyone or change any of our policies or our regulations. And we just carry  on because the market will now clear. And I think in Australia and America, I think  frankly, the climate skeptics haven't moved on in the same way. And so they're still creating  that space of denialism that exists within there. I largely think it doesn't matter,  
**[0:31:46-0:31:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:31:46):**  because I said I'll go back to where we started this conversation. I think the disruption  is underway now. The shifts are happening. The generational shifts and changes are happening.  That will sort of speed this up. So the idea we're going to have a Prime Minister in the  UK or frankly even presidential candidates again in the States who don't sign up to this,  I think is increasingly a receiving prospect.  
**[0:32:05-0:32:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:32:05):**  So essentially, the libertarian right has sort of given up on trying to disprove the  science and they've also moved on to a conversation about policy as well, which can only be helpful  within the Conservative Party and right wing movements, because you're able to have that  discussion about what is the centre-right way of doing things, what is the libertarian  way of doing things and then find your own route.  
**[0:32:26-0:32:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:32:26):**  Welcome to our territory, right? That's right. Come and fight on our territory. That's right.  We can have that discussion all day long. So I mean, it's a delaying strategy, I think  is all they've got now. I don't think they're in a stopping it strategy. I think they'll  just delay it as much as possible. I suspect in their quiet moments they know they've lost.  But we'll see in the States. But I mean, even for all the rhetoric, I think it's important  
**[0:32:45-0:32:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:32:45):**  to keep this in perspective as environmentalists. And we've fought this for so long, it's very  easy to forget that we were not fighting the battles of 10 or 15 years ago now, right?  That we've moved on to a different phase of this. Even Trump, for all his rhetoric, more  coal-fired power stations closed than open-minded has watched, right? There's stuff happening  behind the scenes that is more fundamentally different. And it's important, I think, that  
**[0:33:04-0:33:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:33:04):**  as environmentalists, we don't just keep fighting yesterday's battles, we move forward into  the next. And I will welcome somebody in, even if five years ago they were saying this  is all climate denialism, I'll welcome them into a Sen meeting and say, fantastic, sit  down, welcome, you know, because we now need everybody involved, irrespective of the past.  I'm interested in, there are two organisations in Britain that are kind of diametrically  
**[0:33:25-0:33:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:33:25):**  opposed to each other in many ways in terms of their approach. And you just talked about  Sen, the Conservative Environment Network, and the way that most of your work is very  quiet and behind closed doors. And then there's Extinction Rebellion, which is loud and exuberant  and uses a lot of superglue. And I wanted to ask you about Extinction Rebellion. XR  has pushed climate action up the agenda recently, but I wonder if you think that there is a  
**[0:33:47-0:33:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:33:47):**  danger that in just attacking the government, as many NGOs tend to do, for not doing enough,  rather than acknowledging at least some of the UK's progress, and by linking climate  action again to economic reform and a more socialist model of economics, that XR may  actually reignite that tired old political division and slow down real progress toward  net zero warming? I mean, XR, I mean, you know, let's start.  
**[0:34:12-0:34:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:34:12):**  The awareness raising and the power of the campaign really starts with Greta Thunberg  and that bit is of course hugely powerful and immensely welcome. You do need a movement  with any question that just says truth's power, which is, you know, this is a kind of emergency,  let's treat it like a climate emergency, and let's respond quickly for it. That said, I  do think some of XR's campaigning style is unfortunate. A true story, in the 2017 general  
**[0:34:39-0:34:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:34:39):**  election, there was an XR demonstration outside the Labour Party headquarters on Victoria  Street, okay, and there was a lady who was on hunger strike outside the Labour Party  headquarters, right? Now, Jeremy Corbyn was the leader of the Labour Party at the time  and he was literally campaigning for the XR manifesto. That was literally being written  into the Labour Party manifesto, but they were campaigning outside the Labour Party.  
**[0:34:58-0:35:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:34:58):**  And you saw one go, really? I mean, really? So, I think some of their campaigning styles,  it does, it kind of, if you're not, I think, intelligent when you're campaigning and have  a clear point of change that you're looking for and a clear point of intervention and  an effect on the results of your campaign you're looking for, then I think it too easily  gets played into the narrative of there are nothing ever good enough for these people  
**[0:35:19-0:35:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:35:19):**  and that's why, therefore, I should do nothing. What do you think, Ed? What do you think,  Ed? I get the impression that you're more sympathetic, I guess, to the way that XR does  things. Again, there's a sort of grizzled campaign  in myself and I mean, I've been involved with XR. I would say that what XR did, and I take  Bennett's point about, you know, some of the specific actions were perhaps not so well  
**[0:35:42-0:35:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:35:42):**  thought through, but that's also the problem you have when you have a sort of decentralised  movement, which isn't, you know, quite the same command and control structure as you  might have in a more conventional campaigning type model. And so you're going to have things  that happen, which aren't always necessarily aligned or was indeed 100% helpful. But for  me, what Extinction Rebellion did was create a radical flank, which did open up a huge  
**[0:36:06-0:36:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:36:06):**  amount of middle ground. And of course, there'll be some people in alienated by that, but I  actually think it turned silence into speech in a way that it got the country talking.  And it created a debate, which I think ultimately has been one of the most effective interventions  from civil society in the last 10 years or so. And so I think, you know, it remains to  be seen where XR goes next, but I think there's lots of creative space, which has now been  
**[0:36:31-0:36:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:36:31):**  occupied in a really effective way by Greta, by the school strikes, by people waking up  to what can feel like, and I mean this apolitically, but a degree of political dishonesty across  the board that, you know, somehow we can write a net zero target and that everything will  be delivered painlessly and without cost. And actually our lives won't change. And I  think that is politically dishonest. And again, it comes back to this courage point that I  
**[0:36:59-0:37:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:36:59):**  keep returning to. It's like, where will be the leaders that will say, this is not going  to be easy. You know, this is not about just powering the UK's domestic electricity from  offshore wind. This is going to mean some degree of demand management. This is going  to mean the fact that, you know, we have a problem in the UK with say frequent flyers.  You know, the majority of our flights are taken by a very small chunk of the population.  
**[0:37:23-0:37:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:37:23):**  And we can make that very populist and very equitable and fair by saying, well, actually,  if you're flying 10 or 12 times a year, you should be paying a disproportionate price  to the person who will fly once on holiday with their family for their hard earned break.  And so I think that there is a political dishonesty right now where we feel, again, this slight  seduction of the high level targets, which gives people a sense that everything's going  
**[0:37:47-0:37:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:37:47):**  on and that we're sort of on track. But at the same time, it's like, and it's business  as usual below the radar. And it's like, that's not the case. And we've got to, we've got  to be clear and honest with people that this is a transition and a transformation and there  will be, you know, winners, losers, checks and balances, profit and loss.  One of the key messages from Extinction Rebellion is that going vegan is the best way to save  
**[0:38:09-0:38:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:38:09):**  the planet, which some NGOs have taken on and they've reframed as a 50% cut in meat  and dairy products by 2030, which is, you know, just eight and a half years time. Now,  when we spoke recently, you said something, Ed, that I thought was much more interesting  and much more interesting framing that rather than cutting 50% of the meat and dairy out  of our diets, we all need to cut 50% of the carbon out of our diets by 2030. What's the  
**[0:38:35-0:38:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:38:35):**  difference?  Well, I mean, I think this comes back to the point I was making earlier about, you know,  clear, simple campaigning messages, which are now perhaps missing some of the nuance  and complexity of the reality. I mean, I would far rather see it as a choice for people and  an informed choice and an emergent sense of change, because clearly there are aspects  
**[0:38:52-0:38:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:38:52):**  of livestock agriculture which can be quite regenerative. Whilst there is a broad truth  to perhaps that going towards veganism, even if it's not vegan every day, will likely have  a big benefit. Clearly, it would be nice to give people a bit more subtlety, you know,  clearly we're in the space beyond, you know, just meatless or meat-free Mondays. And what  you would want to see is people being very smart and judicious about where they choose  
**[0:39:18-0:39:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:39:18):**  to get their different sources of protein from. Because I think there's also a food  security issue there, isn't there? You know, where we're only sort of 60% food self-sufficient  in the UK. I would far rather see us having a much bigger national debate, which again,  I think there's been a little bit of political cowardice around. It was just saying, well,  what does a sustainable diet look like for the nation? And it's not saying we go back  
**[0:39:39-0:39:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:39:39):**  to a sort of 1940s rationing food security type of imposition, but it's to say, this  is what we can produce in the UK in a sustainable and regenerative fashion to bring our soils  back to health, to have the right type of biodiversity. And this is the implications  that it then has for the nation's diet. And one of my favourite examples, if we're talking  about land and agricultural production is, you know, back here in East Anglia is Hodmer  
**[0:40:04-0:40:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:40:04):**  Dobs, you know, a local company which are doing some amazing work with bringing back  all these different types of pulses and beans and even growing quinoa in Essex. You know,  and these are really sustainable, great sources of protein, which can be grown in an organic  and soil friendly way. And that's a really fantastic protein displacement, you know,  some of the cheap meat. I mean, heaven forbid, you know, the latest trade deal with Australia  
**[0:40:28-0:40:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:40:28):**  where we're going to get, you know, some pretty low welfare meat coming halfway around the  planet to disrupt our own agricultural markets. And it's like, that seems to be some pretty  piss poor political decision making.  The other factor in all of the diet questions, people have been trying to do this, and the  work of Professor Tim Lang, he's been looking at sustainable diets and how you can do this  
**[0:40:49-0:40:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:40:49):**  is really interesting. I agree a bit more political risk needs to be taken about what  that means. And the links, we say it's entity, the links to health, well being and that,  and I think that's going to be a key area for change. But also, frankly, that again,  come back to what I call nature positive innovation, you know, the truth of the matter is the food  system is going to go into the growth of its own massive disruption, because, you know,  
**[0:41:09-0:41:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:41:09):**  I don't know if you think it's not about recreating the, you know, the alternative proteins, yes,  we need to bring back original varieties and that sort of thing. But we're also going to  be able to generate proteins that look and taste awfully like animal proteins a long  time before we create the perfect steak. And so a lot of that protein and a lot of dairy  is going to get disrupted. A lot of you know, so we'll have cows to generate really high  
**[0:41:29-0:41:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:41:29):**  quality milk, like really high quality cheese, but you know, the milk that goes into my tea  could well come from it, might well not come from a cow's milk.  I totally agree Ben, I mean, I call it like handicraft and spacecraft, you know, there'll  be that precision fermentation piece, which provides some of it and then there'll be the  stuff which actually reestablishes that relationship with the land again as well. Because I think  
**[0:41:50-0:41:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:41:50):**  that's the other thing that could happen if you get into this sort of slightly industrialised  innovation, which has also huge benefits for animal welfare, but you don't want to become  disconnected from the soil completely because you know, that still is ultimately the stuff  of life.  I want to go back to this idea of nuance and the idea that nuance is anathema to campaigning.  
**[0:42:10-0:42:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:42:10):**  And it seems to me that there is a great danger, Bennett, in oversimplifying these environmental  challenges, whether it's governments or companies. And earlier on, I highlighted the fallacy  of the duty to maximise profit. And I wonder if companies and governments are falling into  a similar trap when it comes to climate change, land use and the countryside. And in following  this perceived duty to maximise emissions reduction, because that's, you know, that's  
**[0:42:34-0:42:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:42:34):**  the big thing that everybody's focused on at the moment, that these decisions are being  taken and they undermine biodiversity restoration, they can undermine climate change adaptation  and rural innovation, job creation, food quality, all these other things. And that instead,  surely our duty to the countryside isn't just about prioritising emissions reduction, but  instead it's about delivering multiple outcomes from land use wherever possible, all at the  
**[0:42:59-0:43:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:42:59):**  same time. And clearly we need leadership around this to get, you know, through the  nuance, to cope with the fact that it's not an easy political message and get this across  to people. Do you think the government gets this?  Yes, I think they do. I think the policy, well, government, I think government is not  one homogenous sort of blob that everybody in government all just signs up to the set  
**[0:43:19-0:43:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:43:19):**  views. I think the guys working on the policy on this in Defra do get this very much so,  yes, I'm sure they do. There does still seem to be quite a strong  drive towards, you know, sparing off large tracts of land for sitka spruce just for that  carbon sequestration, which, you know, can have some really pretty devastating impacts  on biodiversity and flooding and that sort of thing.  
**[0:43:37-0:43:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:43:37):**  Yeah, no, for sure. And I think I wouldn't, I wouldn't disagree that not every decision  that's being made is therefore the right decision, but do they get this? And I think you're seeing  some of this in the fact that they're taking a while to work out the right incentive mechanisms  to replace CAP with, right? So what does ELM look like? The environmental  land management scheme that will replace the CAP farming subsidies. You know, they've got  
**[0:43:58-0:44:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:43:58):**  their initial pilots, the sustainable farming incentive, they've got this initial pilots  at the moment, which are very much looking at this and how do you balance it and how  do you measure it? And how do you know whether you're getting the net biodiversity gain from  particular behaviours? And how do you then run that at scale when every single ecosystem  is different? But the whole point about nature is it's different in every value, right? That's  
**[0:44:19-0:44:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:44:19):**  the point. And so how on earth do you design schemes that do this and push it? So it's  at scale when actually the data points are different everywhere you look. I think the  answers aren't immediately obvious for this. I think there are no question there are going  to be bad actors as well who are pushing, you know, there are going to be elements in  the commercial forestry community who are without doubt seeing this as an opportunity  
**[0:44:38-0:44:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:44:38):**  to get paid to do commercial forestry, which is not necessarily with long term environmental  outcomes. You know, we need to recognise that our role, to come back to my point, we need  to recognise that our environmentalist change here, we need to facilitate and enable these  debates to take place, I think, as opposed to just constantly beating people up who are  trying to do it. You know, we need to the net zero debate, you already alluded to, is  
**[0:44:59-0:45:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:44:59):**  hugely important right now. You know, we can't just pretend we can buy our way out of, you  know, buying endless carbon credits for a bunch of Christmas trees, right? So that's  not going to achieve anything. It's how do we actually understand how, as one of my bosses  would have called it, how we actually live in harmony with nature, right? How do we live  in harmony with the natural world? And have that sort of more self-sustaining lifestyle  
**[0:45:22-0:45:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:45:22):**  of it. I think it's naive to think it's just going to be a simple back to the land approach  that just works on its own, because we're going to need to blend because there are,  you know, many, many people on this planet and there's lots of people, as was this test,  you know, environmentalism has to work for the most vulnerable rural community. It also  has to work for somebody on minimum wage with two jobs in Heclim, right? And you've got  
**[0:45:42-0:45:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:45:42):**  to, it's got to work in all angles. So we need to understand what those parameters are.  Jason Vale There's a lot of pressure and a lot of grumbling  from farmers about the fact that there isn't an immediate replacement to the Common Agricultural  Policy, you know, at this point. And as you say, elms are being thought about up until,  you know, 2024 when the new scheme will be in place. But it's always seemed to me, and  
**[0:46:02-0:46:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:46:02):**  what you're saying seems to be backing this up, that actually, it's really important that  government can take the time to go through these trials, so that it doesn't just implement  something, which a year later, they realised was actually pointing things, pushing things  in completely the wrong direction. So having these two or three, four even years to get  stuff right, we should kind of take some solace from that.  
**[0:46:23-0:46:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:46:23):**  David Pembroke We've got to understand how the rural communities  and the jobs that currently exist, but in particular ways that the countryside is managed,  how that iterates, how do we ensure that it continues, there continues to be jobs and  roles and vibrant opportunities for rural communities in this space. And we can't just  sledgehammer from one to the other and then discover we've got a problem because it won't  
**[0:46:45-0:46:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:46:45):**  last, that the politics will go against us. And I think we do need a kind of innovation  and iterative innovation culture through this whole agenda. So we can let people sort of,  you know, we can need to experiment, we can give people the space to experiment.  Jason Vale Ed, one of the conclusions from a previous  podcast conversation with Cristiano Figueres and Professor Tim Jackson was that in terms  
**[0:47:03-0:47:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:47:03):**  of food, land use decisions are too often profit led, and they're being taken by people  who are just too far removed from the land and the communities that they impact. And  that instead, sustainable land use requires a power shift from large food corporations  and back towards small and medium sized farm and food businesses. What do you think?  Tim Jackson Yes. I mean, everything that Bennett's just  
**[0:47:28-0:47:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:47:28):**  eloquently articulated around, you know, some of the right legislative incentives and measurement  schemes and experimentation that's going to go on. But I think broadly, you know, you  have got to bring people back into that intimate, rather emotional, harmonious stewardship of  the land. I mean, I look around the fields here in East Anglia, and there's so many farms  that have been put out to contractors for cultivation, where you get these big, slightly  
**[0:47:53-0:47:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:47:53):**  faceless contract organizations, they have no relationship with the land that they operate  on. You know, you probably got reasonably poorly paid people actually operating the  machinery. I don't sense, you know, and I hesitate to use the word love, but they don't love  the land that they're looking after. You know, it is unfortunately being seen through an  economic and a profit led lens. And that's different because, again, I think coming back  
**[0:48:18-0:48:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:48:18):**  to most people being, you know, generally well intentioned, I mean, farmers care about  their land and hopefully can be incentivized and nurtured and cajoled and supported in  trying to do the right thing. And I don't think that happens in quite the same way,  even under the best intentioned commercial contractors. And so, you know, you want someone  who gives them monkeys about what's in their hedgerows, that is what is in the bits of  
**[0:48:43-0:48:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:48:43):**  land between the bits that they're cultivating at the time, that understands the role of  set aside and actually takes a real joy and pleasure and pride and honor in facilitating  that harmonious relationship with nature, because that's what farming is about. And  that's what it should be about. And its deepest roots are there. And if we circle back to  some of the issues around greenwash, which use the word farm, you know, to cultivate  
**[0:49:10-0:49:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:49:10):**  an image in people's minds that is actually not very representative of the reality of  agribusiness and is evocative. But yeah, I do think we want to have this a renaissance  of what it means to be a genuine ecological steward that provides food for the nation  and protects and enhances the nation's wildlife at the same time.  Bennett, just finally, I wonder if I could ask you about, and I appreciate it's difficult  
**[0:49:38-0:49:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:49:38):**  to sum up, you know, what a conservative view is, but at the same time, you know, as somebody  from within the conservative movement, as a center right person, what's your view about  where power and profit should sit in the future in terms of food production and agricultural  land use? Is it about linear top-down change led by big business, big profits, and perhaps  big investment in change? Or is it about a bottom-up revolution of smaller businesses  
**[0:50:05-0:50:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:50:05):**  in a more diverse and vibrant rural economy with profits recycling around those countryside  communities?  Yeah, I mean, I have to say over the last five years, I don't know how much I would  describe myself as a conservative these days. It's been a journey, right? But we will see.  Look, I think the, of course, it's the latter, right? Of course it is. Of course, it's, you  
**[0:50:28-0:50:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:50:28):**  know, at the heart of any sort of, in the UK at least, conservative tradition is Burke,  right? It's all about a kind of sense of, yes, how do you encompass that sort of free  and enable the small business, the community, the town to be in control of its destiny and  make its choices. As ever where nothing is bifurcated, of course, that's where your starting  point is. But of course, it's going to have to be some national enablers of that to get  
**[0:50:54-0:51:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:50:54):**  that through. You're going to have to see some work on whether it's around food standards,  and how do you build sustainability criteria into understanding some of our food standards  and that sort of thing. How do you build in? What are the rules, frankly, on sort of say,  I would applaud efforts to control the importation of unsustainable palm oil into the UK and  that sort of thing. What are some of the rules, systemic rules that need to be put in place?  
**[0:51:21-0:51:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:51:21):**  It's a combination of both. In my heart, I would say, you need to have, as I say, we  want to see a transition in the economy. That means everywhere is going to have to transition.  And you've got to enable that, and that's going to be built by new innovations. The  way I say it is, I think the kind of people who are going to win in this space, they probably  haven't dropped out of Harvard yet, the kind of businesses. They're kind of people who  
**[0:51:43-0:51:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:51:43):**  are going to get, who are going to really benefit from a sustainable future. Maybe they're  dropping out if we speak, I don't know. There's a level of transition that we're going to  see over this next period that is super exciting. And it's how we try and minimise the inevitable  negative consequences that will come from that.  Fantastic. That's been so interesting, but that's all we've got time for. I'd like to  
**[0:52:01-0:52:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:52:01):**  thank my guests, Ed Gillespie and Bennett Northcote. If you've enjoyed listening, please  subscribe to the Farmgate podcast so that you never miss an episode of Land Unlocked,  which is being broadcast on the same channel. And then tell your friends, like us, review  us and share our links. Land Unlocked is produced by the UK's Food, Farming and Countryside  Commission and the Farmgate podcast. You can find out more about us online at ffcc.co.uk.  
**[0:52:26-0:52:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/From-greed-to-green-e14mjr9#t=0:52:26):**  And you can join the conversation by following us on LinkedIn and on Twitter. I've been  Finn low, Christine. Bye for now.  