### Farm Gate  (2022-52-01)
**[0:00:00-0:00:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to Farmgate. I'm Finlow Costain, the Chief Executive of Farmwell and founder  of the Food and Global Security Network. This programme is part of a series in which I talk  to regenerative dairy producers from around the world. The series is part of the Regen  Dairy Project, set up by FAI Farms and Farmwell in collaboration with Unilever, Barry Calabo,  Marla Foods, Woolworths South Africa and Ben & Jerry's. Today I'm talking to the remarkable  
**[0:00:31-0:00:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:00:31):**  Sophie and Di Wilson, who farm in Wiltshire in the UK, and Mark Anderson, an outstanding  dairy farmer from South Otago, New Zealand. Welcome all.  Hi. Hello. Hello.  Let's start with the basics. Di, what is regenerative farming to you and what specifically is regenerative  dairy?  
**[0:00:49-0:00:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:00:49):**  I think it's a bit of a journey really. For us, it sort of started by two main things.  One is playing without wintering because we were sort of backed into it. The other one  would be slightly unhappy with the way our land was performing under a normal three-leaf  grazing, rotational grazing. We sort of look to improve on that. Then the more you learn  and understand, the more down the rabbit hole you go. I think there's a bit of a change  
**[0:01:15-0:01:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:01:15):**  in focus from cows and grass almost into focusing on the soil, and then that feeds up. I think  one big factor of regenerative for us is a financial element. Our farm with a healthy  soil will grow more food, hold more water in wet extremes or dry extremes, and then  all of that should help the bottom line.  Mark, when we spoke previously, you told me that for you as a New Zealand dairy farmer,  
**[0:01:41-0:01:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:01:41):**  reach ends about decarbonising and decolonialising agriculture. What do you mean?  By that, I really mean society as a whole is in need to desperately decarbonise our  activities and our dependence on non-renewable fossil energy. We know our Western lifestyle  or culture is pushing these planetary boundaries to these limits never seen before in history.  When I talk about decolonisation, I really mean decolonisation of the mindset and really  
**[0:02:14-0:02:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:02:14):**  acknowledging that regeneration is rooted in indigenous wisdom or knowledge and traditional  methods of farming. So to me, it's really about decolonising my mindset and relearning  a lot of what colonial Western capitalist structures have taught us over the past. I  can paint a picture when my ancestors were early settlers from Scotland here. They landed  two years before any colonisers in Dunedin, in a local city here. They came to escape  
**[0:02:48-0:02:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:02:48):**  that European lordship hierarchical structure, but that's all they really knew. So they reverted  back to that. And the European colonisers mindset was really close to the holistic indigenous  Maori worldview, which is shared globally and many indigenous cultures around the world.  And they really viewed themselves as part of nature, whereas we didn't really understand  that in the Western culture, I think. So really, I mean, this runs really deep. Like, I've  
**[0:03:23-0:03:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:03:23):**  started to look back on the scientific revolution around the 15th and 16th century. And there  are many systemic issues. For me, developing these scientific theories was really built  on the extraction of information from nature. And this runs deep. Sir Francis Bacon, he  made comments like, we must penetrate nature, we must extract information from her bosom.  So this was really the beginning of the mechanistic mindset and our separation from nature.  
**[0:03:55-0:04:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:03:55):**  Sophie, coming to you, I wonder what the key differences are between regenerative farming  and other forms of sustainable agriculture, such as organic. And I wonder, you know, sort  of reflecting on what Mark was talking about there with that decolonialization, sort of  moving away from structures and towards something which is more in harmony. Does that ring true  for you?  
**[0:04:19-0:04:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:04:19):**  Absolutely. I think it really does. And then organic and regenerative, I think, share a  lot of the same in where they sort of came from. And certainly, you know, we farm organically,  and that's pretty one of the things that's actually into becoming more regenerative,  you know, because we weren't happy, like I said, with how the farm was behaving and performing.  But we couldn't just sort of reach for the quick fixes or whatever. And so that's when  
**[0:04:43-0:04:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:04:43):**  we really started to look a bit differently. I think the difference in region is maybe  traditionally organically, we've sort of replaced some of the, you know, the calcified  of agriculture with mechanization with ploughs with diesel machinery. And probably where  we're looking at is how can we move away from that and get back to sort of trying to mimic  nature and to rebuild our farm, I suppose. And, you know, almost bringing together some  
**[0:05:08-0:05:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:05:08):**  of the principles of the, you know, the Mintil movement and No-Till and almost driving sort  of improvements in organic approaches through fixing the ecology that's coming out of the  regenerative movement as well. So there's loads of synergies to be had, I think.  And it sounded from what Dai was saying that for you, there was a combination of drivers,  you know, some of those are economic. Some of them were based on, you know, what you  
**[0:05:28-0:05:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:05:28):**  physically had on the farm when you first got there. But then you've also got those  sort of ideological and environmental drivers as well.  Yeah, absolutely. I think that sums up really well. We're very much pretty early on in it.  And we know we're almost learning more and the more that we learn, the more we realise  that we're doing the right things. And so we probably don't even know half the reasons  
**[0:05:47-0:05:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:05:47):**  why we're doing, why what we're doing is the right things. But we're both pretty confident  that this is the right way to go.  Mark, now you're a fifth generation farmer and the direction that you've chosen to take  the farm in New Zealand is quite different to the direction under your own parents. What  persuaded you to make the changes that you have?  
**[0:06:04-0:06:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:06:04):**  Yeah, I guess I was really privileged to be in this position and being able to grow up  on this same land that I was born on. So experiencing the different models of farming from my grandparents'  era where they were smaller, they were super diverse, they run pigs, cows, arable, sheep  and beef through to my parents' generation where they were sheep and beef mainly, but  then also had goats and export flowers. And then that morphed towards larger land holding,  
**[0:06:38-0:06:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:06:38):**  going bigger and expanding into monoculture dairy farming. So I've seen these changes  and I've been lucky enough to grow up and observe all the way how landscapes function.  And a lot of these things have only clicked in later years. But really, the reasons were  around tension events that lead us down this path and that would be a health scare, but  also just general well being of people in this industry. It's becoming harder to attract  
**[0:07:11-0:07:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:07:11):**  people to large industrial farming models, financial stress, climatic stress. Yeah, we  were getting many, many more droughts and just the environmental reasons and that flows  through to animal welfare and calf rates were becoming poorer and poorer until we started  to change the way we saw things.  I'm going to come back to a whole range of those different things that you were bringing  
**[0:07:37-0:07:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:07:37):**  up there a bit later in the programme. But I think at this point it would be helpful  to get into some of the specifics about your farms and what it is that you actually produce,  what the landscape is like, where you are. And I wonder if you could start by giving  us some basic stats about your farm, farm size, number of cattle, breed, that sort of  thing.  
**[0:07:57-0:08:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:07:57):**  We have a contract farming agreement with us selling the cows, with Sophie's family.  I'm not from a farming background, but we farm with Sophie's parents. We've got a 200  hectare dairy grazing platform and 30 hectares of support, mostly for heifer rearing. We  have 300 cows, which are British, Friesian based. So they're quite big girls, so they'd  be over 600 kilos. And we've used a bit of crossbreeding, but I think we're going to  
**[0:08:23-0:08:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:08:23):**  settle to a duty crossbred to breed a smaller, more efficient cow, which will take us time,  but we think that's the right way to go. We've always avoided that because of what you do  with bull calves, but sex semen technology has worked quite well for us. We milk once  a day and we're in our first year of doing that. We've toyed with it at the end of the  season. Two seasons ago, we went middle of the season last year. And then this year we've  
**[0:08:47-0:08:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:08:47):**  gone all in. So everything's on once a day for the first year. And it's a dairy conversion,  so we're converting some arable and beef land into dairy. So we've got a new milking parlour,  some cracks and water, and that's about it really.  Jason Vale And you know, in terms of geography, you're  you're I mean, not exactly, but more or less bang in the middle of England, aren't you?  
**[0:09:07-0:09:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:09:07):**  And so I'm, I kind of imagining there's arable around you and the landscape is fairly rolling.  It's not too dramatic in any particular direction. Is that right?  Paul Anthony Yeah, that'd be fairly fair. There'd be a  lot of arable farms around us. Very few people actually working in agriculture because they'd  be like very large farms, highly mechanised. And then the livestock dairy round here would  
**[0:09:30-0:09:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:09:30):**  be very common to be autumn block carving. So milking through the winter off silage made  during the spring and then dry at this time of year, which is traditionally very dry.  Jason Vale And when you moved on to the farm, there were  no outbuildings, were there, for wintering the cattle and, and there still aren't. And  I just wonder if you could talk us through that and whether the lack of buildings informed  
**[0:09:51-0:09:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:09:51):**  your approach to dairying or whether you already planned to out winter the cows.  Paul Anthony To be honest, it was more of an accident. I  knew that we kind of could out winter and so when our shed didn't get built, we kind  of knew we could coach. So we out wintered, didn't make that good a job of it, it was  okay. And then the shed didn't get built the next year. So we did a better job. And after  
**[0:10:10-0:10:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:10:10):**  doing that for a few years, I think we sort of were pretty happy. I mean, there's always  good improvements to make, little tweaks. But for sort of three winters now we've reliably  out wintered, not caused any poaching of concern and grazed the fields in the middle of winter  and then grazed them again early, early May back into the rotation. So it's a very low  cost cheap way of wintering. We use grass and bales. Some bales we make, but mostly  
**[0:10:36-0:10:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:10:36):**  we buy in and stack them out in the autumn and then just strip grows across them through  the winter and the turf and the grass underneath holds everything up.  So it sounds from what you're saying as though you've almost sort of stumbled into a system  that feels very comfortable in terms of that out wintering, a system that perhaps, you  know, works better for you.  
**[0:10:57-0:11:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:10:57):**  Yeah. And I think now it's probably our strength. Yeah. We can winter cows very cheaply. It  takes quite a lot of planning, but I think our per cow costs are very low.  Now Sophie, you're also a vet as well as a farmer. And I wonder what sort of impact out  wintering has had on the cattle. And I'd be interested in, you know, the way that you've  built up that knowledge in the way that Dai's just been talking about the impacts in the  
**[0:11:22-0:11:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:11:22):**  first year and you know, the way that you've changed what you're doing up to date and whether  you've had to choose, for example, particularly hardy breeds.  Yeah. You know, I think it's, it's been really interesting actually. I think if you'd asked,  you know, any of us at the start, you know, in the first year, will you be out wintering  for four years? We'd have all said, gosh, of course not. You know, it was very much  
**[0:11:43-0:11:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:11:43):**  a, you know, how can we get going? And actually, like you say, it's, it's like I said, it's  actually now really become a huge asset in our system. You know, I think in terms of  our breeds, I think our cows, our British freezing cows are naturally pretty hardy as  dairy cows go. And we've not specifically sort of bred for, for the out wintering other  than like I said, generally moving towards a smaller, more low maintenance cow.  
**[0:12:08-0:12:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:12:08):**  We should just point out to people, no, no, no. We should just point out to listeners  that it's pretty hot in the UK and the baby that you had hoped was going to be asleep  is with you chipping into the conversation, which is, which is fantastic.  Yeah. So I think, you know, developing our approach with a really, you know, absolutely  kind of meticulous planning in the autumn to make sure that we can keep the cows moving  
**[0:12:32-0:12:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:12:32):**  all the time, never poaching the ground. And, you know, it means actually the cows themselves  do really well in the system as well. I think being outside all winter keeps the dry cows  really fit. So it helps reduce our, our carving difficulties. You know, we can use the system  to manage body condition by sort of giving them a bit more or a bit less or moving them  a bit on sooner or that kind of stuff. I think they do as well as or better than they would  
**[0:12:52-0:12:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:12:52):**  in the shed, like you mentioned. And, you know, we generally have very low cell counts,  you know, don't have issues with mastitis from the dry period. So yeah, it's a system  that, like you say, we've sort of fallen into, but does really seem to work. They just get  a bit hairier.  The impression I get is that they get less pampered in terms of being brought in, you  
**[0:13:08-0:13:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:13:08):**  know, whenever it's a bit chilly. And so from that perspective, they just become naturally  more resilient and that resilience has, has helped with their health and their carving  and all these other things too.  Yeah, absolutely. And you know, cows are naturally very resilient animals and, you know, it's  all a matter of genetics really and the environment and, you know, you can manage them in a variety  
**[0:13:27-0:13:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:13:27):**  of ways.  With this more natural approach to cattle health and welfare and the out wintering,  I'm just wondering whether cow with calf is part of your system as well.  Currently, we're not doing a huge amount of stuff with cows and calves beyond just a few  suckled calves on cows that need a bit of special attention. Stye and I do have experience  
**[0:13:45-0:13:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:13:45):**  running multi-sector systems where, you know, one cow or a group of cows would rear sort  of several calves. We used to have a herd of 60 dairy cows that would rear 200 calves  throughout the season. And that is a system we would go back to potentially if we had  the right set up around us. I think, you know, aside from the benefits for the cow and calf,  the big win for that system is that you've got then a group of cattle that you can move  
**[0:14:10-0:14:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:14:10):**  around the place. So in terms of the regenerative side, you know, they can be integrated into  arable systems, they could be grazing temporary lays further from the parlour and they're  producing milk to feed those calves but off of your platform. So, you know, you can be  maximising milk in a tank, feeding calves and hopefully having a benefit for other parts  of the system as well.  
**[0:14:28-0:14:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:14:28):**  So is that a system that you think that you're more likely to look at in the future or is  it something that kind of isn't necessary for your set up?  I think it's something we definitely look at. I think, you know, it's things like, you  know, access to more land that would make it maybe a more attractive option. But it's  definitely something that we would consider returning to down the line.  
**[0:14:47-0:14:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:14:47):**  One of the questions that I think a lot of dairy farmers will be interested in, a lot  of farmers who are listening to this, will be the impact that the various different choices  has had on the overall profitability of the farm. And I just wonder, Di, if you could  sort of take us through that and how the way that you farm has impacted on the amount of  milk that you produce and how much money you're able to make as a farmer.  
**[0:15:09-0:15:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:15:09):**  I think we have a quite low output and very low cost. Once a day has helped to reduce  the cost even lower, especially cake usage. We're using more than 30% less cake for the  same amount of milk by keeping a few more cows. The cows are pretty tough on once a  day, so our health costs are very low and our labour bill is very low because we sort  of don't have quite a lot of the associated, not just milking in afternoons, but also feeding  
**[0:15:36-0:15:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:15:36):**  and bedding all winter in sheds and then mucking out. And I think we look at all of that and  think in the winter it takes us an hour to feed and move and check, sort of 300 cows  really, which makes it pretty streamlined. I often think that beef and sheep farmers  get it more than other dairy farmers. So we would have a slightly higher output and better  cash flow than a beef and sheep farmer. And so they would think that sounds like a good  
**[0:16:02-0:16:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:16:02):**  business, but other dairy farmers would be horrified with how little output we have.  In terms of the overall profitability, what falls out the bottom, we haven't been doing  it for that long. We're only in our fourth season, but it's always returned a good return  on capital and hopefully it's going to only build from that as time goes on.  So from that perspective, because your costs are so low, it almost doesn't matter that  
**[0:16:24-0:16:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:16:24):**  your output is relatively low because you can still make a profit in that way.  Yeah, exactly. Exactly that. Like I say, I think it's a good return on capital for the  money that we've put in and it's given Sophie and I a good lifestyle and there's room for  that to improve further as we make improvements and settle into the system. But it's probably  not going to put three children through private school.  
**[0:16:45-0:16:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:16:45):**  It's interesting that you mentioned lifestyle there and Mark, that was an issue that you  brought up as well, that it's about, you know, sort of feeling better about the way that  you farm, enjoying just dairying slightly more than you were before. And so I wonder,  having spoken quite a lot about Sophie and Di's farm, whether you could tell us a bit  about your farm in terms of size and location.  
**[0:17:05-0:17:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:17:05):**  The farm's called Westridge Farm and it's 580 hectares now. We're boundary seven kilometres  of why we're a river and it's really the ideal microclimate for farming. And in the area  there are many top arable producers and sheep and beef producers. So we're not a traditional  dairying area, but it is a good area to run a low input system without irrigation, et  cetera.  
**[0:17:34-0:17:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:17:34):**  So we're now milking around 630 cows. We've come down around 20%. We were milking around  900 actually around four years ago. And part of our change was to de-risk our business  and actually, yeah, but like Di and Sophie run a lower cost system with a lot lower inputs.  And obviously, yes, the production is slightly lower, but profitability has been really increasing  as our systems come together on farm. The milking platform is around 300 hectares and  
**[0:18:12-0:18:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:18:12):**  the full unit is 580 hectares. So once we've made hay and made silage, et cetera, we can  extend those boundaries. So in summer, I mean, the farm runs quite well on a 30 day recovery  period, but in summer, this last summer we were pushing out to 65 day recovery. So really  letting those plants recover through the dryer. So we spring calve and we're also milking  once a day. This will be our fourth season once a day milking. And as I stated, we've  
**[0:18:42-0:18:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:18:42):**  reduced those stock numbers down the last four years. This is also our fourth year breeding  dual purpose animals. So for meat and milk, and really that's for the saleability of the  calves. If we're ever put in the position where we have to rear all calves on farm,  that's one of our solutions to addressing that. And we're mainly breeding Normandy's,  Fleck V's and Viking Reds now. More so for that low input model, they've really got good  
**[0:19:15-0:19:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:19:15):**  foraging capabilities and are said to have had better animal health traits. We moved  to these breeds just because they're a little bit more robust. And for the past 25 years,  we've bred these racehorse cows that really need higher input. They need a higher input  system because their breeding's been really based around production. They've lost a lot  of these traits that animals do have. So we need to build that resilience back into our  
**[0:19:46-0:19:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:19:46):**  farm. We also moved to mob grazing techniques. And that was after meeting one of our mentors,  Siobhan Griffin. She was a US dairy farmer, but now living near us here.  One of the other big drivers for you to go regenerative was environmental. And you've  mentioned to me a Greenpeace campaign called Dirty Dairy, which made you question what  was happening on your farm. I wonder why it was that that campaign in particular had such  
**[0:20:12-0:20:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:20:12):**  an impact.  Yeah, I believe that campaign was Fish and Game. And in 2003 or 2004, they came up with  that initiative and we'd converted to dairy in 1995. And by 2004, I'd already lived in  Canada and in Britain, I've farmed up around the Chester area. And this was really the  first big wave of dairy conversions and the intensification of dairy in New Zealand. The  
**[0:20:38-0:20:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:20:38):**  urea use and more monoculture winter crop and etc. that really accelerated. But yeah,  Greenpeace had really had many campaigns and they were focused on mainly on the industrial  practices and the fertilizer use. And I guess I just wanted to prove to myself that it didn't  have to be that way. We also had conflicts of interest through the last few years of  milking large numbers. We were employing shear milkers and contract milkers. And the main  
**[0:21:07-0:21:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:21:07):**  focus is production based. So it didn't really sit right with me and my vision of what the  farm should look like and my love of nature. I mean, it's obviously very hard. We had people  around us at that time that were starting to think this way and to farm this way. And  we really leaned on each other's strengths. That really helped. I mean, it was a major  inward battle first because we were researching online and we were trying to learn how we  
**[0:21:36-0:21:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:21:36):**  could adopt these principles into this big monster of dairy farming. So it was this inward  battle on you. And then it was almost an outward battle because you were then beginning to  practice these things on your farm that were different from the norm. And that in itself  is quite a confronting task when it feels like you're swimming against the tide basically.  One of the things that struck me as well from speaking to you in the past is that it wasn't  
**[0:22:09-0:22:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:22:09):**  just the environmental health of your farm that you were interested in, but also human  health and nutrition. And I know that you were also diagnosed with an autoimmune disease  some years back, which meant that you became at that time much more focused on health and  nutrition. Why is regenerative dairy important from that perspective?  I think when you're faced with an event that scares you, it becomes real. It really wakes  
**[0:22:36-0:22:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:22:36):**  you up and smacks you in the face. So it really made me think about the whole system more.  How did we get here? What is all this for? It made me slow down and reassess and look  for those other options. Yeah. The way I see it was my microbiome, mine was compromised  and I could see the farm was a mirror image of me. And yeah, it was a kind of liken it  to if you look at a farm scale, the kidneys or the wetlands had been drained, the lungs  
**[0:23:08-0:23:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:23:08):**  or the soil wasn't breathing properly. We really started to turn all that around with  a different attitude and different outlook. And when you start to farm this way, suddenly  it's not all about you and profits. You start thinking very differently. You start thinking  about the bigger picture of resource scarcity and feeding community and so forth. Yeah,  it's really exhilarating actually. So through that and through that systems thinking, you're  
**[0:23:37-0:23:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:23:37):**  creating a better land quality, cycling of minerals and water and all the other stuff  we associate with Regen. But at the same time, that's providing a combination of better wellbeing  for you and perhaps a better quality or more nutritious product, which is better for your  body. Di, just coming back to you, when we spoke before recording, you used what I thought  was a really powerful phrase. You said that dairy can feel a bit like a treadmill and  
**[0:24:07-0:24:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:24:07):**  getting off that treadmill can be harder than perhaps it is with beef or sheep where you  have to make more gradual changes. What did you mean about dairy feeling like a treadmill  and why is it so hard for dairy farmers to step off?  I think we were quite lucky to never really get on the treadmill. We were very close at  the beginning. We had a plan to be a fairly normal spring calving dairy with housing for  
**[0:24:31-0:24:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:24:31):**  the winter. When I did our budgets, we were sort of pushing in high 5,000, low 6,000 litre  yields, feeding over a tonne of cake. That's a reasonable amount of feed, but while the  milk price is reasonable, it works, I guess. Because I really had a defining moment, but  the shed didn't get built, so we started down another path. Now, I look at it and think,  why would I build a shed? If I build a shed, I've got to build a silage  
**[0:24:56-0:25:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:24:56):**  clamp and I've got to make lots of silage. Then we've got to feed the cows all winter,  and then we've got to muck out the sheds, and then we've got to spread that muck. In  the time when that's all changed, the price of fuel has doubled, price of fertilizers  has doubled. Hang on a sec. Maybe that isn't the way to go. Also, machinery is really expensive  and I don't really want to capitalise a business like that. That's the treadmill I was talking  
**[0:25:21-0:25:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:25:21):**  about. That's how we ended up not really on it.  Jason Vale,  Yeah, and there's an element of the way that the economics have been around it all. I think  while diesel has been relatively cheap, and I think farm size has an impact. A lot of  people milk a lot of cows close to the parlour, then haul in feed from further away, and then  
**[0:26:02-0:26:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:26:02):**  end up taking them up further away. I think the economics around that might be shifting.  And I notice Mark has also de-stocked or lowered his stocking rate. I think some people are  upping their stocking rate, but then they're actually using more land further away. The  land that's been used to grow their cake and the land that's probably been away from the  dairy to provide extra forage.  
**[0:26:26-0:26:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:26:26):**  Jason Vale Ghost acres, I think they're called. This  sort of invisible impact of dairy, where you're using land that you can't see, but that land  is producing the food that's needed to keep that system going.  Mark Brooks Yes, that's exactly it. And then we wouldn't  have many ghost acres, but then we keep a really low stocking rate. And I think that's  
**[0:26:46-0:26:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:26:46):**  the shift. And I think land access comes into that. I mean, the economics around it, we  kind of, even on our very low cost, need to do about a million litres. And much below  that, we struggle to cover our overhead. So that's quite a hard treadmill to get us, I  guess, if you've already done that system. But I wonder whether it would be worth taking  a real step back and looking at the system and losing the ghost acres, losing the cost  
**[0:27:10-0:27:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:27:10):**  associated to them, and seeing where you end up. And some people, that would work really  well and some people that won't work at all. But I think I'd like people to be open minded  to think about it.  Jason Vale So you're off the treadmill, Di. I just wonder  how it feels emotionally and financially. Do you feel good when you get up in the morning?  
**[0:27:28-0:27:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:27:28):**  Di I think we've not got in my head that I picture how it will look and it's not there  yet. We've not had a lot of rain the last few months and it's pretty dry here and we  are still stepping with drought. Now my head feature, we won't suffer drought because our  soil is so healthy that there'll be so much water retention that we will just keep grass.  You know, I slow down a bit, but I imagine we'll be really green. That's how in my head  
**[0:28:23-0:28:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:28:23):**  I'd picture it in a few years time, but we're not quite there yet.  Jason Vale And just for the record, Di, who are you producing  for? Are you producing for yourselves or are you contracted to a big company?  Di We supply Omsco, which is an organic cooperative  in the UK and we are looking at more farm gate. I think part of Regenerative is selling  
**[0:28:41-0:28:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:28:41):**  your own story and I think we are starting to look more and more into that and have a  story that we would like to sell. I think being proud of what we do is a massive part  of this whole journey for us.  Jason Vale Fantastic. Now, Mark, you talked earlier  on about resilience and the way in which mainstream dairy and when you were involved in that,  
**[0:29:02-0:29:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:29:02):**  you felt reduced your own resilience to external economic shocks. But you've also said that  having reduced inputs, now that you're farming more in balance with nature, that although  the debt against the farm is still large, it somehow feels more manageable. And I wonder  if you could talk us through that?  Mark Brooks Yeah, yeah, sure. It's certainly challenging.  
**[0:29:22-0:29:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:29:22):**  I mean, initially, this was the goal to transition to a more agile model of dairy. I mean, it's  one thing feeling like you're stuck in this model, but if we can adapt change and make  this model a little bit more agile to move with the changing climate and being able to  absorb, you know, a changing world that's going to benefit us in the future. You know,  we changed to the ones today milking the dual purpose animals, and we took a little bit  
**[0:29:52-0:29:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:29:52):**  of a production hit on that. But this is now slowly building back up. I mean, the first  few years we swapped out solid fertilizers for liquid and biological, and then we moved  more into the mob grazing and biological applications. And this was all while scaling another set  of systems on the side, which is windrow composting. So next year will be our first year using  the compost and the mob grazing only. I'm not going to spend anything on inputs next  
**[0:30:24-0:30:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:30:24):**  year.  Toby  That's a pretty exciting place to be.  Mark Brooks Oh, it's amazing. And it's really cool that  it's just coming together when there's pressure coming on the system. The first few seasons,  
**[0:30:36-0:30:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:30:36):**  it kind of felt like we were just shuffling deck chairs around and not really saving any  money on what we were doing. But yeah, once the confidence grew and the grazing management  and the multi species pastures, yeah, they started to increase in soil biology, increasing  soil physical chemical properties. So we saw phosphate increasing potassium doubling micronutrients  increasing or without adding any non-renewable inputs. So that really gives us confidence  
**[0:31:10-0:31:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:31:10):**  to scale the grazing and the system even further and move forward. We also should stop and  shed grain feeding two years ago. And yeah, we would normally supplement grain, crushed  grain in the dairy shed, but we took that out of the system that just didn't feel right.  I mean, grain, I think it should be used as a human edible feed crop. And I mean, with  soaring prices now, I'm pleased we made that decision to take that out of the system. But  
**[0:31:38-0:31:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:31:38):**  yeah, really focusing on the pasture, greater pasture growth, not overgrazing. Yeah, really  in New Zealand, urea and inputs have really driven stocking rates past unsustainable levels.  So yeah, there's a lot of farmers in New Zealand now trying to use urea more efficiently through  local applications and trying to understand how they can get off this treadmill that Diane  and Sophie are talking about.  
**[0:32:03-0:32:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:32:03):**  Fantastic. And it's really interesting that you start talking there about the, you know,  the chemical compositions that you're building in the soil. And Sophie, I'd like to come  on to ways of measuring regeneration and the way that you do this on your farm. And I just  wonder if you could talk us through your approach to actually capturing the positive changes  that you're clearly witnessing.  
**[0:32:24-0:32:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:32:24):**  Yeah, I think it's a massive part of this whole transformation for us. And we're really  right at the start of it. So it still feels like we're very much in a phase of trying  to capture, you know, capture our baseline in some ways, because you know, although we've  been on this unit for four years now, you know, we've only really been sort of starting  to think more regeneratively, probably for the last 12 to 18 months, you know, even things  
**[0:32:45-0:32:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:32:45):**  like just making sure we've got baseline soil tests and organic methods for all the paddocks  and that kind of stuff we've now got. So we're still trying to pull together the right package  of measures really in terms of that side of things. I think the most consistent things  we can look at at the moment, and it's very much what Mark touched on as well, is actually  just our production really in terms of our grass growth. So we've always done wheat complaint  
**[0:33:08-0:33:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:33:08):**  metering, you know, and obviously our milk output and that in relation to what we're  doing on to the farm. So our concentrate usage and especially when we see drier periods like  the one we're going through at the moment, you know, we've been lucky enough to experience  a few of those in the last four years. So it's looking at, you know, as those periods  occur, you know, how does the farm perform? How does the grass hold up? And how does what  
**[0:33:29-0:33:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:33:29):**  are we sending away from the farm in terms of milk? And like I mentioned earlier, I think  we've still got a long way to go in terms of seeing improvements. But, you know, I'd  say we're already able to stock the farm a bit more heavily, you know, without bringing  in more. Both acres, we're running just over 300 cows this year, which is up a bit from  the sort of 270 we ran last year. So it's very early days and, you know, we're probably  
**[0:33:50-0:33:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:33:50):**  doing a bit more sort of ad hoc measurement, just trying to look at things like soil measurements,  best pests and compactions and things like that. But we haven't really started to trend  anything like that at the moment. So it's very much more a case of trialing different  measures, thinking about what are the ones we want to continue to try and do year on  year or week on week or whatever the timescale needs to be to show a change. But for us,  
**[0:34:11-0:34:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:34:11):**  that's very much still in development, I would say.  So it's a combination of environmental data, carbon data, soil data, but as well economic  data and sort of visual methods of recording information. And of course, you're organically  certified. So there's a whole range of information that you're pulling in to kind of inform the  way that you farm going forwards.  
**[0:34:30-0:34:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:34:30):**  Absolutely. And actually, you know, the financial data is more readily available. And that's  always really interesting to look year on year, you know, how our overall financial  performance that always, you know, changes a bit, whether you look at it per litre or  per cow or per hectare. And obviously, we've got our animal health data, you know, fertility  data, all that kind of stuff. It all ties into regenerative, but we're probably going  
**[0:34:53-0:34:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:34:53):**  to do a bit more work on pulling it all together.  It's really interesting to hear about that, because of course, you know, one of the issues  is, you know, when people claim to be regenerative, I mean, you know, the first question is, well,  how do you know what what are you regenerating? But, you know, from what you're talking about  there, you're able to monitor trends, some of them better than others. But at the same  
**[0:35:12-0:35:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:35:12):**  time, you've got so much data that you can physically see the improvements year on year  in so many of the areas that you've been talking about there. And Mark, am I right that you  have a third party that actually comes onto your farm each year and collects quite a lot  of physical data for you to measure your own regeneration?  Yeah, sure. It's quite exciting. After attending a three day workshop with Nicole Masters and  
**[0:35:36-0:35:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:35:36):**  some real industry leaders, that was over three years ago, we employed one of her coaches,  Michael Cashmore, and that was really to add rigour to what we were attempting to do. So  yeah, he visits two to three times a year. And we take visual soil assessments, worm  counts, we measure bricks, rooting depth of plants, the water infiltration, soil physical  and biological measurements through the soil food web. And all of those are really trending  
**[0:36:06-0:36:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:36:06):**  in a positive direction. So we can we can map them out and showcase them in the future  to what's happening on the land. We also have a French New Zealand scientist, Gwen Guillay  and her team from Manaki, when they are land care research, and they're monitoring every  three to four years taking international standard one metre soil cores, measuring soil carbon  sampling and stocks of carbon, insect diversity, forage diversity and so forth. We've also  
**[0:36:38-0:36:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:36:38):**  the local Dunedin Otago University, in the last three years, they've developed a new  agricultural degree, and it's really honing in on biological systems. So each year now,  we also have 30 students turn up in a bus and everyone's out there digging soil pits  and counting worms. And last year, they were split into groups and one group dug a soil  sample and they counted 125 worms in a spade square. And I mean, these worm numbers have  
**[0:37:10-0:37:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:37:10):**  just been increasing, increasing with this mob grazing, laying down litter, feeding soil  biology, it's quite amazing to see that the changes happening really quick. The results,  yeah, they start to speak for themselves, really. I mean, like I say, we've been increasing  all these properties, soil structure, minerals increasing without addition. And I want to  say that also the ground nesting birds, we're starting to see more birds on the land. We've  
**[0:37:37-0:37:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:37:37):**  even seen hawks nesting amongst our multi species paddocks. And it gave me a real fright one  day, I was bringing the cows in. And there's these two large round patches of grass that  hadn't been grazed. And I thought what's going on here. And I drove closer and a hawk  flew out in there with a nest and eggs. So I haven't seen that in 25 years of dairy farming  here.  
**[0:38:03-0:38:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:38:03):**  And to be clear, that's not because you're targeting these species, but because you've  done so much to restore the building blocks of biodiversity. And in doing that, you're  bringing back in these sort of target species, if you like, but also you're seeing this incredible  growth in all of the other species as well.  Yeah, that's so true. I mean, there's a lot of talk about this carbon tunnel vision online  
**[0:38:26-0:38:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:38:26):**  at the moment. And we see that we if we focus on biodiversity on every trophic level, so  animal, plant, animal, human, etc, we're starting to layer and more trees to the farm. And these  are all carbon based biomass. So when you start to like you say, when you build that  foundation, it just keeps growing. And it's really life creating life moving away from  tillage and, and winter cropping to bale grazing and longer pasture recoveries. This is all  
**[0:38:59-0:39:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:38:59):**  a step in that direction.  It's wonderful to be in that position, not only to be able to tell the story, but to  prove the story as well. And of course, that's what this data collection does the relationships  with universities and, and certification bodies. That's fantastic. Now, Mark, just finally,  and Sophie and I, I'm going to come to you with this in a moment as well. But just finally,  
**[0:39:22-0:39:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:39:22):**  thinking about your motivation to become a regenerative dairy farmer, just in a couple  of sentences, is there a single value or personal characteristic that drives you forward?  I think it's, yeah, I'm thinking of this global ecological consciousness that's rising.  And it's about farmers taking back the control of their destiny, really, and just being curious  and asking those questions. We also asked ourselves what does success look like to us?  
**[0:39:53-0:39:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:39:53):**  And I think it's quite different from what it may have looked like 10 or 15 years ago.  I think dairy gets a bit of a, has a bit of a bad rep, I think, for work-life balance.  For us, that's probably been a big thing is, obviously, we, you know, not saying we don't  work hard and stuff, but, you know, we probably have a more flexible life, you know, where  we can build in a good amount of family time and off farm time. And, you know, between  
**[0:40:19-0:40:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:40:19):**  working once a day, between having a clear dry period during the winter, it builds a  lifestyle that actually is really sustainable for us as a family. And the other thing really  is that a bit like Mark touched on, you know, it's become a bit of a new challenge for us.  And we're really enjoying learning about soils, about this whole, you know, the way these  ecosystems function that, you know, we weren't even really that aware of. And almost the  
**[0:40:43-0:40:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:40:43):**  more you read and the more you listen to podcasts and, you know, come across this information,  the more you want to know. And it's, we're enjoying together kind of exploring all of  that.  Mark I think there's sort of two sides to it for  me. One is being really proud of what we do and being able to show the public who are  
**[0:41:00-0:41:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:41:00):**  getting more and more interested in food production that we are producing healthy food for them  without destroying the planet and increasing biodiversity and dung beetles and wildlife  around and nature on the farm. Mixed in with a really odd financial element for me, a drive  to start with nothing and to follow possibly the New Zealand share milking model into farm  ownership. I think those two things, most people would think don't go together and I  
**[0:41:28-0:41:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:41:28):**  would quite like for them to go together.  That's fabulous. Thanks everyone so much. I'm afraid that's all we've got time for.  I'd like to thank my guests, Mark Anderson from South Otago, New Zealand and Sophie and  Di Wilson from Wiltshire in the UK. Regen Dairy is a partnership project of Farmwell  and FAI Farms. You can find out more about the project at regendairy.org and you can  
**[0:41:52-0:41:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Getting-off-the-treadmill-e1n8451#t=0:41:52):**  join the conversation on Twitter by searching for Farmgate podcast. If you've enjoyed listening,  please come back and listen to more. Tell your friends, like us, review us and share  our links. I've been Finn Loce-Kustain. Bye for now.  