### Farm Gate  (2020-01-28)
**[0:00:00-0:00:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to Farmgate, I'm Finnlow Costayne. Today we travel to Christchurch,  New Zealand to speak with Glen Herrod, the founder of the Happy Cow Milk Company.  Glen founded Happy Cow, a cow and calf dairy business, in 2014. But despite the fact that  the farming end of the operation was working well, he had trouble with distribution. The  company ran out of cash within a few years, but what happened next was truly remarkable.  
**[0:00:31-0:00:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:00:31):**  His story went viral and ordinary people from all over the world chipped in a few dollars  a month to help keep his business afloat. And now following a fundamental and revolutionary  redesign of his distribution system, Happy Cow 2.0 is ready to launch. At the heart of  the Happy Cow milk co is an ambition to help farmers sell direct to citizens. Dairy farming  is part of Glen's family heritage, but a decade ago he took a step back, looked at  
**[0:00:58-0:01:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:00:58):**  the industry and decided that there was a need and an opportunity to do something different.  I started by asking Glen Herrod why he felt it was important to try something new.  I suppose the New Zealand dairy industry is quite different to the rest of the world in  that we've had our shear farming system where the landowner would own the farm and  a shear milker would own the cows. So the shear milker would come in and do all the  
**[0:01:23-0:01:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:01:23):**  work and milk the cows using the infrastructure that's owned by the landowner and they would  split the money 50-50. So it used to be a very good system for a shear milker because  they would make quite a high return on capital. So they were able to make a good return, save  the money and then buy a farm. And it was good for farm owners because they got sick  of milking cows and they would get someone else to do it. But the shear farming system  
**[0:01:49-0:01:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:01:49):**  is very different now and it's not eliminated, but it's not what it used to be. It's  part of the dairy farming culture. You start, you know, you leave school or whatever, you  buy some cows and then you do that for five years and then you go shear milking, do that  for five years or so and then you buy a farm. And that's kind of what's happened since  the 60s really. And just I think the trend that we're seeing in every industry is we're  
**[0:02:16-0:02:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:02:16):**  getting larger and larger. Scale is getting bigger and bigger. So now if we looked in  the early 80s, an average farm in New Zealand was 150 odd cows and now the average herd  is 450, maybe 500 cows in New Zealand now. Originally the idea was that that barrier  of entry is getting higher and higher. You know, instead of needing 150 cows to be a  farmer, you now needed 500 or whatever the number may be. So that was the original thinking  
**[0:02:42-0:02:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:02:42):**  and I sort of thought, well, how can we simplify what constitutes dairy farm? You know, a dairy  farm is a milking parlour, lots of concrete, effluent systems, fences, laneways, all those  sorts of things. And I just felt that if we could simplify it and maybe do a mobile cow  shed, we could build a milking platform without needing a lot of the infrastructure. And I  think there's a few farmers around the world who have been doing that. It's quite common.  
**[0:03:07-0:03:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:03:07):**  Well, they used to do it back in the day, back in Holland and Belgium and the like,  and it was really sort of just feeding off that. And it was the motivation was how to  reduce the barrier of entry to farming so that the next generation can come through.  So we're moving from a system in your vision from that share milking, from anybody needing  to own and manage significant infrastructure that usually goes along with a dairy farm  
**[0:03:34-0:03:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:03:34):**  and going back to or introducing a mobile system that moves around a field and the cows  come to the system.  Yeah. And I really did that just because I didn't have the capital. But yeah, so we built  this mobile cow shed. And I'm also aware that farmers always have one customer and that  customer is the milk company that they supply. And whether they're a co-op or they sell to  
**[0:03:57-0:04:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:03:57):**  a corporate processor, having that one customer means you can't diversify and it means they're  really price takers. And this is a problem that all primary producers tend to have around  the world. And in New Zealand, although we have co-ops, we export 90% or 97% of all our  milk produced and our farmers are not in touch with the consumer or the public. And what  we've seen in the last 20 years in particular is the New Zealand public sort of turning  
**[0:04:23-0:04:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:04:23):**  against dairy farmers and they're just not on board with the way dairy has gone. We've  had this massive dairy boom and the dairy industry is, well, it is the backbone of New  Zealand's economy. And it's what's going to save us in this recession or depression we're  going through now. But they've lost touch with the public. So part of what I'm trying  to do with Happy Cow is if we can get farmers to sell direct to the consumer rather than  
**[0:04:47-0:04:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:04:47):**  their co-op doing it or private companies do it, we get that connection. And part of  the whole story of Happy Cow is really how consumers have had a direct contact with me  and my story.  Mason It's interesting. So we've talked a little  bit about the economic drivers behind what you wanted to do and some of the social drivers.  
**[0:05:08-0:05:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:05:08):**  There are also welfare and environmental drivers behind the decisions that you were making.  And part of that is around wanting to have a cow and calf operation.  David So what happened was I wanted to build this  mobile cow shed and then we built a milk processing room on the front of it. So it was a big long  trailer about 10 metres long. So cows at the back had five sets of cups at the back or  
**[0:05:31-0:05:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:05:31):**  six I think. And then we had the pasteuriser in the front and I would milk and pasteurise  the milk directly in the paddock. And then the idea was to put that milk into a tank  and take it to a vending machine. So when I started, I had to test all this out. So  I bought six cows and I leased some land and started the process of figuring out how to  do all this. And obviously these cows were calving and I needed to do something with  
**[0:05:55-0:05:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:05:55):**  the calves. And because it was leased land, I didn't have calf sheds, I didn't have calf  feeding equipment, and I really didn't have any time to deal with calves. So I thought  I'll just leave them with their mothers as a temporary measure to, well not a temporary  measure, it was we'll leave them with their mothers and that's one less thing that I need  to worry about.  
**[0:06:12-0:06:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:06:12):**  So it was more more expediency than a particular desire to improve that welfare situation at  the time.  I hadn't really thought enough about it because I was still thinking about milk processing  regulations, engineering stuff, trying to get milk to market, all those sorts of things.  The farming, because I've been farming my whole life, I wasn't worried about the farming  
**[0:06:33-0:06:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:06:33):**  stuff because I knew how to do all that. I was concentrating on the stuff I didn't know  how to do. And we originally went in thinking that our proposition to the public was a much  more sustainable environmental offering really. And I didn't really realise that people had  an issue with animal welfare of cows. I was a little naive at this stage. And then when  I started selling milk, I would tell, they would ask what happened to the calves. Everyone  
**[0:06:56-0:07:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:06:56):**  was asking me about it and now it's really what we've become known for. And obviously  it's sort of happening around the world now.  And that must, you know, if you have a calf staying with a cow, then obviously they're  sharing that milk. And what kind of impact does it have on the economics of what you're  doing?  
**[0:07:13-0:07:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:07:13):**  Yeah, so it's interesting. So because I was milking the cows in the middle of the paddock,  I'm bringing the milking parlour to the cows. The cows just sit in the paddock with their  calves and we milk them and then they walk off the trailer and go back to their calves.  And it's quite a simple process. And because we're doing 365 day supply, we want our cows  to be sort of calving all year round. And that's quite uncommon for New Zealand because  
**[0:07:35-0:07:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:07:35):**  we have a seasonal supply. We basically want all our cows to calve in the four week period  of August, August and September. So when you think about what the workload of removing  a calf from its mother and then milking the cow, putting the calf into a shed, taking  the milk, putting it into a tank, hooking the tank to your tractor, driving the tank  to the calf, employing someone to feed that calf and then taking the truck to the tank  
**[0:08:00-0:08:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:08:00):**  back and things. There's a whole lot of workload involved with that and labour is involved  with it. So if you leave your calves with your mothers, the workload involved is you  put a tag in its ear when it's born and then you weigh it every four weeks or something.  And so yes, that calf will drink more milk.  But the input costs go down significantly.  
**[0:08:20-0:08:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:08:20):**  Yeah. So I'm all about simplifying the system and reducing your dependency on labour and  also just reducing the amount of work you have to do during the day. We're not doing  this currently. I don't have cows currently, but the model we're trying to push forward  is that you would get a calf to about eight weeks of age and at that point we'd want to  put some type of flap in their nose that makes it difficult for them to drink milk and leave  
**[0:08:43-0:08:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:08:43):**  them with the mother for a couple of more weeks. And then you would separate them, put  them into the paddock next door, into a calf roof paddock and the calf and the mother will  sort of meet each other across the fence. And I think the research that I've read is  they'll do that for a couple of days and then they just naturally go their separate ways.  I had a bit of everything. I had areas, I had frisions, I had jerseys and then we had  
**[0:09:05-0:09:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:09:05):**  everything crossed in between.  And do you have a sense of how many litres you would be getting annually from an individual  cow?  So we were milking once a day to start off with. So that was a little reduced a bit.  Our cows were doing around 20 litres a day. Cows in New Zealand generally produce less  
**[0:09:25-0:09:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:09:25):**  than the rest of the world because we go on our pasture based system.  How does that compare with cows in the more traditional New Zealand systems?  Cows are about the same. Let me clarify that. When we were doing once a day with the calf  on its mother, we were doing around that 17 to 18 litres per day. But when we started  going onto a twice a day system and it gets a little confusing because we had frisions  
**[0:09:48-0:09:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:09:48):**  which produce more milk, we're sort of around that 20 litres. But I think the New Zealand  average is around 20 litres as well.  We were paid on milk solids by the factory. So jerseys are quite good. Well, the Kiwi  Cross, the Jersey Frisian Cross is what New Zealand dairy farmers are quite fond of because  they, although they don't produce the most milk, they're actually the most efficient  
**[0:10:07-0:10:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:10:07):**  harvester of milk, of grass. So they turn grass into milk and being paid in the milk  solid basis, that works really well.  It's interesting that, you know, in that system where you've reduced your input costs, you're  giving much more freedom for the cattle generally. Calves staying with them for a couple of months  and then that assisted weaning. And in terms of New Zealand, you're getting a very similar  
**[0:10:30-0:10:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:10:30):**  litreage per cow to the rest of the industry. And it's a remarkably different system that  you're running.  We're getting a lot of resistance from farmers because they can see the public taking to  it. You get quite a bit because, I mean, we call ourselves the Happy Cow Milk Company.  So if you, we put a bit of mark in and out and we say, look at our happy cows, we leave  
**[0:10:50-0:10:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:10:50):**  the cows with their mothers. Existing dairy farmers, they get a bit upset because they're  essentially saying that their cows aren't happy because they take their cows with their  mothers.  Yeah.  So we have all those sorts of debates and it's a lot of defensive stuff going on. But  
**[0:11:04-0:11:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:11:04):**  my focus is how do we make the smaller, these smaller family farms around the world, how  do we make them have a competitive advantage against the big boys who are smothering them?  The story that you tell, I recognise from elsewhere around the world, particularly in  places where it's a relatively new idea to have an independent farm or an independent  business which is selling and branding directly to the public because sort of automatically  
**[0:11:29-0:11:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:11:29):**  you start to get those issues sort of rising up between, you know, where you've got a situation  where the majority of dairy producers are working towards a particular customer or a  particular export model and then somebody comes along and rocks the boat and says, look  at me, I'm different. So in New Zealand, is it relatively unusual for there to be a smaller  family business selling directly to the public?  
**[0:11:54-0:11:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:11:54):**  It is relatively unusual. There's probably only maybe 10 in New Zealand who are doing  it. There's a lot of them.  Gosh, that is small. Yeah.  You'll have them in the UK, you know, the farmer with the vending machine at the end  of the gate.  
**[0:12:05-0:12:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:12:05):**  There are lots now. And over the last decade we've seen a, you know, a really substantial  increase and I think we're hoping over the next decade that we will see an enormous shift  in independent farmers, farmers working cooperatively at a landscape scale or as an individual scale  to reconnect with the public and reestablish that connection which has been lost, you know,  through dairy farmers or other farmers simply supplying into a retailer model or or supplying  
**[0:12:36-0:12:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:12:36):**  into a big corporate model because at that point, that relationship between the customer  and the farmer that used to exist up until relatively recently has been lost.  Yeah. And I mean, there's lots of the farmers are doing that for a reason because it's no  joke processing your own milk and distributing it and creating a brand. It's hard. And, you  know, the number of farmers who have contacted me over the years and said, oh, we did it  
**[0:13:01-0:13:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:13:01):**  for five years and basically five years tends to be the cutoff. You do it for five years  and then they find out it's just too much too hard.  Things went wrong. The business didn't work, but you're still there. So what went wrong  and why are you still there trying?  Well, yeah, I mean, it did go wrong. What really happened was we were growing so fast  
**[0:13:21-0:13:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:13:21):**  that we couldn't keep up and we ran out of capital. We could see what needed to be done.  We had lots of customers who were wanting our milk. We were trying to do it. And, you  know, I probably started off undercapitalised and I utilised everything I could and we wasn't  able to really sell the vision to the bank without them taking, well, I ran out of equity  basically to offer up the security.  
**[0:13:44-0:13:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:13:44):**  And you said you started with six cows. So you say, you know, you were growing and couldn't  keep up. And so where were you at that stage? How many cows did you have at that stage?  We got to 60 cows in milk. So we had 60 cows in milk and then a lot of dry cows as well.  So we'd grown quite quickly over a three year period, basically. And the main issue was  how do we process milk efficiently and how do we distribute it efficiently? And that  
**[0:14:12-0:14:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:14:12):**  was what really took my day. I took my time and trying to figure that out. And then, you  know, we become so labour intensive and generally the whole time there was work for, you know,  work for two people, but there was only the money for one. And then you would upgrade  the equipment and grow a little bit bigger. And then there was work for three people,  but only money for two. And it was really a typical small business conundrum where you  
**[0:14:36-0:14:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:14:36):**  just don't have that efficiency.  So it was the costs of distribution in terms of labour and physically getting the milk  from the farm out to customers. How far were you travelling to get milk to customers?  We've got a population of 350,000 in Christchurch. So I was driving 30 odd kilometres.  So it was still just, it was one distribution point?  
**[0:14:56-0:14:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:14:56):**  My driver would start at six in the morning, he'd be back at six at night and he would  have done 30 deliveries. So we priced our product at the premium end. So we were around  $4.50 NZD a litre. So I don't know if you work with that as in pounds, but it was very  expensive. What happened was we would get lots of people, lots of retail outlets wanting  to sell our milk, but they'd only sell a small amount of milk. So therefore you'd do 30 deliveries  
**[0:15:20-0:15:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:15:20):**  a day to service all these small retailers and cafes and so on. Where if we could just  go to a supermarket and do maybe three deliveries and sell the same volume of milk, that would  be much better. The problem we had was the reusable packaging. So the reusable, as well  as the carbs and the environmental aspect, basically the reusable glass bottle was another  big thing that our customers love. And what we wanted to bring back, but that was also  
**[0:15:48-0:15:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:15:48):**  the very thing that stopped us from scaling. And it was really the supermarkets didn't  want to deal with that because they're not set up to take bottles back. And some of them  did, and we did have good relationships with them. But again, they would also view us as  a niche product. So then they would actually charge or put a big margin on the product  and then it becomes even more expensive. And then you sell even less. And this would probably  
**[0:16:11-0:16:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:16:11):**  work if you're in the UK because you've got such a big population. You see, we were getting  the hardcore customers who would crawl over broken glass to support us and, you know,  do whatever it takes to bring their bottle in. But for the most part, most people aren't  that committed. And even if you could get them to pay a premium, they're not really  that into it. And then when you've got a small population base like we do, it's actually  
**[0:16:34-0:16:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:16:34):**  quite difficult to sell 1000 litres a day.  So you ran out of money and decided at that point, I mean, how did you feel at that point?  Because you put an awful lot of heart and soul into this.  Well, yeah, basically, that last sort of six months is really a blur. Actually, I can't  really remember it even it was two years ago. But yeah, it was just a determination of not  
**[0:16:56-0:17:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:16:56):**  failing because you couldn't, I couldn't afford to fail. I mean, I put everything into it.  You know, I've been working on this since really, I've been working on this since 2008.  And so the realisation that it wasn't working and trying to figure out how to do it and  bringing in people to help me and getting advisors and you find ways to grow essentially,  it was Yeah, it was um, it's a tough time. So when the decision was made to close it  
**[0:17:19-0:17:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:17:19):**  down, I didn't really know what to do. I just sort of put the message out the Facebook that  we're going to shut down. And I chosen to close it in because I knew that we could sell  all our assets and, and pay off our creditors and then shutting it down. And we got a lot  of support from all our customers. In fact, my story, I was asked to write a story for  one of our newspapers. So I sort of explained how it went. And that story went global, like  
**[0:17:44-0:17:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:17:44):**  literally went global. And it ended up on forums and Silicon Valley. And I had people  in Sweden and Denmark and  Toby  What was it that made it go viral?  David  
**[0:17:54-0:17:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:17:54):**  Just being honest and open and just, I suppose, not trying to, you know, make it sound like  I'm a big expert and just saying, look, I tried to do this, this is my vision. And this  is what I found really hard. This is actually, you know, you can't, maybe you can't do it  in small, you know, maybe there's all these hassles and all these difficulties. So, so  what people were seeing was here's this guy who's trying to change dairy with his animal  
**[0:18:15-0:18:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:18:15):**  welfare, with the reusable packaging, all those sorts of things, and the systems basically  knocked them down.  So what happened next?  David  So I set up a Patreon account. Patreon allows members of the public to donate money. So  
**[0:18:31-0:18:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:18:31):**  I just said to our fan base, I said, Well, you would like to see Happy Cow Milk carry  on, you know, I'm just I'm definitely going to carry on. I'm not giving up yet. But, you  know, just give us a couple of dollars a month, and we'll see what happens. So we had around  770 people at the peak, I think donating anywhere from $1 to even $100 a month.  David  
**[0:18:53-0:18:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:18:53):**  Mostly New Zealand citizens or?  David  Well, in the world.  David  Gosh. That's remarkable, isn't it? Remarkable because you got people from the other  
**[0:19:00-0:19:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:19:00):**  side of the world who are likely never to taste the milk that you're producing, still  contributing.  David  Yeah, that's right. And so I think we got up to around around 7000 US dollars a month,  seven, 8000, somewhere around there. And that enabled me to basically keep the lights on,  
**[0:19:21-0:19:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:19:21):**  and then restart again, basically start thinking, well, everything that I've learned, well,  basically, I slept for a month, and then got back into it and just analysed everything  and just got the spreadsheets out. I got a few interns from a local university to help  me. And we just analysed distribution costs, we analysed and figure out where was the cost  in the whole system, and how can we streamline it and make it better. Because essentially,  
**[0:19:43-0:19:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:19:43):**  all we've done is we've done a traditional milk processing model, but we've done it at  small scale. So we had no economies of scale. And if we look at the way other companies  in history have innovated and changed things, as they essentially, you know, they simplify  things, they make it simpler, they make it easier, and they drop the cost. And really,  it was clear to me that if you're going to sell milk, milk is like a staple, it's not,  
**[0:20:07-0:20:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:20:07):**  you know, we can tell all the stories you like about your cows, and we love our cows  and everything. It's still milk to most people.  Toby  It's not a luxury product. It's something that people need on a daily basis, like bread.  David  
**[0:20:18-0:20:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:20:18):**  Yeah. And you look at the figures and vast majority of people will buy the budget milk  in New Zealand. The cheapest milk is 70% of the population buy the cheapest milk. And  we were playing in the very premium end. And that's really what a lot of farmers always  think is like, Oh, we can get a premium by doing this. Or how can we get a premium. And  when I looked at, you know, a lot of innovation, they don't actually try and get a premium,  
**[0:20:40-0:20:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:20:40):**  they actually drop the cost. And it changed my whole mindset about how we're doing things.  You know, if you look at McDonald's, they created a system that allowed any teenager  to make a burger, and they dropped the price of burgers dramatically to what was available.  Toby  And I guess part of your challenge is the short shelf life.  
**[0:20:56-0:20:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:20:56):**  David Yeah, that's right. Yes, just thinking through  this. And really what we realised is when you're in the milk processing side of things,  I mean, I left the farming side alone, because that wasn't really broken. The milk processing  was. So what we figured out is that 80% of the cost of milk processing is really where  is handling pasteurized milk. So it's when you take the milk out of the pasteurizer goes  
**[0:21:17-0:21:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:21:17):**  through the cooler goes into a holding tank or the bottle machine or whatever, because  you can't contaminate that milk, it has to be in a process room and you wear your your  hair nets and your your special boots and all those sorts of things that creates a lot  of cost. So I will double down on how do we fix that problem. And the second thing was  distribution, you know, delivering milk all around, doing lots of deliveries, lots of  
**[0:21:40-0:21:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:21:40):**  small deliveries everywhere was just not going to work. It wasn't scalable.  Toby So what's the new system that you came up with?  David So essentially, we've developed a milk pasteurizer  about the size of a dishwasher. Well, if you see a dishwasher and you chop it in half,  it's about the size of half a dishwasher. So it's around 120 litre tank. And the principle  
**[0:22:00-0:22:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:22:00):**  around that is that this tank is a pasteurizer when it's at the farm, it's a storage tank,  and it's also a milk dispenser all in one. So when this tank it's basically a tank with  the microcontroller on the lid on the top, and this fits this will attach to a processing  hub at the milking parlour and it's controlled by an iPad. It's basically milk processing  by numbers. So the idea is, is when we look at innovation, it's how do you get something  
**[0:22:28-0:22:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:22:28):**  that is an expert that you need experts to do and how do you make a lay person do it,  you know, like McDonald's. So how do we get someone to be a process engineer? Or how do  we get a farmer to be able to process milk without having to get all the training and  also without the risk of them contaminating the milk? So the first thing  So you talk about on your website, you talk about dairy democratized. And is that what  
**[0:22:50-0:22:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:22:50):**  you mean that it's something that suddenly it's a system which is accessible and usable  by by almost anybody?  Yeah, so I mean, I'm basically aiming that a 10 year old can operate this, you know,  anyone should be able to walk up to this hub with a tank and follow the prompts on the  iPad and they will be able to process milk in a way that there's no way that they can  
**[0:23:11-0:23:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:23:11):**  contaminate it and it only works one way. And what it's really doing is sending all  this data up to the cloud and we're ticking off checkboxes and allowing it to be fully  audited and then when critical periods like the heating step, the actual pasteurization  of the milk, when that takes place, our system takes over and carefully monitors it and double  checks it and all those sorts of things. And the human is only there to do the things that  
**[0:23:34-0:23:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:23:34):**  a computer can't do. And that's like load the tank in and open a tap or disconnect pipe,  those sorts of things. And the way we do that is that they fill this tank up with raw milk,  push the button, it pasteurizes, it cools down, and then they take that entire tank,  put it on the back of their truck and they drive it into town. So that tank now becomes  the final packaging. So there's no risk, there's no workload of the farmer having to pump the  
**[0:23:58-0:24:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:23:58):**  milk out, put it in bottle it and all those sorts of things. And there's no risk of them  contaminating the milk. So it's very low risk way of doing things. So from a farmer's perspective,  you fill these tanks up, push a button, pasteurizes, and then they look at our app and we tell  them where to deliver it. They'll put it on their truck, drive it into town to wherever  we've told them to deliver it to, pick up the empty tanks and replace the full ones.  
**[0:24:21-0:24:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:24:21):**  And then what happens is it's got a milk pump and a control system and payment system attached  to it as well. So customers can just buy straight from that tank or cafes can fill up straight  from that tank. What we've actually done is anyone with this tank can now become a milk  retailer. So that means that anyone, it's a little business in a box basically. So someone  can decide they're at number one Williams Street and they're going to do home delivery  
**[0:24:49-0:24:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:24:49):**  to all of Williams Street and maybe two streets down. So they can literally walk down the  door to door with this tank and filling up people's bottles. And because we've got a  digital payment system, the payment all gets done automatically. So there's no change of  hands of money or anything like that. And it splits the transaction. So the retailer  will get 50 cents to a dollar and then the farmer gets a dollar 20 and then I get my  
**[0:25:15-0:25:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:25:15):**  cut.  When you say it's a business in a box, it's something that you can use and that any other  farmers who want to employ a similar system, they can buy or lease one of these units from  you.  Well, no, it's more like Uber. Uber Eats, I suppose, where someone decides I'm going  
**[0:25:32-0:25:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:25:32):**  to, how do I explain it? Like you can be an Uber driver. Instead of doing that, you can  be a Happy Cow milk seller. So you can decide I would like to sell milk and they just download  the app. Then they become a node, number one Williams Street. And basically what we're  saying to that person is you become the salesperson, you figure out how to sell the milk. You know,  there'll be a bit more structure about that. But rather than the farmer having to control  
**[0:25:55-0:26:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:25:55):**  the brand, the farmer having to control the distribution and all the ordering and all  the invoicing and purchase ordering and things like that. We're saying the farmer, you produce  milk in this tank and then we're going to find people who want to sell milk and get  money. And we're really saying to those people, you just figure out how to sell it. So now  we've got this motivated sales team of people who have got their own little business and  
**[0:26:16-0:26:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:26:16):**  figuring out how to sell the most amount of milk they can. So they could be on the side  of the road, they could be at their house, it could be in their shop, it could be in  their cafe or it could be in a retail environment. There's all sorts of ways we'll do it. But  it changes the, we're sort of changing the way we think of it so that no one owns the  tanks. The tanks are sort of owned by us. No one really owns the system. They just plug  
**[0:26:36-0:26:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:26:36):**  in and use the system and use the transaction. So we're really a platform that matches farmers  to resellers and then matches consumers to resellers.  It's fantastically scalable. The only block on this is the number of people that want  to participate.  Yeah. So if you're in Chichester for instance, and you're a farmer there and you decide you  
**[0:26:59-0:27:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:26:59):**  want to do this, you probably get in touch with us. We would put you through a training  program online. The hub and the tanks would turn up one day after you pay us some money  and you plug that into the internet and that processing system now becomes fully compliant  with all UK food safety milk processing regulations. We would then while you're sitting up, figure  out who are going to be your resellers. Like we might say you need five cafes, you want  
**[0:27:24-0:27:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:27:24):**  a couple of, I don't know, whatever home delivery people and that will get you a thousand litres  a day that will sell your milk. That's enough milk for 50 cows or whatever. As soon as that  farmer's ready to produce, we've got resellers ready to go and they're all into the system  and we're basically matching the farmer with those resellers to make sure that no one's  running out of milk basically. We're telling the farmer ahead of time how much milk's needed  
**[0:27:48-0:27:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:27:48):**  and we're facilitating the transaction.  So Happy Cow Milk Co phase one was changing the production system but still trying to  use a more old fashioned, a more traditional model of distribution. And what you've done  here is you say, well, we got the production element, the production element's okay, we're  going to change the distribution. And so you've got this, as you call it, democratised system  
**[0:28:14-0:28:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:28:14):**  where anybody can choose to participate. I mean, which is really exciting and incredibly  innovative. I wonder about quality control, how you can make sure that the product that's  going to the consumers is high quality, is the same quality for everybody that's receiving  it.  You know, we're sort of thinking someone would become the designated milk person for their  
**[0:28:38-0:28:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:28:38):**  area and, you know, we'd want that to be a long term relationship and they build the  connection with the local customers and people can review them. It's like all online things.  You get an Uber review, was my driver any good? So we'll have that sort of system going.  For me, the far more important thing is that milk safety and the milk quality aspect that  you mentioned. So there's still all regulations require routine milk testing and the farmer  
**[0:29:03-0:29:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:29:03):**  will have to do that. So there'll be, we'll facilitate that. So part of the system is  today is milk testing day, take this raw sample, take this many processed milk samples, put  them in these containers and whatever and send them off to the lab. And then we're getting  those results at the same time as the farmer. So that's the manual side of things that I  don't think we'll ever get around. And that's really important. The second thing is because  
**[0:29:26-0:29:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:29:26):**  this is a decentralised sort of system, when you think of milk processing and you think  of an existing milk factory, you know, you'd have a massive factory, big tanks doing massive  batches. The milk goes out the door and then it goes to however many thousands or hundreds  of retailers, which then go to all these customers and the factory has no idea who's actually  purchased that milk. So if there's a problem and they have to recall the milk, it's a national  
**[0:29:51-0:29:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:29:51):**  catastrophe because you have to now, I will say how we do it in New Zealand, you have  to form the media, it all becomes on the front page, don't drink this milk, this batch number  is this, if you've got this, return it and all those sorts of things. That's because  you've got the centralised system, one batch going to lots of places. We've got one little  farmer doing a little batch of milk, thousand litres a day, probably going to 1500 customers.  
**[0:30:13-0:30:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:30:13):**  If there's something wrong with that milk, we've got the email address, our system knows  exactly who's purchased that milk, we can immediately email them or text them and say  don't drink that milk and sort of quarantine the issue. And that changes the kind of the  way you look at milk processing in that so much of the regulation you have in place,  that processes put in place is there as a, because the downside of having a bad batch  
**[0:30:38-0:30:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:30:38):**  go out is so enormously catastrophic that milk processing becomes so expensive. But  having said that, I don't want to make that sound like, oh, we can be a bit more blase  about processing milk.  And the unit that you have developed, that's something that you've invented yourself, that  you've adapted from other ideas, is that correct?  
**[0:31:00-0:31:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:31:00):**  Yeah, so it's just funny how to get to this point, I borrowed my cousin's cheese bat,  it was my first pasteuriser, a 200 litre cheese bat, and I worked out how that worked. And  then I bought a tank off eBay and a 2000 litre tank, and that was my second pasteuriser.  And we basically built that. And by doing that and getting it through the regulators,  I understood the processes of milk processing. And now I was able to, well, it's a new insight  
**[0:31:29-0:31:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:31:29):**  and think about how we could do this and how we can build these pasteurisers differently.  So yeah, we've built it, we've got custom electronics being developed at the moment  and the COVID, like everyone, it's all affecting the way we can develop things. We've got a  little team of coders who are beavering away writing the code to make all this work. And  yeah, it's built from the ground up.  
**[0:31:52-0:31:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:31:52):**  And you were planning to launch at the start of April 2020. That's been delayed. When are  you planning to launch now?  Well, we'll start up again in the first of June is the plan. And we'll just test out  what's what we've got. And we'll just figure out we'll start with home delivery, and just  test our assumptions and just make sure what we thought was going to work is going to work.  
**[0:32:13-0:32:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:32:13):**  And basically, we just need to make sure that the software and the hardware is just bulletproof  and just, you know, the payment system always works. The, you know, the pump always distributes  the right amount and those sorts of things. Once we've got all that sort of stuff, absolutely  solid, then we will raise some more capital and look to scale around the world.  And maybe in a year's time, we can come back to you and just see how that that process  
**[0:32:37-0:32:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:32:37):**  has gone. Because what what strikes me, Glenn is that, you know, often on this podcast,  when we're talking about regenerative agriculture, or just in the last episode, we were talking  about a sheep lameness five point plan. And, and what strikes me in all of this is that  it's, it's about how to take a holistic approach to to systems. That's what allows change.  And so this was what you were finding that, that just looking at the production and relying  
**[0:33:09-0:33:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:33:09):**  on an old fashioned distribution model didn't work. And so the way that you you're expecting  to make it work is by innovating that front end that distribution system as well. And  it sounds like you know, you potentially you've, you've got a system where the productions  going to work in the way that it was working before, you've got a new system which has  been demonstrated, you know, through Uber and through other decentralized economic models.  
**[0:33:38-0:33:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:33:38):**  And if that can work for milk as well, and and it sounds like there's no reason why it  shouldn't, you know, given a fair wind, that could be really exciting, really disrupting.  And you know, and potentially a really big change, not just for you in Christchurch,  or New Zealand, but potentially around the world.  Oh, absolutely. And while there's a lot of technology and everything to make that happen,  
**[0:34:01-0:34:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:34:01):**  essentially, the whole goal right from the start was how do we get that farm local farmer  to supply their local market. And it's taken me eight years to get here, I didn't think  it was gonna be this difficult. But if you think of, I think you kind of actually have  to build the whole system from the ground up, you can't just do one little bit. And  I think of IKEA a lot of the way they do it, they've sort of said, you know, you can have  
**[0:34:21-0:34:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:34:21):**  really cheap furniture that looks really good, but you have to put it together yourself.  And we're kind of saying that, well, you can do that we can have happy cows to the environment,  but you have to bottle it yourself, basically. But so there's one thing but in order for  IKEA to actually deliver that they have to they make their own shipboard, they design  their own products, they ship their own products, they retail their own products, the whole  
**[0:34:43-0:34:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:34:43):**  retail system is dictated to the customer, the only way they can go and all these things  especially designed so that they can get to that final product. So what we've kind of  had to do is go through that process. But the vision is, is that we don't put production  parameters in place. I mean, we will have basic ones in place. But because everyone  in the world is so different, what we really want is those local customers to be directly  
**[0:35:06-0:35:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:35:06):**  in contact with their farmers. So if you're in Chichester, for instance, and you've got  your bottle of milk, and you see arts from Frank and Karen, they can directly talk to  them. And then if they've got questions, they ask in the farmer directly. So then when they  give me feedback, like the cow and calf thing that I was getting, it made me makes me take  notice because I'm getting all these emails or Facebook messages from people telling me  
**[0:35:27-0:35:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:35:27):**  this so it's it's alert, it's registering in my brain. So we want kind of use the public  as the the brand enforces or the people are going to drive the standards that we do on  the farm. Works the other way because the public can be completely unreasonable and  not understand and ignorant. So what it does is actually creates a dialogue. And when someone  knows the farmer, and they sort of feel like they're friends with them, the farmer can  
**[0:35:54-0:35:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:35:54):**  say, well, actually, you know, we're having a hard time because of this or we want issue  want to re-report in what's happening on the farm. So is the farm actually making money?  You know, they've had a drought, they've got no, they've got no grass, you know, now the  cost of production has gone up, we sort of want, it's a fine line, we don't quite know where  it is. But this principle of the customer, if they're interested, they're able to know  
**[0:36:15-0:36:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:36:15):**  who the farmer is a little bit better. And when they have this sort of friendship model,  they're less likely to be so black and white in their expectations.  That was Glenn Herrod, preparing to launch Happy Cow Milk Code 2.0 and describing his  innovative and disruptive approach not only to dairy production, but to milk distribution  as well. If you've enjoyed listening, please come back and listen to more. Tell your friends,  
**[0:36:43-0:36:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Happy-Cow-Milk-Co--New-Zealand-edbp54#t=0:36:43):**  like us, review us and share our links. Farmgate is a partnership project for Farmwell and  FAI Farms. And you can join the conversation on Twitter by searching for Farmgate podcast.  I've been Finn LoKerstain. Bye for now.  