### Farm Gate  (2020-58-01)
**[0:00:00-0:00:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to Farmgate, I'm Finnlow Costayne. Despite near universal support for laws to  restrict lower quality food imports into the UK, the government rejected amendments to  the agriculture bill that would have protected farmers and citizens. Instead, in a bid to  reassure the public on food standards, a trade and agriculture commission was established  by the Department of International Trade, the DIT. Well, this created an outcry, particularly  
**[0:00:32-0:00:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:00:32):**  amongst NGOs, because the commission was short-term, non-statutory and its membership was largely  devoid of independent environmental or farm animal welfare expertise. Government reacted  again and the trade and agriculture commission has now been put on a statutory basis for  three years, but questions remain about its membership and potential effectiveness. Moreover,  there's concern that Britain is already on the back foot, that by default as we leave  
**[0:00:59-0:01:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:00:59):**  the EU, our trade policy will be reactive rather than proactive and progressive. Tom  West is the UK environment lead at ClientEarth and Angela Francis is WWF, UK's chief advisor  on economics and economic development. I met them following an environmental roundtable  hosted by the commission and I started by asking Angela Francis what she thought the  impact of future trade deals would be on agricultural land use reform in the UK.  
**[0:01:29-0:01:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:01:29):**  It's actually been really heartening to see in the one area that the UK can very obviously  go beyond the EU in reforming agricultural policy, it's taken the bit between its teeth,  it's set out a public money for public goods framework for the agriculture bill. We also  have a coming environment bill which sets out a due diligence framework for eliminating  deforestation from the UK supply chains, but trade has got an enormously important part  
**[0:01:54-0:01:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:01:54):**  to play in this too and standards are key to that. It's really interesting that the  government's decided not to support amendments or make its own changes to legislation because  there's almost universal support, as you say, across farmers groups and civil society groups,  but then also the surveys that we have done and that which have done show 92 to 93% of  the public want to protect food and farming standards. I think there's a great quote from  
**[0:02:20-0:02:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:02:20):**  George Freeman, a Conservative MP who's not known for being a particular rebel, he said  that DIT have moved their position on this and they were first saying that we didn't  need to do anything more on standards because they were already in law. Then they said that  those standards bind our hands in negotiations, which implies they do want to change them.  Then they said that the WTO won't let us keep the standards we've got, so they're also suggesting  
**[0:02:42-0:02:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:02:42):**  they're going to change. Then they've also said there's nothing wrong with the food that's  currently banned, so chlorinated chicken is safe to eat, so have some for dinner tonight,  that sort of thing, which doesn't give you confidence. Then finally, we've had a statement  from the DIT that says that low standard food is the price we pay for a US trade deal and  then have tried to talk about other ways that they would deal with low standard food through  
**[0:03:03-0:03:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:03:03):**  pricing or labelling and all of these other inadequate replacements for those food stuffs  being banned. So it is really confusing and I think it's confusing because DIT have been  confused. I think if we got Baze, Defra and DIT around the table to say what are we actually  trying to achieve, we'd get a lot better position than we have at the moment where we're actually  going to have those conversations over a negotiating table with Australia, New Zealand and Canada  
**[0:03:26-0:03:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:03:26):**  before we've got our own story straight.  So, just to help with the acronyms there for international listeners, we're talking about  the inconsistency between the Department for International Trade, Business Energy and Industrial  Strategy and Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. That's Defra, Baze and  DIT. But despite the inconsistencies that exist, Tom, and despite the fact that we have  
**[0:03:50-0:03:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:03:50):**  concerns about the way that the Trade and Agriculture Commission has been constituted,  what is it do you think, what is it that you hope the commission will achieve?  Well, I think what the commission could do is it provides a forum where this conversation  around how the UK should be designing its approach to imports and its approach to trade  and agriculture can happen. These things are not straightforward. They are very complicated.  
**[0:04:14-0:04:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:04:14):**  They can't just be sort of worked out overnight and then done. And so creating a forum for  those conversations to take place, not just now but ongoing into the future, I mean, that's  certainly helpful. We've seen in the Ag bill that the amendments being proposed are being  rejected by the government. And I think what we need instead is we need something which  is going, not necessarily, but we need commitments in law, of course. But as well as these commitments,  
**[0:04:35-0:04:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:04:35):**  we also need to find forums where the conversation can take place and move forward. But that  needs wider involvement of other people, that needs transparency, that needs long term mandates.  And one of the things that we're told, one of the concerns that people within government  have had, and I can remember a conversation actually with George Eustace going back maybe  four years ago where he was saying this, that the WTO is some sort of a big bad wolf, that  
**[0:04:57-0:05:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:04:57):**  it won't allow us to kind of, you know, impose standards on the rest of the world. And I've  never been comfortable with that analysis of where the WTO is. Is he right?  I don't think that's quite right. And client Earth brought out a report looking into this  matter, looking into how import restrictions can be made compatible with existing international  trade rules. Now, the first thing to say is, look, there is need and scope for these overarching  
**[0:05:21-0:05:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:05:21):**  WTO rules to be reformed. The General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs first negotiated and  agreed back in the 1940s. It's outdated. It does contain exemptions which allow countries  to put in place measures for environmental reasons, but it can be improved in order to  be clear that that includes matters to protect the global commons, matters to combat climate  change. And we set out recommendations to this effect in our report, ways in which FTAs  
**[0:05:46-0:05:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:05:46):**  can modernise. And some FTAs already do that to some extent, but there's space there.  But the other really important issue, I think, is the question as to whether import restrictions  or what import restrictions are permissible under WTO rules. And what the research in  our report shows is that how the WTO panels look at this is they look at things on a case-by-case  basis. They look at each thing individually and say, what is the measure here aiming to  
**[0:06:08-0:06:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:06:08):**  do? Is it aiming to meet a legitimate environmental objective? If it is, then that's a very good  start. It also, in cases dealing with asbestos, dealing with frozen chickens, there's some  famous cases around shrimp and tuna. And it says, what's the measure that's being attempted  to be achieved here? And are the measures being taken justifiable and proportionate  in relation to those? So if the UK wanted to, we say there are some  
**[0:06:33-0:06:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:06:33):**  footholds there. There are some ways that the UK could say, hang on, what we're trying  to do here, it's not just domestic protectionism. We want to protect the environment. We want  to take important measures to meet our environmental commitments, our domestic ones, net zero,  environmental coming up, our global international commitments too, CBD COP coming up, Paris  agreement of course. And we need to put in place measures which will allow us to meet  
**[0:06:54-0:07:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:06:54):**  those. And by doing that, and by being progressive and being bold politically at the WTO, there's  some space here to do things better. And you mentioned there, Tom, the fact that  the UK now has a seat at the WTO. Of course, that's as a result of our leaving the European  Union. The European Union had the seat at the table before that. So there is an opportunity  for us to use that seat to help to reform and improve the way that the WTO approaches  
**[0:07:21-0:07:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:07:21):**  sustainability. But Angela, at the commission roundtable,  you mentioned the way in which it's not just UK versus US. We tend to think about the UK  as having higher standards. We don't want to have chlorinated chicken. We don't want  hormone reared beef. But you mentioned US fisheries and the way that the WTO has approached  a bill out of the US. I think it was the Marine Mammals Protection Act and the way that they've  
**[0:07:45-0:07:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:07:45):**  responded to that.  That's right. We can look at bits of the US agriculture system and say they aren't particularly  progressive on climate or nature. But then in other bits of food production, seafood,  the US has been a leader in thinking about how it wants to change seafood production  to protect marine mammals. So this Marine Mammal Protection Act is a piece of domestic  
**[0:08:07-0:08:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:08:07):**  legislation which the US passed, but it's now starting to apply it to imports of seafood.  So it requires countries that want to export seafood into the US to make provisions for  how they're going to protect marine mammals in their fisheries. And that requirement starts  raising the standards all over the world and really dealing with damaging issues for biodiversity  from bad fishing practices. And the US have done that in exactly the way that Tom just  
**[0:08:33-0:08:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:08:33):**  described, in a way that's non-discriminatory, that sets out a legitimate environmental objective.  It applies it equally to importers and to home producers. And that's the kind of things,  the kind of model that the UK could be looking at for its agricultural policy. Because we  have a Climate Change Act, because we have a nature restoration framework in the 25-year  environment plan, and because we have public money for public goods, we can say very legitimately  
**[0:08:58-0:09:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:08:58):**  that we are trying to move agriculture onto a sustainable footing to protect climate and  to protect nature. And we are going to require countries that want to export agricultural  commodities to the UK to do something to show that they are playing the same game. Because  we know that if we raise production standards for UK farmers, but don't do anything on imports,  all that we do is just offshore our environmental impact somewhere else. And UK farmers are  
**[0:09:21-0:09:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:09:21):**  in a fantastic position to be leading on this. It's something that I think not only have  we got the policy framework for, but we've got the expertise and the academic research  support that means that we can really deal with farming in a very different way and lead  the way.  So Tom, as our legal expert here from ClientEarth, just to be clear, this was the WTO explicitly  
**[0:09:43-0:09:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:09:43):**  allowing a member state, in this case the USA, to restrict trade based on ethical and  environmental policies at home.  So the Marine Mammal Protection Act, which I'm just talking about, this is the US putting  in place a domestic process to make sure that it's important, meeting its requirements.  But in many cases for the WTO, they have looked at measures that are put in place and the  
**[0:10:06-0:10:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:10:06):**  WTO has in place through Article 20 of the GATT, these public policy exemptions, which  clearly give space to members to put in place measures which are designed to, amongst other  things, protect the environment. And as I said, those do need updating. It would be  better if those were clearer about what sorts of measures are allowable, under what circumstances,  bringing those up to date to the 21st century.  
**[0:10:29-0:10:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:10:29):**  I mean, that's really what it's about. It's about saying, obviously our understanding  of what's needed from an environmental point of view has advanced enormously in the last,  what is it, 60, 70 years. So it's about bringing it up to date, while of course also working  within that existing framework to make that case, both politically and legally, that it  must be possible for states to take measures which are well designed and which are there  
**[0:10:50-0:10:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:10:50):**  to protect the environment and public health.  I suspect that there's hardly a person who, you know, is vaguely aware of the news that  hasn't come across the idea of chlorinated chicken and hormone-reared beef. These are  the big sort of ticket things that the people are concerned about being brought into the  UK. What other sorts of things could get in under the radar, even if the government is  
**[0:11:10-0:11:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:11:10):**  true to its commitment and doesn't let in chlorinated chicken?  Yeah, there's lots of standards that are set out in things called statutory instruments,  which have appendices with thousands of lists of chemicals, residue levels, rules on antibiotics  in meat, rules on milk quality, which sit in tables that the UK has transferred over  from EU law into UK law. And those food standards apply equally to food produced in the UK and  
**[0:11:37-0:11:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:11:37):**  food that we import. So it's not just these iconic issues. It's a whole set of things  around our food standards. And at the moment, the way they sit in law is they can be changed  by a minister at the stroke of a pen with no requirement for any parliamentary discussion  about the change. And sitting behind all of these decisions is an approach that the UK  takes to how it wants to protect human health and how it wants to protect animal welfare,  
**[0:12:03-0:12:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:12:03):**  which we have inherited from the EU and applied for the last 30, 40 years, which is called  the precautionary principle. So the UK takes an approach that if something is being given  to humans to eat or used in animal welfare, it is up to the producer to produce to prove  that is a safe system, not for the consumer to ingest it for 20 years and then have to  fight a court case to prove that it's bad for you. And that approach is the one we're  
**[0:12:28-0:12:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:12:28):**  used to. Other countries have different approaches, which means that they use chemicals that we  don't use and have systems that we don't we don't have in the UK. If you change your trade  rules and accept what is sometimes called, I think wrongly, a science based approach  to regulatory standards, it's not about each standard changing, it's about changing your  whole principle to law. And so even though you might not want to allow in chlorinated  
**[0:12:53-0:12:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:12:53):**  chicken or hormone beef, if you start accepting the principle that you have to prove something's  bad before you can ban it, as opposed to prove it safe before you allow people to eat it,  then suddenly you'll find yourself not being able to stop those products coming into the  country.  Well, there's a huge amount of complexity that you're referring to there, you know,  
**[0:13:10-0:13:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:13:10):**  within these statutory instruments and and so on. And again, it reminds me of, of, you  know, the the incredible learning curve that the UK has to be on. And we talk about, you  know, trade deals often taking 10, 15, even more years to be developed. And we're trying  to do this at an absolute sprint.  What I'm really concerned about is that we sign trade agreements, which they might not  
**[0:13:33-0:13:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:13:33):**  themselves change the rules directly, that would be quite unusual for a trade agreement  to do. But what they do is they create mechanisms and processes which allow the changing of  these rules through undemocratic and untransparent ways. So putting in place relatively harmless  sounding mechanisms, things like regulatory cooperation, we like cooperation, don't think  we should do that, or ways to assess equivalence. But if in practice, those are done behind  
**[0:13:55-0:14:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:13:55):**  closed doors reliant largely on trade experts or civil servants or trade lawyers not involving  wider stakeholders, both from business, but but also, of course, hugely importantly, from  civil society, to make sure that the public's interests are being represented. That may  put in place changes which where things can be made without the right transparency without  the right scrutiny. And then we end up in a situation where things are being changed  
**[0:14:19-0:14:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:14:19):**  without really equals proper consent. And I think for me, that really ties in to some  to wider problems that we're seeing, which which goes back to some of the issues we're  talking about earlier, which is that the government's quite happy to talk the talk and a lot of  this talk is good and positive. But when it comes to walking to the war, when it comes  to really putting that stuff down in law, it's falling short. Now, as lawyers, you know,  
**[0:14:40-0:14:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:14:40):**  of course, we always think it's sensible to have things in law. That's not just because  we like the law. That's because by putting things down in a legal framework, you get  certainty, you get clarity, and you get accountability so that everyone knows the rules of playing  to and if someone whoever that might be thinks that they're not being lived up to, there  are routes in place for people to challenge that. So all of that stuff is really, really  
**[0:15:01-0:15:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:15:01):**  important. At the moment, we're just not we're just not seeing those.  I think, you know, if you sort of take this from a different perspective, and you think  about it from the government's point of view, then it's easy to understand why they don't  want to have their hands tied behind their back when they're approaching these, these  new free trade deals, because there is going to be a certain amount of haggling that takes  
**[0:15:19-0:15:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:15:19):**  place presumably, you know, behind these closed doors, where we don't quite know what's going  on. Is it helpful in that circumstance where you are haggling over something, albeit over  a number of months or even years to have red lines that you can go in there from the outset  and say, this is our red line, this isn't going to shift, this is set in UK law, or  is it better to have that flexibility? Our view, I think, and it's been played out  
**[0:15:45-0:15:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:15:45):**  by the way the US negativators work and the European negotiators work is it's much better  to go with your red lines. So the US take their trade negotiating mandates through Congress,  and then when they're sitting at the table and being pushed on an issue they don't want  to be pushed on, they can say, I can't go any further, this is the mandate I have from  Congress. Similarly, the EU take their negotiating rules through, through Parliament, that has  
**[0:16:07-0:16:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:16:07):**  led them in deals with the US when they're discussing them and they haven't got a deal  with the US yet, it's been been impossible to get it. They have gone into that deal saying,  we aren't even having an agriculture chapter, we're not discussing agriculture with you.  There are so many problems with us trying to cooperate around regulation for agriculture,  our approach is so fundamentally different to ours, that we think it's easier just not  
**[0:16:28-0:16:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:16:28):**  to discuss it. And so the negotiations that happened when they happened didn't even discuss  agriculture. So the two biggest trading nations go in, if you want to call it with their hands  bound, they go in with their hands bound, and that actually helps them not talk about  the things they don't want to talk about. And I think about this not as much about who's  got power, but it's about having clarity and coherence about what are you trying to achieve  
**[0:16:50-0:16:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:16:50):**  in these in these negotiations. And for us, it should be about trying to marry our economic  objectives and our and our environmental objectives, we're trying to work out how we develop the  industries we need to develop that are going to survive and succeed in you know, the next  50 years, help us meet our net zero commitments help us meet our nature restoration commitments.  And I would like somebody to tell me how they think a trade deal that undermines our standards  
**[0:17:16-0:17:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:17:16):**  is in any way useful first step to that. All of those things are true. And then the other  thing I think we need to remember is a US trade deal is marginal in terms of its economic  benefits. So the government's own analysis has said that a trade deal with the US the  most liberal, the most kind of concession, the most kind of deep trade agreement you  could get would be worth naught point one 6% to GDP by 2035. So it would take 15 years  
**[0:17:43-0:17:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:17:43):**  to add less than half a percent to GDP. So that's an enormous risk to take for such a  marginal benefit. And I think it's much more important for us to think about not the number  of deals we try and do and the UK is putting itself under enormous pressure to do deals  with the US, Australia, New Zealand, all at the same time, rather than thinking about  how many we do, we need to think about assessing these deals on the contribution they make  
**[0:18:07-0:18:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:18:07):**  to a green recovery and contribution they make to the industry we're trying to build  because I do believe that trade can help us innovate and it can help us compete, but only  if we do it in a way that's consistent with what we're trying to achieve in those industries,  not over a negotiating table with what your opposite party wants to achieve.  Okay, so let's let's move on to that. We've looked at this from quite a sort of defensive  
**[0:18:27-0:18:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:18:27):**  starting point. We've looked at standards, we've looked at law, we've looked at where  we perhaps distrust the government to deliver particular things. We look at it from a sort  of an alternate viewpoint. What do we think government policy should be in terms of approaching  these trade deals? How should we be approaching them as we go forward in order to make sure  that our own values, our own standards are met, but also that we're beginning to export  
**[0:18:52-0:18:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:18:52):**  those elsewhere around the world?  Well, I think a really important starting point that the UK needs to have in its trade  policy, its trade negotiations, is being clear that it will not, it'll put its environmental  and climate commitments first, that those are the starting points, that that's what  the UK side up to. And that's putting them first politically, but also when necessary,  
**[0:19:13-0:19:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:19:13):**  putting them first legally, so that if there's any conflict between rules, people might need  to have or agree to on trade, they'll say, but yeah, but actually, it's not just environment,  of course, there's other hugely important matters on human rights, humanitarian issues,  which would also fit in that sort of wider public interest category of issues which should  come first, so that when there's any conflict, we would know where we'd stand. It's also,  
**[0:19:33-0:19:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:19:33):**  I think, a matter of who we want to do business with. And this comes back really to what Andrew's  talking about in terms of getting our positions and our red lines clear and upfront and saying  that that's who we want to be as a country, that's the sort of future we see for ourselves,  who's with us. And if you're pointing in roughly the same direction, thinking the same sorts  of things, then let's have this, you know, productive conversation about how we do, you  
**[0:19:56-0:20:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:19:56):**  know, to develop better technology, to tackle climate change, to farm in more sustainable  ways, whatever it might be. And that's a much more productive conversation than one which  is simply trying to, as you say, be defensive against the sort of erosion of our current  standards. Yeah, we're very disappointed, I suppose, to be having a conversation where  we're constantly having to talk about not going backwards, when we actually could be  
**[0:20:19-0:20:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:20:19):**  having a conversation about how the UK goes forwards. We think the UK's agricultural policy  has been some of the most revolutionary and leading we've seen anywhere in the world.  And we absolutely need to have some countries starting to do that. So food and farming system  is responsible for 30% of the world's emissions. It's responsible for 70% of terrestrial  biodiversity loss and 50% of freshwater biodiversity loss. Now that is an industry that  
**[0:20:44-0:20:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:20:44):**  needs big changes. And the industry itself knows that. So as well as those being kind of the  external factors, the industry itself is experiencing degraded land, which is costing it  up to 10% of global GDP. Pollinator loss, so the loss of bees and other pollinators, is impacting  production and crop levels losses about five to 8% a year that these things are affecting the  industry and is already starting to move. And it wants to be able to go further in saying,  
**[0:21:11-0:21:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:21:11):**  how do we farm differently and you know much more about the agro-ecological methods that are being  being looked at than I do. But the industry also knows it is impossible to invest and innovate  in how you do things differently if you're constantly being undercut by countries that  haven't got there yet. So I firmly believe that this is the direction agriculture is going to go,  but it's probably going in a kind of a slightly lumpy way where some countries will get it before  
**[0:21:35-0:21:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:21:35):**  others. And if at the same time as you start to say, let's improve our standards of production  and invite farmers to try and work out how they can produce food in ways that don't damage nature  and can actually contribute to greater carbon sinks from our landscapes, if you invite them  to do that at the same time as saying, oh, by the way, you're going to have to compete with  these guys who aren't doing it at all, you're not doing anything. And these 10 years are so  
**[0:21:58-0:22:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:21:58):**  important. And we just don't have time to be talking about the problems of going backwards  when we should be going forwards. We're talking about a joined up government approach, really,  aren't we? And as you say, we've been making substantial progress through the agriculture bill  and potentially through the environmental land management scheme in terms of actually getting  monies to farmers to deliver those public goods. But then also on the other side, we need this  
**[0:22:20-0:22:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:22:20):**  trade policy to be set in a way that supports farmers and producers as they are transitioning.  I wonder if there are other things if we're thinking about joined up government policy,  you mentioned labelling, I think earlier, Angela, what else is there that government  should be looking at between trade policy on one hand and agriculture policy at government  level on the other? What are the things in between that the government could and should be doing?  
**[0:22:45-0:22:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:22:45):**  So I think what we've got, I suppose, is an industrial policy that's started in the farming  space. We don't often think about industrial policy for farming, but it's really important  that you design things. So the example I gave at the roundtable was the example of sow stalls.  When the UK decided to ban sow stalls, you know, quite rightly, it didn't do anything to say about  what type of meat it would import. So it still imported those meats. And what happened was we  
**[0:23:08-0:23:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:23:08):**  just ended up importing a lot more pork from other bits of Europe, which still had these systems.  And if we're trying to think about these kind of 21st century challenges, we need to start thinking  about import standards as one part of it. But then what other things have we got in the mix? And  I would say labelling and maybe tariffs come in, rather than stopping the stuff at the bottom,  they start coming in in ways that you can encourage the best stuff. So in labelling,  
**[0:23:32-0:23:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:23:32):**  which government seems to always talk about as an alternative to standards, and we can talk about  all the reasons we think that doesn't work. But one of the reasons is so little of our food is  actually labelled. We eat 60% of our food in restaurants and cafes and out and about and we  don't have labels and it's already processed, so you can't see what's in it. So that is probably  something that's not going to change most food. But if you had labelling systems or reduced tariffs  
**[0:23:58-0:24:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:23:58):**  for the very, very best quality food, you were giving an extra incentive to the few customers  who cared, you start to create routes and increased preference for those foods. I think that's a good  place for it to sit. It just doesn't sit at the bottom and replace something like a standard.  What we're looking at here is the need for an array, an arsenal of different tools,  which we needed for different purposes. The idea that there's the panacea, the one size fits all.  
**[0:24:20-0:24:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:24:20):**  There's never one, is there? It doesn't matter where you're looking, it never exists.  So in particular, in this space, I think it's important to, as Angela says, get that distinction  between what's the really bad stuff that we need to stop and what's the good stuff we need to  encourage, and also how that may differ between domestic production standards and what we require  of our domestic producers versus what we require of our imports, bearing in mind the different  
**[0:24:42-0:24:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:24:42):**  ecological, political, socioeconomic circumstances that exist around the world, but making sure  those are connected. So again, that's back to your point, Pinna, about making sure things are  connected so that if we see changes in one area, that that makes sense and speaks to changes  elsewhere. Sort of related, but also just wanted to talk about the possibility of making improvements  in public procurement as well, and where there may be knock-on effects and value there. And again,  
**[0:25:06-0:25:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:25:06):**  this comes back to joined up thinking across governments and walking the walk as well,  and that could potentially have a value impact too. It's an excellent point, because I think  there's possibilities to go higher in public procurement. UK government doesn't have particularly  high environmental standards yet for its catering and food budgets, but one of the places we're also  concerned that you can drop further down is in school or hospital or prison budgets, where  
**[0:25:34-0:25:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:25:34):**  finance is important and budgets are often squeezed, that when, if a food stuff ends up  coming into the UK, labelled or not labelled, there'll be extreme pressure for some of those  volume buyers to end up buying foods which have these lower standard things in it, and then you  don't get a choice, because if your relative is in hospital, that's what they're going to be eating.  If your child is having their school dinner, that's what they're going to be eating, and you  
**[0:25:55-0:25:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:25:55):**  don't get a choice over it. So I think that's where, you know, labelling fits in alongside  lots of other things, and standards are actually incredibly important for enabling people not to  worry. The interesting evidence that the Witch found is that everybody cares about food standards  and nobody wants food standards to go down. We talked about that at the top, but when they did  a socio-economic breakdown, the poorer you are, the more likely you are to care about standards,  
**[0:26:17-0:26:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:26:17):**  and I think that's kind of connected to the fact that you know that you're more likely to be at  risk, because at the moment you don't have to worry. UK's food standards are pretty good,  and hopefully they improve in quality and in environmental impact. Everybody cares about  these things, but not everybody's got the time or the budget to choose something very special,  but knowing that there's actually a really, really good flaw and you can't go below that,  
**[0:26:41-0:26:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:26:41):**  makes a lot of people feel a lot more comfortable about the food they're putting on their plates.  We're coming to an end, and I just want to ask this sort of last question really as an  opportunity to wrap up your views on, I guess, you know, a lot of what we've talked about today.  Can we become global leaders? What I would say is, the question is, can we be environmentally  bold? And the answer to that question is definitely yes. The UK definitely can, if it wants,  
**[0:27:05-0:27:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:27:05):**  stand up and say we're going to do these things differently, we're going to meet our environmental  and our SDG commitments. Now, part of doing that is, I think, taking a bit of a step back and  saying, well, what's trade for? Why do we want to increase trade, or why do we want to do trade  deals? What's the point of it? And sure, the point of it has got to be, well, to make people's lives  better. It's got to be about making people's lives better, whether that's here in the UK or  
**[0:27:26-0:27:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:27:26):**  elsewhere too, and then say, well, how do we do that? And clearly doing that in a way which is  just and which meets our environmental commitments, that's got to be not just a part of it, but that's  got to be central to it. At the moment, sometimes it feels like we're doing trade deals because  we're doing trade deals because that's the thing we need to be doing. But say, well, why? What's  the value? What should we be getting out of those and how that would then inform our approach to  
**[0:27:47-0:27:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:27:47):**  them? I totally agree with that. I mean, the reason that so many environmental groups, I think,  have got so exercised by the approach to trade is because the UK is actually in an amazing place to  lead on food and farming. We have Europe does lots of things very well, but it hasn't done farming  particularly better than anybody else. The CAP system wasn't great. The one thing we've done  is come out and change that into something that's a framework for farming that's going to support  
**[0:28:14-0:28:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:28:14):**  agricultural, sustainable agricultural production. That is an enormous potential win for the UK and  for the world. And so to have that undermined by our trade policy, which isn't looking at how it  reinforces that commitment to change our production and our consumption is just a wasted  opportunity for us and for the rest of the world. And I think in a COP year, when the UK has got the  eyes of the world on it after Brexit, and having had the Climate Change Act, for us not to say that  
**[0:28:40-0:28:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:28:40):**  we're putting environments and how we change our economy to deliver on our environmental goals,  how we don't put that at the centre of our trade policy, I think will knock everybody's confidence,  to be honest. And I think we need to step up, be much more confident, much more ambitious.  It is possible and we can do it. Even from this point, I still believe we can do it.  World Finance and so I will. That's all we have time for. I'd like to thank my guests Tom West,  
**[0:29:06-0:29:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-a-progressive-UK-trade-policy-possible-en7ant#t=0:29:06):**  the UK Environment Lead for Clyde Earth, and Angela Francis, WWF, UK's Chief Advisor on  Economics and Economic Development. If you've enjoyed listening, please come back and listen  to more. Tell your friends, like us, review us, and share our links. Farmgate is a partnership  project for Farmwell and FAI Farms. We're funded by San Calpa, and you can join the  conversation on Twitter by searching for Farmgate Podcast. I've been Finn low Costain, bye for now.  