### Farm Gate  (2020-31-04)
**[0:00:00-0:00:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:00:00):**  Hello. On Farmgate today, prompted by a recent blog by Tara Garnett from FCRN, the Food and  Climate Research Network, I'm asking the question, has vegan become a dirty word?  It seems pretty crazy that we've reached the stage where this question is even formulated,  let alone asked. But with food having become central to the mission to avert the global  climate crisis, it seems that people's personal choices about what they eat have become a  
**[0:00:31-0:00:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:00:31):**  central battleground. Do you think that you're a better person because you're a vegan? Or  because you only eat meat from grass-fed livestock? Or perhaps because you refuse to eat anything  that's been produced further than 20 miles away? Well, today I'm going to chew the  fat – or suck the soya curd, if you prefer – with two people who care passionately  about the impacts of the food they eat.  
**[0:00:53-0:00:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:00:53):**  Later in the programme, I'll speak to Caroline Grindrod, a regenerative meat producer from  Cumbria. But first of all, let's hear from Dr Tara Garnett from FCRN. And following on  from her blog, I asked her, has vegan become a dirty word?  I don't think we're at a stage where vegan is a dirty word within the kind of public  consciousness. But within some within the environmental community, I do sense this dis-ease  
**[0:01:22-0:01:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:01:22):**  with the word, because in their minds, it has become aligned with a particular worldview,  which represents everything that they reject. And I think that worldview is seen as big  business, alienation from the natural world, processed food, food without soul, as it were.  And I think that was what I was trying to explore in my blog, because I think that's  a very caricatured position of veganism, because it in itself is a much more complex concept,  
**[0:02:01-0:02:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:02:01):**  and people eat for lots and lots of very complex reasons. I think there is some, it has become,  the lifestyle of veganism has become problematic for some environmentalists today.  When you say that, and yet many eco omnivores, if you like, and green vegans, I think they  kind of have the same goals, really, you know, we're trying to solve environmental problems.  So I wonder, and I think you're quite right, that there is a competition of ideas, you  
**[0:02:35-0:02:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:02:35):**  know, that's taking place, which can be quite combative. And why do you think that is? Why  is it combative?  So I think it's really, really complex. Now, I think one of the, what it hinges on, to  an extent, is how we see our relationship with the natural world. And that's the first  thing. And I think the second thing is that what is the counterfactual that people fear?  
**[0:03:02-0:03:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:03:02):**  And to explain that, what I think some of the veganism posits itself, that the kind  of what it sees as the opposite of veganism is perhaps a world in which everyone carries  on eating meat much as we do today, much as trends suggest we're doing more of, which  is rising consumption of large quantities of industrially produced, intensively produced  food.  
**[0:03:33-0:03:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:03:33):**  I don't think anybody would disagree within the environmental movement, at least that  model simply isn't viable. Business as usual isn't an option.  Their view is, I think, that this is the future that they fear, and therefore veganism represents  a better way forward. I think there's another view. I think there are also people, perhaps  not within the very close-knit environmental community, but who see this rising animal  
**[0:04:08-0:04:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:04:08):**  consumption, this rising demand for animal consumption, and say, well, look, we can't  actually do anything about this demand because, like, the laws of supply and demand are fixed  by God, and therefore we need to give people what they want in the least damaging way possible.  And for them, actually, intensive production looks like the least bad way forward. So there  is that environmental position, and I would call that quite the kind of mainstream green  
**[0:04:38-0:04:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:04:38):**  light position. Then you go back to the sort of eco-omnivores who perhaps are more optimistic  about humanity, who perhaps feel that actually we can make it work, we can integrate ourselves  with the natural world, that we are not vermin on the face of this earth, and that actually  we can – and they have a very strong sense of history, and that this is what humans have  done, and therefore the past is an indication of the future. Plus, probably quite a strong  
**[0:05:14-0:05:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:05:14):**  emphasis on ideas about working with nature and nature being a guide.  And I think that's interesting, to sort of get into that, because I think you've  brought up nature a couple of times, and it's this idea of the natural world that seems  to me to be quite important. If we think about Britain, obviously at a global level it's  slightly different because there are still wildernesses that are relatively untouched  
**[0:05:39-0:05:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:05:39):**  by human beings. But in Britain, is there such a thing as a natural environment?  No. I mean, so just a couple of things here, because I think what we'll come back to  is also perhaps there's a difference in the view to which we are connected with the  rest of the world, as opposed to the extent to which we are, as Britain, an island and  therefore responsible for our own food production and consumption. But I'll leave that for  
**[0:06:07-0:06:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:06:07):**  a moment. So is there any nature in Britain? No, but there are greater natures and lesser  natures. So, you know, at one level you could say everything is cultural now, because even  in the most remote corners of the Amazon rainforest you can see traces of human kind of modification.  But that's, you know, you can take that argument so far, too far. I mean, there is  a difference between a car park and the Amazon rainforest. So, you know, there's culture  
**[0:06:38-0:06:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:06:38):**  and culture. When it comes to Britain, yes, of course we have shaped the landscape, but  there are wilder and less wild parts of it. So I think it is a question, what kind of  landscape do we want, do we value? But I think this is where it links also with the fact  that we are part of a global community. It's a very, very simplistic notion to suggest  that we adopt this push model, that we in the UK have to feed the world, the starving  
**[0:07:11-0:07:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:07:11):**  gases, et cetera, because we know very well that hunger arises from lack of access and  affordability and lack of agency rather than a lack of food per se. But at the same time,  I think we do have to bear the global context in mind. And this is why I personally come  back to the point of view that I cannot see a world where we meet some of the environmental  challenges that we face, biodiversity loss and climate change, without reducing our consumption  
**[0:07:48-0:07:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:07:48):**  of animal products, even in a country like the UK, which is good at grass.  So going back to the idea of vegan and again, why this becomes combative and why people  feel threatened by it. I suppose that it's perhaps part of it's because you've got sort  of polar opposites, people who just carry on eating meat in the same way that they have  always eaten it and don't challenge themselves and their consumption behaviours. And then  
**[0:08:15-0:08:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:08:15):**  people at the other extreme who have taken a very, very different set of life and dietary  choices. And so I wonder how we can take heat out of this debate and if there's a way of  creating a conversation which isn't just set at those polar opposite points.  Absolutely. And I think one of the other things that might be worth bringing into the discussion  is the idea of motive. And I think people were sort of more sympathetic towards veganism  
**[0:08:45-0:08:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:08:45):**  in the past. They might have sort of laughed at it or thought it was eccentric or a bit  extreme or whatever. But back when it was really quite hard to be vegan, there was a  kind of well credit due or power to your elbows sort of respect because it might not have  been much fun. But now that it's easier, I think there is a strong strand of sort of  hair, shirt and morality within the environmental movement that they don't really like the fact  
**[0:09:15-0:09:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:09:15):**  that it's easy and they don't like the fact that industry is catering to this increased  demand and therefore making it even easier. So I think that's an important element to  bear in mind because I think it also links to the whole lifestyles, life ways approach  of some of the kind of eco omnivores who are working hard on the land and struggling and  trying very hard to do and be something different.  
**[0:09:48-0:09:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:09:48):**  That was Dr Tara Garnett from the Food and Climate Research Network. Caroline Grindrod  is a regenerative hill farmer and world a culture consultant who lives in an area of  Cumbria perhaps best known for producing Beatrix Potter. She also runs a meat business called  Primal Meats. Perhaps surprisingly, Caroline believes the vegetarian and vegan movements  have been hugely important in terms of raising the environmental challenges associated with  
**[0:10:14-0:10:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:10:14):**  meat production higher up the public agenda. As a regenerative producer, Caroline advocates  systems that seek to mimic the functions of nature, keeping soils covered, promoting photosynthesis,  managing water, integrating trees and other flora, working with nature to oxidise methane  and sequester carbon. But I put it to her that this type of farming is far from normal  in the United Kingdom.  
**[0:10:42-0:10:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:10:42):**  That's quite right and I think that's where veganism and vegetarianism is highlighting  that issue is we've got some very dysfunctional in terms of natural processes, dysfunctional  food systems. So we've decoupled the system. We've taken what was a beautifully functioning  ecosystem of all those climate cooling mechanisms built within it and we've taken the animals  away and put them in sheds and then we ploughed up the land and created bare soil and we're  
**[0:11:07-0:11:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:11:07):**  using fossil fuels to produce our food. So we've got a very broken system. But the answer  isn't simply just not eating meat. We can produce meat in a very nature friendly way  that is encouraging all of those hydrological functions that are helping keep the planet  cool. And we can also produce plants in that way. But you can also buy plants that are  produced from ploughed land that's using energy intensive fertilisers, uses pesticides to  
**[0:11:34-0:11:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:11:34):**  kill all the insects, uses herbicides to kill all the wildflowers and poisons the seas.  And that can be a plant diet. So it's really just not as simple as saying eating plants  is better. We need to start to broaden out the conversation into how does that influence  and impact land use.  So you mentioned land use there and that seems to me that it's the crux of what we're talking  
**[0:11:54-0:12:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:11:54):**  about. And you're a regenerative farmer. So if you were going to a new piece of land,  a new farm that you didn't know, what's the first thing you do? What's that first building  block of creating a regenerative farm?  So I use holistic management as my main kind of framework for managing landscapes. And  I think actually what's the important point is you can't just manage land and we're trying  
**[0:12:20-0:12:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:12:20):**  to do that. We have to manage the people and make it profitable. So what we always do is  create a context. We talk about what do you want to do here? You know, it's all very well  trying to pay farmers just to be environmental guardians, but that's not why they went into  farming. So we've got to try and fit their food producers and we can do it so much better.  We have to do it so much better. But ultimately, we've got to design a system that fits around  
**[0:12:42-0:12:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:12:42):**  the landscape that they're on, what they actually want to do and make sure it's producing food  that's very healthy, sustainable food that's appropriate for the culture. So we design  a system based on all of those things. And then really it's about looking at those ecological  principles. So we say, OK, how can we improve this farming system so it's supporting the  hydrological function, the water cycle? How can we build soil so that it's improving the  
**[0:13:08-0:13:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:13:08):**  mineral cycle and making sure that we are cycling those minerals so that we've got potentially  maybe animals in that system or just ways of making sure that the minerals have been  passed through and up into our food, which is a huge issue. And then we'll be looking  at energy flow. How do we make sure that we've got plants in the ground growing all year  round, whether we're growing plants or we're growing animals, we need to be increasing  
**[0:13:29-0:13:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:13:29):**  photosynthesis, which is driving carbon sequestration. And community dynamics, we need a complex  and resilient food web, which includes livestock or whatever we're trying to grow. But it also  has to include lots of other animals and species too, if it's going to be resilient and complex.  When you say other species, you mean nature? Nature and wildlife. In order to create a  system which has no plagues, as soon as you simplify a system down to one or two species,  
**[0:14:01-0:14:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:14:01):**  you then have to really work hard to control everything. And that costs money. We have  to spray every weed, we have to use pesticides, herbicides, and then we've taken out the natural  pathways of fertility, which happens through the microbial interactions with photosynthesis.  So we've then got to bring in energy intensive fertilisers to feed the plants. The whole  thing then becomes extremely expensive, which is why a lot of farmers are not making any  
**[0:14:26-0:14:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:14:26):**  money anymore. We're dealing with the symptoms all the time in very costly ways, not just  to our pocket, but usually those costly ways are very environmentally costly too.  And those interventions, those interventions that you mentioned, the spraying of pesticides,  etc. An awful lot of that technology, those sort of paid for interventions, when they're  invented, when they're patented, owned by a company, of course, they're promoted out  
**[0:14:50-0:14:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:14:50):**  into farming media and that sort of thing. But what you're talking about, it strikes  me, is more about technique than it is about technology per se. And in that regard, these  techniques, if they were better shared amongst the farming community, could be available  for everybody and reduce costs potentially quite significantly.  Absolutely. So the first things we look at with the farmers is, you know, where's your  
**[0:15:16-0:15:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:15:16):**  main cost centre? So we look at separating out all of the different businesses. They  usually got sheep operations and cattle operations. And often farmers are focused on how much  money can we bring in? You know, their sales. And very rarely actually look at how much  they're spending to achieve those sales. So what we look at is, you know, how much is,  you know, if you actually get a farmer to sit down and say, how much does it cost to  
**[0:15:36-0:15:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:15:36):**  me and vet med and feed costs, mineral blocks, for, you know, machinery costs, fossil fuels,  you know, petrol, you know, all your contracts costs. What could we actually get rid of if  we created a truly natural ecosystem, you know, an agro-ecological system that essentially  has building its own nutrients and we are getting rid of those pests and diseases that  are coming out from, you know, because we've been balanced the system, you can get rid  
**[0:16:02-0:16:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:16:02):**  of a huge number of your costs and therefore you're just naturally more profitable. And  then added to that, there's, you know, a lot of evidence and we're certainly finding it  on the farms we're working with, you can often actually increase your production. In the  UK, we maybe don't have such scope to increase production as some of the people in the dry  lands of the world are experiencing, but there's still great scope to actually, you know, with  
**[0:16:26-0:16:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:16:26):**  the conversation so far has been very much around land sparing and the whole argument  around sort of separating ourselves from nature and saying, okay, let's become more efficient  on this agricultural land so we can give more back to nature. The problem is that that's  based on models of farming that are, you know, often very good and conservation farming comes  from that kind of movement and, you know, some of the organic farming, you know, often  
**[0:16:49-0:16:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:16:49):**  it reduces your productivity, but when you actually start to mimic ecosystems and use  these regenerative practices, which is what we teach, we find you can actually increase  productivity because you, you know, ecosystems, not truly pristine natural ecosystems that  are functioning at the most high level, are the most, you know, they produce the most  food in terms of biomass in the whole world. It's way beyond what we can produce from our  
**[0:17:15-0:17:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:17:15):**  intensive agricultural systems. So what we need to get a lot better at is understanding  how to make that work in each region with different, you know, contexts.  I'm struck by this idea that you can actually increase the productivity. Actually, I guess  we need to take a step back and just understand and define what we mean by productivity. So  are you talking about an increase in overall yield or are you talking about an increase  
**[0:17:40-0:17:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:17:40):**  in yield relative to input cost?  Overall yield and reducing of input costs.  This is staggering because, I mean, you know, this is the criticism, isn't it, of nature  farming, of organic farming overall, that it's great in patches. And isn't it wonderful  because we're, you know, we're helping to restore nature in these pockets of land, but  
**[0:18:04-0:18:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:18:04):**  we can never feed a growing global population if we farm that way everywhere. But what you're  suggesting is that we can do that.  Yeah, and I believe we can. And I'm not, you know, this isn't big false promises. I'm very  careful about this. But if, and if you just suddenly said, right, well, if you, you need  to change the whole system. So often farmers used to ask me to come in and say, you know,  
**[0:18:29-0:18:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:18:29):**  how can we be more productive or more sustainable? But they're not willing to look at, you know,  they're dairy farmers or they're a beef farmer. So, and they really just wanted to tweak what  they're already doing. Well, we don't do that. We look at changing the whole system to mimic  an ecosystem. And when you do that, you definitely can be more productive. It won't look the  same because you're not, you cannot compare it directly with a soy crop, you know, or  
**[0:18:51-0:18:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:18:51):**  a wheat crop and say, this is what we're doing is we're creating, you know, potentially would  be having a diversified range of outputs. So it's more difficult to measure, but overall  your livestock numbers are likely to be able to increase. And if you're an arable farmer,  and that's not my specialism, so, but there are arable farmers, people like Gabe Brown  who are using these principles and practices to the highest degree are significantly producing  
**[0:19:15-0:19:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:19:15):**  more, you know, but they're producing a range of different foods. And then if you get into  the conversation around, okay, well, nutrient density, should we just be comparing calories?  I mean, you could easily say, okay, well, if you have this intensive production system,  then maybe we could produce more calories, although I don't agree that's possible either.  But calories are meaningless. Really what humans need is really good nutrition. So you  
**[0:19:37-0:19:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:19:37):**  need to be focused on what's the quality of that. And is it sustainable, you know, to  that landscape? You know, we use it, we're giving a false choice really by saying intensive  agriculture can produce more because it's producing more this year, but over a series  of 10 years where you're building in crop failures and bad years, you know, is it truly  sustainable and is it going to go beyond that? Are we going to be able to keep producing  
**[0:19:58-0:20:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:19:58):**  food for 50 years on that intensive system? And in my experience, that's an absolute no,  because our soil carbon levels are being depleted. You know, the problems with insect pests are  getting worse. Worms are no longer working in farming. We've got huge issues that are  just not going to allow us to continue in that same way. So it's a false choice.  What you're trying to do is to go back to looking at what the root cause is rather than  
**[0:20:21-0:20:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:20:21):**  simply treating symptom after symptom after symptom.  Yeah, completely. So in modern farming, we're doing nothing but treating symptoms. And as  you quite rightly say, and that costs a huge amount of money. So if you go back to the  root cause of nearly every problem, it's in soil health. So if you have gradually depleted  your carbon and all of the biology, all the microorganisms in your soil, then you've broken  
**[0:20:42-0:20:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:20:42):**  down the nutritional pathway that feeds the plant. And as soon as you do that, you have  to feed the plant with fossil fuel, fossil fuel derived nutrients, which are hugely problematic  for lots of reasons. And I'm very, very costly to the farmer. But that plant becomes quite  sick because you are not providing the massive range of nutrients that needs to be healthy  and disease resistant. And we've got so used to that. We think it's normal for things to  
**[0:21:03-0:21:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:21:03):**  get diseases all the time. And then that plant is sick. So it needs pesticides and herbicides.  We need to kind of control everything and treat that. And then whatever is eating that  plant, whether it be us or an animal, is not getting the range of nutrients it needs. So  we then have to treat our animals with worms and all sorts of applications to try and prevent  them getting sick and give them minerals that they could have got from the soil, but that's  
**[0:21:26-0:21:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:21:26):**  broken down. So, you know, you're then treating all of these symptoms and that's where we  get to. And we've become really good at trying to manage those symptoms. But ultimately,  what we need to do is go back, right back and strip the whole system down and say, how  do we rebuild a truly balanced, ecologically, you know, sound system that's going to continue  to produce food long term and that food is going to be incredibly healthy for everybody.  
**[0:21:50-0:21:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:21:50):**  OK, so my kids love playing with Lego, and it seems to me that many modern farm systems  are like vast Lego castles where new wings and turrets have been built, requiring new  props and stilts to be added. And the whole thing has just become astonishingly unwieldy.  So what Caroline is talking about is stripping the Lego model back to basics and rebuilding  the foundations from the roots up. But can you do this while the Lego castle continues  
**[0:22:18-0:22:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:22:18):**  to function? And if we strip away my laboured Lego metaphor, can you shift to regenerative  food production while continuing to farm throughout the transition?  You can, and some people are extremely good at that. I think there's a period we've got  a window of opportunity where it's easier to transition into one of these models if  you give yourself a bit of breathing space. And how I like to work with farmers is to  
**[0:22:43-0:22:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:22:43):**  say, OK, you've got to if you actually look at where your profitability is, it's very rarely  in the actual production. Most farmers in this country are making very little money  out of their sheep operation or their cattle operation alone when you're looking at considering  those input costs. So with that in mind and the fact that a lot of the percentage of an  income comes from subsidy, and we've got a few years left where we know that's going  
**[0:23:03-0:23:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:23:03):**  to be the case, I think this is the time to say, right, let's strip back some of the numbers,  strip back some of the complexity in your system. So often we have to create big areas  of rest ahead of us. So we've got areas of grass to go into. And in order to do that,  if you've got lots of different enterprises and lots of different animal operations, it's  really hard to create that big gap. So what we often do is trying and help them simplify  
**[0:23:29-0:23:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:23:29):**  the operation. So, you know, how do we get down to sort of one beef operation, one sheep  operation and not be crossing them and separating them all into little groups all the time.  And at the same time, we need to be, you know, looking at getting rid of all those input  costs and resetting the system so that we can actually go into this brand new world,  essentially, of managing your farm like an ecosystem.  
**[0:23:53-0:23:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:23:53):**  You mentioned when you were talking about cattle and sheep, can you have regenerative  systems that don't include livestock?  I think the principle is that all ecosystems would, you wouldn't be separating out animals  from plants. That just doesn't happen in a natural system. So with that in mind, it doesn't  really make sense to try. So if you want to have natural mineral cycling and you want  
**[0:24:18-0:24:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:24:18):**  the soil to be healthy and minerals to be turned from sort of, you know, vegetation  into back into nutrients that can feed plants again, and you want all of the complexity,  you need to be able to not have big booms of pests and issues with insects and all those  problems. I think you need a truly integrated system.  Well the cock rule says that that's all we've got time for. Has vegan become a dirty  
**[0:24:46-0:24:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:24:46):**  word? No, or at least it shouldn't have. But there's no doubt that society needs  to rediscover a little respect for the choices people make about what they eat. We won't  get very far if we start judging people for eating either a nut cutlet or a beef burger.  And more than that, fixating on people's diets is coming at this from entirely the  wrong direction. Instead we need to look at the land. What can each parcel of land, and  
**[0:25:11-0:25:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:25:11):**  the landscape around it more broadly, best produce in balance with nature? Of course,  that raises more questions and more challenges, but those are subjects for other programmes.  No one ever said that averting environmental catastrophe was going to be easy.  Well that's it. Thank you for listening. And if you've enjoyed the programme, then  please come back and listen to more, tell your friends, like us and share our links.  
**[0:25:37-0:25:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Is-vegan-a-dirty-word-e9vtat#t=0:25:37):**  Farmgate is a partnership project for Farmwell and FAI Farms, and you can join the conversation  on Twitter by searching for Farmgate Podcast. I've been Finnlow Costayne, bye for now.  