---
title: Let's help Dominic Cummings! Radical proposals for agricultural reform
---

### Farm Gate  (2020-02-16)  
### Author(s): ffinlo Costain  

**[0:00:00-0:00:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:00:00):**  Welcome to Farmgate, I'm Finnlow Costayne. Dominic Cummings, the UK Prime Minister's  Strategist in Chief, has said that he wants to shake up government. He wants to break  the alleged stranglehold that the civil service has over policy development and delivery.  
**[0:00:20-0:00:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:00:20):**  He's asked for ideas and we want to help. Of course, our focus is agricultural land  use and food production, and my goodness, what challenges we face. Humanity is looking  into the jaws of a climate catastrophe, at the same time as peering down the throat of  
**[0:00:36-0:00:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:00:36):**  a potential breakdown of nature, both of which will severely affect our ability to produce  good quality, nutritionally diverse food at a national scale. Alongside these existential  threats we have Brexit, new trade deals and rapidly evolving supply chains. Is Britain  
**[0:00:53-0:00:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:00:53):**  up to the job? As we leave the Common Agricultural Policy, can Dominic Cummings help ministers  to unleash the vibrancy of the market and the ingenuity of our farmers and communities?  Or will the civil service clamp him down with paper clips, wrap paperwork and process around  
**[0:01:11-0:01:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:01:11):**  his ambition, finally smothering the bouncing baby of a burgeoning bottom-up land use revolution?  Well, I've spoken to five big beasts of the food and farming community. I've asked  them to help me to help Dom. Each of them has two minutes to outline their reforms,  
**[0:01:29-0:01:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:01:29):**  followed by a short conversation about their ideas, six minutes each in total. In other  words, it's the perfect length of podcast for Dominic Cummings to listen to on his commute.  Let's hope he does.  
**[0:01:42-0:01:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:01:42):**  First up, we have Sue Pritchard. Sue is the director of the highly influential RSA food  farming and countryside commission. I gave her two minutes to reform the government.  So I'm going straight at the seat of power. I'm going for Treasury reform. And I would  
**[0:02:01-0:02:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:02:01):**  like to see at the heart of Treasury, in fact, senior to the chief secretary to the Treasury,  a new secretary to the Treasury for public value. So so often, departments are played  off against each other. So these really important issues that you outline things like climate  
**[0:02:17-0:02:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:02:17):**  change and the nature crisis, but also the public health crisis and the crisis of the  polarization in our communities stay as crises because the opportunities for acting on them  sit across multiple departments. And so the interests of departments act against the requirement  
**[0:02:36-0:02:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:02:36):**  to work more collaboratively together. And we need to break that down. So a secretary  for public value will utilize a thing that already exists within Treasury, but is very  underutilized. That's called the public value framework. It will have responsibility to  
**[0:02:52-0:03:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:02:52):**  do four things. First of all, develop an expanded scope for that public value framework and  look at the whole resource that contributes or depletes public value. At the moment, it  just looks at public spending. But there are so many other ways that support public value  
**[0:03:11-0:03:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:03:11):**  or deplete it through private sector resources. Then we would look at the value in supply  chains, we'd look at value in place, we would look at the kind of value that's generated  through healthy social processes. And finally, we'd be looking at all of the ways in which  
**[0:03:26-0:03:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:03:26):**  other sectors, other industries, other businesses actually extract public value for their own  profit, leaving the bill at the Treasury door, all of that needs to be made more visible  to be confronted and to be acted on at the heart of the power base, which is in Treasury  
**[0:03:42-0:03:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:03:42):**  itself.  Thank you very much for that. That's a really interesting set of proposals. I'm interested  in that last element first, how businesses extract public value.  
**[0:03:52-0:03:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:03:52):**  So there are so many ways in which businesses and whole sectors are currently benefiting  from their activities through passing off costs elsewhere to the public purse.  And who do you have in mind here? Just give us an example.  
**[0:04:09-0:04:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:04:09):**  Let's talk about agrochemical companies who make an absolute fortune out of supplying  synthetic chemicals to the farming sector, and which then require cleaning up out of  the water system. And let's talk about sugar. Sugar companies currently make significant  
**[0:04:29-0:04:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:04:29):**  profit through growing a crop that has a marginal benefit for the human diet. We can tax unhealthy  products and we can tax activities that are passed off. But I think more importantly,  we can raise the regulatory baseline.  
**[0:04:47-0:04:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:04:47):**  So let's go back to the bigger picture, a Secretary of State for Public Value. To look  at this issue that you're saying is diluted across a number of different departments and  find a way of pulling that together and giving the issue some clout.  
**[0:05:00-0:05:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:05:00):**  Do you know, I'd go even further. I would say that that minister could also be responsible  for two other things. We need a new economic paradigm. At the moment, the way that we measure  economic performance through GDP is proving to be destructive and unhelpful. And in countries  
**[0:05:17-0:05:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:05:17):**  who've started thinking about a well-being economy, they're exploring those ways in which  we can put public value at the heart of the heart of an economic system. The second thing  that needs to happen, I think, is the broader definition of public value and exploring more  
**[0:05:31-0:05:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:05:31):**  what public really values. We need much better systems to understand what really matter to  the public. Our current democratic processes are deeply inadequate and so easily manipulated  by people with particular interests and those that lobby for them.  
**[0:05:49-0:05:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:05:49):**  I'm reminded as you talk about a well-being economy about the proposals from Dieter Helm  around natural capital. And of course, those who have come in for criticism, some people  find it somehow difficult to put a financial value, which is what he's proposed, to some  
**[0:06:08-0:06:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:06:08):**  of these sort of more well-being related elements about enjoyment of the countryside and so  on. Is that a similar issue here? Are we talking about in a well-being economy trying to put  a financial value against people's sense of well-being and how they experience it?  
**[0:06:24-0:06:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:06:24):**  Well, I think you're absolutely right to point up the limitations of the capital's approach,  because that comes at the conversation through a particular economic paradigm and financialising  all the things that are really important to us. I think we need to change the conversation  
**[0:06:40-0:06:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:06:40):**  away from extractive notions and towards more regenerative principles. Kate Rayworth expresses  this brilliantly in donut economics and requires us to think much more creatively and frankly  honestly about those things that we really value. We need to shift that conversation  
**[0:07:00-0:07:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:07:00):**  and that has to happen at the heart of Treasury.  So the government at the moment in Defra is reforming through its agriculture bill the  way that farmers receive funding so that we have a new model of public funds for public  
**[0:07:14-0:07:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:07:14):**  goods. But what it seems to me is that your proposal around public value is a way of trying  to reconnect that work at a farm level with the customer, with the citizen, so that there  is a much better sort of broader understanding of the value of the countryside, the value  
**[0:07:33-0:07:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:07:33):**  of nature and good and high quality nutritious food production.  That's exactly right. And how all of the different systems interconnect. So while we're talking  about the agriculture bill and farm payments, they also intimately connected with state  
**[0:07:50-0:07:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:07:50):**  of biodiversity, with the economic prospects of rural communities and the nation's health  and wellbeing. That needs to be understood in the round.  That was Sue Pritchardt from the RSA. Guy Smith is the deputy president of the National  
**[0:08:07-0:08:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:08:07):**  Farmers Union. I gave him a magic wand and asked him to spell out the changes that he  would like to see. Well, obviously, Brexit is going to impact  on agriculture probably more than any other industry. So for a generation, since the 1960s,  
**[0:08:23-0:08:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:08:23):**  more or less, agricultural policy and delivery has largely been in the command of Brussels.  But now it's going to be repatriated back to Whitehall. And so for the first time for  a generation, the civil servants of Whitehall are going to be fully in charge of agricultural  
**[0:08:42-0:08:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:08:42):**  policy. And there are a number of departments that will have a big impact on the future  of agriculture as we lay out the path to the next generation. The Home Office will be in  charge of access to labour. DAFRA will clearly be a key department for laying out agricultural  
**[0:09:02-0:09:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:09:02):**  policy. But let's not forget the likes of DCMS when it comes to broadband provision,  MHCLG, another department that are going to be in charge of rural infrastructure, and  the Department of Trade, obviously key trade deals determining the future of British agriculture  
**[0:09:20-0:09:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:09:20):**  in that respect. So a lot of new agendas across Whitehall. Now, how the best way to rearrange  those various departments to address this plethora of issues is a very good one on the  one hand, you could say, well, let's be cautious and stick to the web we know, as it were,  
**[0:09:46-0:09:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:09:46):**  and not try and shake the cocktail up too much. On the other hand, you could say, no,  this is a time for brave, radical thinking. We need new approaches, new responsibilities  in different departments. Climate change, you know, probably the biggest challenge humanity  
**[0:10:06-0:10:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:10:06):**  has in front of it, and how we feed the population of the globe that is rising exponentially  without further pressurising our planet, huge challenges. And we will watch this space at  the moment, the NFU lobbies across government across departments, but we will be light footed  
**[0:10:26-0:10:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:10:26):**  if we see the map changing radically.  It's interesting, isn't it? Because of course, those of us who've been working on this over  the last three years or so, you know, we've just kind of got on with the job, we've been  
**[0:10:37-0:10:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:10:37):**  thinking about the policies and the way that things need to change. But you're absolutely  right. This is the first time that DEFRA will have had proper control over agricultural  policy, land policy, the way that the infrastructure works to deliver that policy for a very long  
**[0:10:53-0:10:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:10:53):**  time. And the question of whether DEFRA itself can do that job remains to be seen. So do  you think there is a need for, I don't know, a cabinet level committee or perhaps a new  department that factors in food, you know, at front and centre of what it does to cut  
**[0:11:11-0:11:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:11:11):**  across these different departments that you mentioned?  Well, I'm sure if you spoke to most farmers, they would say we want math back, the Ministry  of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, because they feel that that gives our industry the  
**[0:11:26-0:11:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:11:26):**  prestige and prominence that we think it needs. Unfortunately, I think that's unlikely to  happen, although, you know, we would always put that out there as a demand. So I think  we will in future continue to have to walk through the front doors of several departments  
**[0:11:42-0:11:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:11:42):**  on different issues. But the more centralised they are, then it's probably going to be more  coherent. So if there was a department for climate change, then obviously, food production  and the management of the land of the UK would fit fully in that department. But it is just  
**[0:12:02-0:12:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:12:02):**  too early to tell. And I suppose too often you don't find out whether these new ideas  have worked until after the event, which sometimes is too late, or sometimes you applaud the  blue sky thinking that took place in the initiation.  
**[0:12:17-0:12:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:12:17):**  I wonder if you have a view about the amount of power and control that governments should  have. Obviously, a farmer knows their own land, and they can potentially work with quite  broad goals that governments set in order to deliver the best possible achievements,  
**[0:12:36-0:12:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:12:36):**  the best possible outcomes against those goals at a local level. How much, at the same time,  you know, in the same way that Brussels has over the course of the last few decades, there  can be quite specific measures, directions over inputs and outcomes. Where do you think  
**[0:12:52-0:12:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:12:52):**  that balance lies?  Well, again, going back to the farm gate, you know, most farmers would much rather get  on with the job of managing the countryside and producing food and to be paid by the market  
**[0:13:07-0:13:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:13:07):**  and to have as little government or regulatory interference as possible. However, again,  I think this is a most unlikely scenario. By the very nature of agriculture, you get  involved in the management of the environment, whether it's water, air or soil, and regulation  
**[0:13:27-0:13:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:13:27):**  comes fast and furious. It always has done. And across the world, governments tend to  view food as a strategic thing. And that's been the case in history as well. Politicians  always get a bit wary of the possibility of having a hungry population because they are,  
**[0:13:45-0:13:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:13:45):**  that is a very angry electorate. And so if politicians ever think there may be an interruption  in food supplies, they move pretty, pretty quickly. And it's interesting that under  new agricultural bill, there is now a greed and the NFE were very keen on this, that there  
**[0:14:01-0:14:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:14:01):**  will be a review of food security. So to make sure that as a nation, we retain the ability  to feed ourselves. Guy Smith there from the NFU. Vicky Heard is the sustainable farming  coordinator at Sustain, a coalition organisation representing over 100 food and farming NGOs.  
**[0:14:21-0:14:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:14:21):**  I would look at restructuring government. So you have a climate and nature emergency  department, not just climate because I think you can get some really bad outcomes if you  follow purely a climate focus. So I think it'd be good to have a department at cabinet  
**[0:14:37-0:14:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:14:37):**  level. So it was covering all departments and really driving change across the board  to deliver a sustainable food and farming programme, building on the public money for  public goods programme that we've already got. So paying farmers to get it right and  
**[0:14:53-0:14:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:14:53):**  helping land managers to do the right thing to build up nature based solutions. And that  solutions in the field as well as around the field. I think we've got to really not separate  the two. I think there's a real risk in doing a land sparing approach rather than sharing.  
**[0:15:09-0:15:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:15:09):**  It's really got to be phasing out things like factory farms, which draw in far too much  inputs into the system and chemicals, the chemical treadmill that the farmers are on.  And to do that, I think we ought to implement an agro ecological education scheme, 10 years  
**[0:15:24-0:15:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:15:24):**  for agroecology where farmers are given training, but training that really suits them, that  takes them from where they are in the agroecological spectrum to the next stage and onwards and  make it really accessible, affordable or free to farmers to actually get that appropriate  
**[0:15:41-0:15:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:15:41):**  training and appropriate technologies. There are some great technologies coming online.  Let's use them. Let's not go down the route of all technologies are going to be great  because they're going to give us instant food without all the environmental consequences.  
**[0:15:55-0:16:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:15:55):**  That's not the way to go. I think we need to be still farming proper food from the soil,  but using the best technologies, but also using knowledge and agro nature based systems.  And for all that to work, we've got to make the market work. We need to really develop  
**[0:16:11-0:16:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:16:11):**  new routes to market for farmers so they can go out with the current incredibly, incredibly  concentrated market that they have to deal with now. So they need to be able to get out  of those big retailer markets and go collaborate and cooperate themselves.  
**[0:16:28-0:16:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:16:28):**  Vicky, we're out of time. That's two minutes. That's fantastic. But there's so much, so  much in there, so much in there. What I'm interested in this climate and nature emergency  department, what is it responsible for that's different to what Defra is responsible for  
**[0:16:44-0:16:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:16:44):**  now? What's thrown in, what's thrown out? Yeah, well, obviously climate covers far more  than farming. So it's got to cover all the energy, transport, housing, getting all that  right, but also seeing farming and land use as part of that. So it would have the whole  
**[0:17:00-0:17:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:17:00):**  gamut of solutions available and be able to drive change, you know, but also not to drive  it in a way that will destroy the nature that we need also to rely on. So it would be taking  some from Defra and from other departments, certainly Bayes, to deliver what we need.  
**[0:17:19-0:17:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:17:19):**  So it's a new department while we still keep hold of the other departments. Defra still  exists, but we have this department as well. Yeah, and it needs to include international.  Our international footprint is huge, not just in food, but it is food and feed. So we need  
**[0:17:33-0:17:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:17:33):**  to be thinking about challenging those that impact overseas. There's good trade and there's  bad trade and we need that department would have to take account of that as well. What  I'm interested in is whether this is a continued sort of big government approach where this  
**[0:17:48-0:17:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:17:48):**  new department will come up with bright ideas and then prescribe what needs to happen on  the ground. Or are you seeing this department as something which guides and sets goals,  but gives freedom to farmers and landowners to deliver what they need to do themselves  
**[0:18:05-0:18:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:18:05):**  and to come up with their own solutions? That's a really good question. I don't think I have  the answer to that because I've seen voluntary approaches fail on so many occasions. Leaving  it to the market has not worked over the last 30, 40 years. So I think what you describe  
**[0:18:20-0:18:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:18:20):**  where it could actually guide and give the right incentives, rewards and regulation and  that kind of approach could work, but it still needs that level of intervention. Maybe in  10 years time it would be needed if the industry is going the right direction, but I'm a bit  
**[0:18:35-0:18:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:18:35):**  nervous about leaving it all to the market. No, absolutely. And I mean what I was meaning  more was that there is a legislative framework which is more broad brush, which requires  the farmers deliver against certain goals in order to be continuing in receipt of public  
**[0:18:51-0:18:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:18:51):**  money. And of course, you know, then there's sort of regulations, legal compliance sort  of associated with that as well. But at the moment, defra seems to be quite prescriptive  in terms of inputs, for example, for sustainable improvements on farms. And that there's an  
**[0:19:06-0:19:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:19:06):**  argument that that perhaps limits the need for farmers to actually have a broad understanding  of why and what they're doing. Yeah, I think that's where my agroecological schools could  come in. You might not like the term, it might not ever run like that. But it's having a  
**[0:19:23-0:19:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:19:23):**  system whereby farmers can actually get access to the tools that they might need and the  range of tools that they might want to apply, but not being prescriptive, as you say, but  I think in some in some areas, they need to be prescriptive, such as our huge use of very  
**[0:19:37-0:19:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:19:37):**  unsustainable feeds or the level of chemicals if we if we can really cut back on that and  use integrated, genuine integrated pest management approaches. So it's, you know, setting targets,  as you say, giving farmers the freedom to apply what they know, but also giving them  
**[0:19:51-0:19:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:19:51):**  the training advice and demonstration to help them to do that. And it sounds like from what  you've said, with your magic wand, if you were looking forward 10 years to the type  of farming that we have, an agroforestry approach would be central to your vision.  
**[0:20:07-0:20:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:20:07):**  Absolutely. Agroforestry, I think has a huge part to play agroforestry and hedges to deliver  both, you know, soil livestock care, soil management, as well as potentially food, you  know, there's some good agroforestry schemes, which are delivering fruit and veg fruit for  
**[0:20:25-0:20:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:20:25):**  farmers, which is an additional income. Yeah, it's a good part of the system.  Vicky Heard from Sustain. Next up, we have Mark Bridgman. Mark is the president of the  Country Land and Business Association, or the CLA, if you prefer. I asked him what he'd  
**[0:20:41-0:20:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:20:41):**  do if he had the power to restructure the UK government.  I'd like to focus on four things that I think would really make a difference. Firstly, around  climate change, clearly at the heart of what government's focusing on at the moment, particularly  
**[0:20:56-0:21:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:20:56):**  in the lead up to the COP26 this year. We've got some big picture ideas, but what does  that mean on how we actually deliver it? I think we need to put in place a carbon trading  system. It's the only way that we're really going to restructure the economy so that those  
**[0:21:09-0:21:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:21:09):**  that are generating CO2 can offset it by paying for others to sequester it. I think that carbon  trading system needs to be mandatory, and that's the only way we're really going to  tackle the CO2 issue. Secondly, I think in order to address the  
**[0:21:23-0:21:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:21:23):**  productivity challenge in rural areas, which we see is very evident, we see a 16% gap between  rural productivity and the national average. If you close that gap, that would be 43 billion  of GBA for the UK economy. In order to do that, I think the government needs to set  
**[0:21:38-0:21:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:21:38):**  up a cabinet committee for rural productivity to really pull the different strands together.  Defra look at rural affairs as part of their brief, but I think it's probably underpowered  and under-resourced, and it really needs to look across department. We'd like to see a  
**[0:21:53-0:21:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:21:53):**  cabinet committee pull all that together and address rural productivity, whether it's around  planning, connectivity, and all the different challenges that are there.  Thirdly, we think government needs to tackle the regulatory culture that we face as farmers.  
**[0:22:09-0:22:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:22:09):**  We need to move away from this incredibly bureaucratic big brother watching us filling  in all these forms to the nth degree. As farmers, we have to fill in paperwork to identify down  to the fourth decimal place of a hectare. That's 0.0001 of a hectare. That's one square  
**[0:22:27-0:22:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:22:27):**  meter. I worked out in the back of an envelope, that's probably 200 billion of those in the  UK, and we really need to move away from that micromanagement.  Fourthly and finally, as we look to increase our trade globally as we come out of Europe,  
**[0:22:42-0:22:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:22:42):**  hopefully we'll continue to have a free trade with Europe, but we're going to look to trade  more internationally. We've got fantastic food products and produce that we can sell,  but we really need government to get behind that. Government has done a certain amount,  
**[0:22:55-0:23:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:22:55):**  but we think there should be a real big push and investment to support our exports, these  high-end, high-product, high-quality products that we're producing in this country.  Thank you very much. Really interesting proposals. I'd like to go into that first one. The Committee  
**[0:23:10-0:23:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:23:10):**  on Climate Change, when it presented its recent land use report, has proposed charging oil  companies and other big polluters and hypothecating that money to pay for land-based sequestration.  I presume that that is something that you would support, but I wonder how we can achieve  
**[0:23:26-0:23:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:23:26):**  that land-based sequestration without land prices just going through the roof.  Well, I think it, we certainly think it's a good idea, but I mean, we shouldn't just  focus on the airline industry, for example. We need to think about the whole economy.  
**[0:23:40-0:23:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:23:40):**  What I think it will do is it will provide the funding through the private sector for  this really ambitious tree planting targets that the government has set and that the Climate  Change Committee has set. I think food production and locking up carbon don't have to be mutually  
**[0:24:00-0:24:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:24:00):**  exclusive. They do, you know, the way that carbon is locked up in grasslands and, you  know, there's plenty of land out there where I think we could do this offsetting.  So really there's a way we kind of need to look at finding ways of having that sequestration  
**[0:24:18-0:24:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:24:18):**  value delivered alongside continued food production. Most definitely. Yeah, this is not about either  or. The two things need to work together. Now, you talked about rural productivity.  There is a real need for government to take a serious look at the way the rural economy  
**[0:24:36-0:24:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:24:36):**  works. You're talking about a cabinet level structure with a minister taking responsibility,  not just at Defra, but across government for radical rural reform. What would be their  key goals? Well, for us, it's about working across department.  
**[0:24:53-0:24:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:24:53):**  That's, I think, really the point I want to, would make, you know, where we see the opportunity  to boost productivity in rural areas. You know, I'll just give you some key points.  One is around connectivity. Now, I know the government has spoken about this quite a bit,  
**[0:25:07-0:25:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:25:07):**  and it was talked about in the election with a sort of arms race as to who could roll out  broadband quickest. But it is hugely important getting that fiber broadband into all houses,  getting the mobile coverage. We've only got two thirds of the country has got 4G mobile  
**[0:25:23-0:25:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:25:23):**  coverage from all the four networks. Yes, there's plans in place, but we need to hold  the people that are delivering this to account. And so on connectivity, but also actually  connectivity is broader than just communications. It's all about the electric grid. If you think  
**[0:25:38-0:25:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:25:38):**  about what climate change is all about and how we restructure the UK economy, a lot of  this is going to have electricity at the heart of it, whether that's electric cars, whether  it's electric houses is how we heat our houses with heat exchangers, whether it's battery  
**[0:25:52-0:25:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:25:52):**  storage, whether it's renewables, the electric connectivity, the electric grid is absolutely  crucial. And right now it's not really working. So farmers, I spend my whole time talking  to farmers who would like to do stuff, whether it's around renewable energy, whether it's  
**[0:26:05-0:26:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:26:05):**  around storage, and they just can't get the grid connection. Also around planning, I think  we need to address some of the planning constraints within rural areas. We find our members often  held back through planning, whether it's for delivering rural housing or whether it's delivering  
**[0:26:22-0:26:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:26:22):**  new business opportunities and the cost of the planning system. We think we need to sort  of fast track and accelerate some of those processes.  Mark Bridgman from the CLA. My final big beast is Patrick Holden. Patrick is the founding  
**[0:26:38-0:26:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:26:38):**  director and chief executive of the Sustainable Food Trust. I asked him what the challenges  are, and what he'd do about them.  Well, I believe that UK farmers have become commodity slaves, trapped by dishonest food  
**[0:26:54-0:27:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:26:54):**  pricing in an ever escalating downward cycle towards industrial farming. And if we are  to address the triple challenges of climate change, the biodiversity catastrophe, and  the crisis of public health, we need top down actions supported by market interventions  
**[0:27:15-0:27:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:27:15):**  in combination to enable farmers to switch by 2030, or at the very latest 2040s, to sustainable  production systems. I know this can be done if we redirect the pillar one payments, which  farmers currently are getting in the form of social security payment, to reward sustainable  
**[0:27:36-0:27:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:27:36):**  farming practices. And I believe that governments need to measure the impact of farming on natural  capital, public health and biodiversity. And that can be achieved through the introduction  of a universally harmonised framework for measuring on farm sustainability.  
**[0:27:53-0:27:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:27:53):**  Fantastic. So you're looking at a top down reform and and intervention in the marketplace.  Tell me about that market intervention. What do you want the government to do to to shift  the way that the market works currently?  
**[0:28:07-0:28:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:28:07):**  We need the way in which farmers are rewarded for sustainable practices to be complemented  by market support. At the moment, the existing consumer certification schemes do not link  to government policy, and that needs to be sorted out. It can be addressed quite easily  
**[0:28:28-0:28:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:28:28):**  if there is a harmonisation process between certification and the new government incentives  in the post Brexit policy package.  Now you and the government both are talking about this. Well, we're going to see this  
**[0:28:40-0:28:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:28:40):**  change from from what you call social security payments for farmers. So a shift away from  subsidy to payments for the public goods that farmers are delivering. Now, there has been  disquiet within the mainstream farming community that this this shift away from the subsidisation  
**[0:28:59-0:29:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:28:59):**  of food production may mean that we have less food.  We need to look at the impact of the adoption, the universal UK adoption of sustainable farming  practices on food outputs. They will dramatically affect the balance of the food commodities  
**[0:29:17-0:29:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:29:17):**  that we produce. The impact of these production changes needs to be taken into account by  government. But it also means that we will need to change people's diets. And that can  be achieved if the public understand the need for changed diets to align them, their future  
**[0:29:35-0:29:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:29:35):**  eating patterns with the productive capacity of UK agriculture. It means the end of cheap  chicken, it means more vegetables, and it means a reduction of intensively produced  crops. But since we are currently wasting 50% of all the food that is produced between  
**[0:29:53-0:30:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:29:53):**  farm and fork, and if people were to change their diets, we could achieve this outcome  within the capacity of sustainable production systems. Farmers are rightly worried about  imports from unsustainable production systems in other countries, but we can have the introduction  
**[0:30:10-0:30:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:30:10):**  of a combination of taxes and tariffs, which ensure that we lead the world in the introduction  of an internationally harmonised framework for trade in sustainably produced foods.  Now, just finally, Patrick, we have spent 50 years developing this industrialised model  
**[0:30:30-0:30:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:30:30):**  of agriculture, more than 50 years, and people like yourself, organisations like the Sustainable  Food Trust, the Soil Association, Friends of the Earth, Compassionate War Farming, have  been working for several decades trying to educate people about the impacts of their  
**[0:30:45-0:30:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:30:45):**  food, where their food comes from, and still sustainable food is a relatively small proportion  of the market share. Are we just fiddling at the edges while Rome gets ready to burn,  while it's starting to burn? Can we really deliver this change at the rate that we need?  
**[0:31:03-0:31:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:31:03):**  Yes, it will be possible to deliver the change that's needed, but it is a transition which  is unprecedented in human history. The transition to sustainable food systems which operate  within planetary boundaries and address the crises that we've been discussing. And unfortunately,  
**[0:31:21-0:31:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:31:21):**  the NGO community as yet do not fully understand that in order to protect biodiversity, the  little remaining biodiversity, which used to coexist in harmony with food production,  which is now marginalised to the edge of otherwise intensively farmed land, we need to move away  
**[0:31:38-0:31:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:31:38):**  from the concept of land sparing and stewardship and rewilding as advocated by George Monbiot  towards a new harmonious relationship between food production and biodiversity working together.  This is not in the mindset of most of the environmental groups right now.  
**[0:31:56-0:32:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:31:56):**  So we need to change to a system where land, rather than being spared off to deliver this  bit of sequestration here, this bit of ever more intensive food production over there,  this bit of rewilding here, every hectare as far as possible needs to be delivering  
**[0:32:13-0:32:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:32:13):**  multiple outcomes.  Land use holds the key, but currently the leading orthodoxies in many of the research  and academic communities and in the food industry are still advocating what I would call old  
**[0:32:25-0:32:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:32:25):**  thinking of land sparing rather than land sharing.  Patrick Holden from the Sustainable Food Trust. When I first started thinking about this podcast,  I expected to encounter a range of views, not least about the role of government itself,  
**[0:32:40-0:32:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:32:40):**  its size, its accountability and its power. But interestingly, nobody has suggested shrinking  government. Each of the proposals, whether for new ministers or a realignment of priorities,  has envisaged a strong role for government. Let me end by challenging that just a little.  
**[0:32:57-0:33:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:32:57):**  In my view, agricultural land use and food production has been under the control of government  and the big retailers supported by the government for too long. We know that we are facing environmental  crises, that our rural communities are struggling, that food prices bear little resemblance to  
**[0:33:13-0:33:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:33:13):**  the actual costs of production, let alone the externalised environmental and social  costs, and that good farm animal health and welfare can be extremely patchy.  I put it to you that government has failed, and perhaps it's time that government got  
**[0:33:29-0:33:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:33:29):**  out of the way. Rather than creating new systems riddled with complexity, government should  focus on the bigger picture. Ministers should set bold sustainable land use and food production  priorities focused on climate mitigation, nature's restoration and the production  
**[0:33:45-0:33:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:33:45):**  of high quality food. But what then? Citizens and the market should pay for the food, while  public funds are used to pay for public goods based on the model the government has proposed.  But using acreage as the basis for payments because every acre must either be restored  
**[0:34:00-0:34:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:34:00):**  to excellence or maintained at that level.  Beyond that, in my view, government needs to take a step back. Farmers need to find  their own way to step up and take ownership of their own sustainable farm management plans.  
**[0:34:15-0:34:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:34:15):**  If farmers want payments from the taxpayer, then it should be up to them to demonstrate  delivery. This would mean baseline footprinting of carbon and nature metrics as a gateway  requirement for public funds, after which in-the-round progress must be demonstrated  
**[0:34:30-0:34:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:34:30):**  annually, perhaps assessed through private sector assurance schemes.  Our policy and financial support systems are built, it seems to me, to mitigate against  failure rather than with the expectation of success. I want optimism and trust in human  
**[0:34:47-0:34:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:34:47):**  goodness and innovation to be placed at the centre of government delivery. Can you do  that, Dom?  If you've enjoyed listening, please come back and listen to more. Tell your friends,  
**[0:34:59-0:35:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:34:59):**  like us, review us and share our links.  Farmgate is a partnership project for Farmwell and FAI Farms, and you can join the conversation  on Twitter by searching for Farmgate Podcast.  
**[0:35:11-0:35:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Lets-help-Dominic-Cummings--Radical-proposals-for-agricultural-reform-easbfc#t=0:35:11):**  I've been Finlow Kastain. Bye for now.  