### Farm Gate  (2020-12-04)
**[0:00:00-0:00:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to Farmgate. I'm Finn Logue-Kustein.  The coronavirus pandemic has generated a monumental response from governments and the general  public alike. Political parties philosophically opposed to the big state have reversed their  laissez-faire principles and intervened in our lives to an enormous extent. Our freedoms  have been removed by various states of lockdown, billions have been borrowed and spent, and  
**[0:00:31-0:00:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:00:31):**  in many countries the government is now paying at least some of the wages of ordinary citizens.  In January, hardly anyone had heard of Covid-19. Now many of us think of little else. This  is partly down to a combination of the infectious and dangerous nature of the virus itself,  and partly to government decisions and communications. But the media has also ramped up the jeopardy  and society itself has, at least for now, been generally co-operating.  
**[0:01:00-0:01:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:01:00):**  So the question for this podcast is, what can we learn from the way that Covid-19 has  been communicated and the speed of society's response? And how can we apply this knowledge  to other public health emergencies such as climate change and biodiversity loss, which  perhaps present fewer immediate risks, but which in the medium term also threaten the  existence of human society as we know it? I'll be speaking to Jason Wojciechowski,  
**[0:01:27-0:01:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:01:27):**  a senior fellow at the Centre for Impact Communication, and Oystein Torson, the director of FAI Farms.  Hello both. Perhaps you could introduce yourselves and talk briefly about your interest in this  area. Jason.  Jason Wojciechowski, Senior Fellow, Centre for Impact Communication,  Finland  
**[0:01:42-0:01:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:01:42):**  Finland, thanks so much for having me. Exciting to be talking to you today. Yeah, at the Centre  for Impact Communication, we look at communication and specifically how communication drives  social change and impact across a range of issues. And our latest project is Communicating  Coronavirus, where we are pulling together, synthesizing best practices on this pandemic.  I'm Oystein Torson. I'm the director of FAI Farms. And communicating science is something  
**[0:02:10-0:02:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:02:10):**  we think about every day because our work is driven by three sets of values. One is  the purpose and impact and wanting to make a difference. All the people that work for  FAI do it because they believe in what we do and want to make a change. And then secondly,  we're science led. So everything we do is also focused on the scientific method, knowing  the best science. And thirdly, we're client focused, so we want to deliver value to the  
**[0:02:36-0:02:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:02:36):**  people that we work with. So being able to communicate what science says and then practically  applying it with purpose in the real world is sort of our everyday craft.  Fantastic. Thank you both. So Jason, you've been collating and putting together knowledge  around the way that coronavirus has been communicated to the public. Tell us some of the things,  some of the top line findings that you've come across.  
**[0:03:01-0:03:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:03:01):**  Yeah, absolutely. It's a really interesting time to be looking at this because health  crises have very direct outcomes, right? You can tell right away what's working and what's  not working, much like you can see the curve flattening or not flattening. And in all communication,  really, but especially in a health crisis, there's two key elements. One is trust and  one is action. Do people trust the messengers and is the message that they're giving them  
**[0:03:26-0:03:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:03:26):**  driving them to act in a way that stops the spread of the virus in this case?  So that's really interesting. You're talking about trust and action being linked there.  And if we think of your own country, you're speaking from New York, Trump isn't exactly  trusted. Well, certainly not around the world, but not by half of your own countrymen. You  know, almost the opposite. And in our country, different people trust their own political  
**[0:03:50-0:03:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:03:50):**  party or parties that they voted for much more readily than they trust an opposition  party, surely.  Yeah, that's absolutely right. And one of the recommendations from both the CDC and  the WHO have extensive guidelines on this is to put the scientists forward, let the  doctor speak. And so, you know, with some exceptions we have here in the US, we have  
**[0:04:12-0:04:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:04:12):**  Anthony Fauci and Deborah Birx, who are those leading scientists. Birx now most famous for  shaking her head in the corner, as Trump talked about, bleach and disinfectants. And the guidance  is to put those scientists forward, let them speak. You know, if you look at Obama's handling  of H1N1U, it's pretty diametrically opposed in the level that he got up there, introduced  the speakers, said the key message and got out of the way, came up again and repeated  
**[0:04:41-0:04:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:04:41):**  the key message. And that was his role.  It's interesting, isn't it, that, you know, when you've got the World Health Organization  basically saying to President Trump, look, people aren't going to trust you, therefore,  get the scientists out there because people trust scientists and it's kind of no wonder  he's fallen out with them a bit.  
**[0:04:57-0:05:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:04:57):**  Yeah, it's, it's bound to happen. And, you know, it's been better for everyone that these  scientists have become a bit of celebrities in their own right. And on that piece of trust,  though, you know, I think there are some, some very specific learnings that can be applied  across all science communication and really across probably all communication, because  what actually engenders trust isn't necessarily what you might think it is. A lot of times  
**[0:05:20-0:05:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:05:20):**  what we think about trust and authority in this situation is by, you know, speaking with  in absolutes, having complete knowledge, never showing uncertainty. But what actually the  research shows is that there's a couple of key elements to getting the public on your side  and having real deep trust in what you're saying, which you need when you're asking  them to do pretty bold, life changing actions. So one of the things is don't over reassure.  
**[0:05:47-0:05:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:05:47):**  Probably the most dangerous period here in New York and certainly in the UK when Boris  Johnson's government was flirting with the herd immunity is that period where they act  like life is going to go on as normal. And that that period went on much longer than  it should have. And what they should have been doing is preparing everyone for what  was to come.  
**[0:06:05-0:06:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:06:05):**  And this is what you call anticipatory guidance. Is that right?  Exactly. Anticipatory guidance is just priming people for what's to come. So it's not a shock  to the system so they can prepare. And so they can not be in this kind of limbo where  theatres are wondering, do we put on shows or don't we put on shows? Do we tell people  to come or not come? Here in the US, they went forward with some elections and we already  
**[0:06:28-0:06:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:06:28):**  know dozens of new coronavirus cases in Wisconsin and Michigan that came out of them going forward  with their elections. So you need to say here's what's coming and prepare people for that  change before you lead to it.  But that must be really difficult for governments. I mean, you know, I'm remembering it here  in the UK, the way that the herd immunity, you know, we were flirting with that idea.  
**[0:06:48-0:06:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:06:48):**  And in theory, you know, that's it's it's not a bad theory. It's not a bad approach.  It just it falls down when it comes into contact with human beings because human beings don't  want to be the collateral in that approach. And so when you've got the government dealing  with a crisis, it's something new. They haven't spent as much time as perhaps they should  have done in gaming out in scenarios analysis around what they would do here. They haven't  
**[0:07:13-0:07:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:07:13):**  been investing in in this sort of decision making. And so they are making decisions on  the hoof, so they're bound to get it wrong. And I'm kind of interested that, you know,  I feel like I'm kind of giving the government a bit more of a free pass than perhaps I would  otherwise because, you know, as a citizen, I kind of understand that.  Yeah. There's a, you know, infamous John F. Kennedy quote after the Bay of Pigs where  
**[0:07:34-0:07:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:07:34):**  he said, the more you F up in this job, the more they trust you. And there's a there's  two surprising elements in in this research that we've been pulling together, at least  surprising to me. One is that you should embrace change. You know, there's a fear that if you  tell people one thing one day and a few days later, you change it, that you'll have lost  them completely and they'll they'll hold that against you. But the research shows, if you  
**[0:07:57-0:08:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:07:57):**  let them know why you're changing it, what new information has come to light that they'll  get on board. And, you know, the mask rollout here in the U.S. was absolutely not perfect.  There are a lot of mistakes made. But ultimately, I was walking around New York to go to a store  yesterday and everyone has a mask on. Every store clerk has a mask on. It's and that was  a huge change. They they went from saying, we're never going to ask people to wear masks  
**[0:08:22-0:08:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:08:22):**  in New York. They said, we're never going to ask you to shelter in place. And when they  said, hey, we know we have to change this because asymptomatic people are spreading  the virus. People people trusted that it actually creates more trust. And the other one, which  is, I think, really aligned with what you were saying in the UK situation, that you  shared dilemmas. You share that there's difficult choices and you be open about that. You don't  
**[0:08:44-0:08:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:08:44):**  say we have all the answers and this is the only way to do it. You actually say there's  a few directions we can go. Here's the one we are going to go and here's why. And it's  a difficult choice. In New York, that was really around health care workers who were  telling the mayor, keep the schools open because I need to go to my job and I can't do that  if the schools are open. And teachers saying, shut down the schools. We have a lot of immunocompromised  
**[0:09:06-0:09:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:09:06):**  teachers and faculty. And coming out and sharing that dilemma actually created some space to  make the decision to shut down the school.  I wonder if that changes over the course of a crisis. You know, as I say, you kind of  got that sort of 10 days or so when the British government was flirting with herd immunity,  when it was sharing those dilemmas, as you say, and inviting people to sort of embrace  
**[0:09:30-0:09:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:09:30):**  the fact that they were going to have to, information from government, decisions from  government were going to change. At some point, the schools were going to close. And so there  was that anticipatory guidance that you talk about. But it wasn't happening yet. And then  it came in. And at that point, although it wasn't single messages, it was simple messages  that were coming out. You know, it was stay home, keep the NHS safe. But in the last two  
**[0:09:53-0:09:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:09:53):**  or three weeks, as the lockdown has extended, as people have started feeling more frustrated  and bored, I suppose, and now that there's a more effective opposition leader asking  questions, I wonder if things are starting to change. And that single message isn't working  quite so well, that there's almost another stage of communication that the government  somehow needs to move into to sustain public support.  
**[0:10:19-0:10:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:10:19):**  You know, and getting people when you share those dilemmas, getting them ultimately on  the side of harsher action, the anchor and all the pandemic research, all the public  health research, you know, really the top line you see in every paper you read on this  is don't over reassure, give people the stick, not the carrot. What we know from social science  research is people are much more motivated by immediate loss and the threat of loss than  
**[0:10:43-0:10:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:10:43):**  potential future gains. So, you know, I think that goes against political instincts, which  are always to to minimise threats, say the economy is going to be fine, be cheerleaders.  In this case, you need to err on the side of that threat and the danger to people. And  once you start taking your foot off up the gas on that issue, you're going to see you're  going to have people starting to question it more.  
**[0:11:06-0:11:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:11:06):**  Oystein, you were wanting to come in.  Yeah, I was going to say, I think all the examples we've talked about, you know, both  the masks, the schools, the social distancing and thinking about it sort of personally,  too, going through it, you know, remembering the week when there was a bunch of mixed messages  around schools and then turning into a school closure on a Sunday night. For me, the big,  
**[0:11:29-0:11:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:11:29):**  you know, it's very simple, but the big change in all of that is that the communication became  effective when when essentially you moved away from kind of individual choice to this  is what we need you to do. So I guess I guess that echoes some of the some of the findings  that Jason alluded to earlier around that, you know, being very clear about the single  outcome you want from a particular message. I remember just that resonated with with me  
**[0:11:52-0:11:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:11:52):**  as well, just knowing that this is what you know, this is what you're being told to do.  All right. That's, you know, let's hunk it down and do it. It was, you know, the worst  period is that is that period where, you know, there's just a lot of lot of worry or a lot  of mixed messages. And you're talking about some might want to wear masks or some might  not want to, might not want to wear masks, you know, and you leave the audience to sort  
**[0:12:14-0:12:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:12:14):**  of make up their own mind about the right action. You know, maybe it's, you know, it's  an obvious point, but then it is less, you know, less effective.  I wonder, you know, we've sort of talked through various different elements of communication,  which are important here. And, you know, and specifically, you've talked about Jason targeting  the single message outcome. This is what you need to do over and over again until people  
**[0:12:36-0:12:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:12:36):**  do it, providing that anticipation of something that's going to happen in the future, not  over reassuring and sharing dilemmas. And I wonder, you know, sort of moving on from  there slightly, if each of you are able to reflect on, you know, this is a big change  in our lives. We have had our freedoms taken away by the government. You know, you know,  six months ago, if somebody said this was going to happen, you know, my instinct would  
**[0:13:00-0:13:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:13:00):**  have been to rebel against that. You know, the idea that I have to stay at home, that  I can't go out and shop or meet friends. I mean, ridiculous in a modern society setting.  And I think for me, it was an emotional response. And I spoke to somebody the other day and  for them, it was analytical. If everybody got it at the same time, the NHS would be  overwhelmed. Therefore, we stayed home to protect the NHS. For me, it was much more  
**[0:13:23-0:13:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:13:23):**  emotional. You know, at some point, I could suddenly see my parents in particular with  coronavirus and I feared for their health. And so my emotional response was, well, if  I expect other people to make sure that they socially distance from my parents, I need  to do that myself for people who live around me. And then, you know, the final element  of it was the fear of being seen to get it wrong. Uncertainty about what we were allowed  
**[0:13:48-0:13:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:13:48):**  to do, a fear of authority. So that's it for me. And I wonder what it was for you guys.  Interesting. I mean, I think for me, it's sort of definitely like you're saying, I think  the sort of precautionary principle played in for me is sort of you hear the message,  you're being told that there is something you can do to sort of get out of the way,  protect the health care system and, you know, flatten the curve, so to speak. And I think  
**[0:14:16-0:14:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:14:16):**  it just, you know, I think it was that combination of, yeah, we have the ability and opportunity  to get out of what was becoming the epicenter. And I think that idea of just, you know, I'd  rather be rather be safe than sorry and act on that precautionary principle sort of echoed  echoed with me. But like, you know, like you were saying, I was definitely in the camp  that argued that, you know, if they when we started seeing the measures they implemented  
**[0:14:41-0:14:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:14:41):**  in China, I was definitely one of the people saying, you know, if they try to do this in  New York or in Chicago, whatever, there's going to be, you know, there's going to be  riots, but there weren't, you know, I think people just sort of gradually, you know, understood  the size of the threat and the sort of the specialness of the situation. And then when  you heard a uniform and clear message, people followed.  
**[0:15:04-0:15:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:15:04):**  Jason.  Yeah, it's interesting that break between emotional and analytical, because I'm sure  we all go through that a bit. For me, I definitely have family members that are first responders  and nurses and my sister is a mail carrier. And I've worked with the nurses union here,  which is a very impressive union. And, you know, we all quite rightly revered the nurses.  
**[0:15:25-0:15:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:15:25):**  And I think hearing them say this is what I need was powerful, probably a bit of a side  note to this conversation. But across all industries, we're seeing the importance of  unions speaking up for their members and how that can have an impact on times like this.  Another thing that really impacted me and I you know, this is something we know from  other communication research is when the challenge got bigger, it gives you permission to make  
**[0:15:46-0:15:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:15:46):**  more drastic life changes. And so when they're telling you, you know what, don't touch your  face, that doesn't do anything that doesn't really help. That's like telling someone to  sign a petition with their email address is also weirdly harder than maybe social distancing.  But it doesn't match the scale right when they know this is life and death, try to wash  your hands a bit more and don't touch your face compared to this is life and death and  
**[0:16:11-0:16:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:16:11):**  you all need to stay home and not go to work and our whole economy needs to be flipped  on its head. So actually giving people a bigger challenge, I think we'll find they're more  likely to rise to that and it'll communicate the severity much more.  It's much more like a movie, isn't it? You kind of, you get to that moment, you know,  in that kind of UFO invasion movie where Jeff Goldblum stands up and you know, he's the  
**[0:16:33-0:16:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:16:33):**  scientist, he's the person that we trust. And he says, look, you guys, you just got  to stay home. And you know, that's the point at which you know, the shit's going to hit  the fan. And and as you say, that's, that's quite different from, from just saying, try  not to pick your nose because because that's going to kill you. And I'm sort of I'm aware  as we sort of talk about those, you know, I'm remembering some of the some of these  
**[0:16:56-0:16:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:16:56):**  things. You know, when we go out for a walk, we live in the countryside, we're not in the  city, I think it'd be very, very different if we were living in the city. But you know,  when we were first walking through a kissing gate, I'd be telling the kids off saying,  look, you just you can't touch the kissing gates, you know, don't don't do it. I'm here.  I've got my stick. I'm using that. And and I think everybody was like that for the first  
**[0:17:17-0:17:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:17:17):**  week or two. And then we kind of got bored. And then I realised today, you know, I've,  I've not been doing that for really quite a long time. And so, you know, there is this  kind of, you kind of forget time passes and, and things start to normalise. And unless  people are directly threatened immediately next to you, these messages just begin to  wash over a little bit.  
**[0:17:37-0:17:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:17:37):**  Well, I guess the big risk there is, is when some of the measures are having the intended  effect, isn't it? So, you know, you're starting to see that around around this country, where  in in states where perhaps they enacted stay at home orders fairly soon, and numbers have  been kept very low, then you get the argument of like, what are we doing all this for type  thing, which then, you know, you're sort of becoming a you're becoming victim of your  
**[0:18:04-0:18:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:18:04):**  own success in in some ways. And I think, as you alluded to earlier, Finlow, I think  that will require a kind of next next stage of effective communication and effective and  effective measures to sort of shore up shore up that piece.  Yeah, I mean, that the sign we've seen, you know, we've seen this in Singapore, we've  seen it in places where they've relaxed, I fear we're going to see it a lot more is that  
**[0:18:25-0:18:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:18:25):**  Finlow, what you were describing is very common and you might kind of beat yourself up for  I was I was much more conscientious before than I am right now. But I think what you're  missing is that because the measures are so drastic, you're still following a whole bunch  of drastic measures. I might be touching my face, but I'm crossing to the other side of  the street just out of habit now when someone else is walking down. Yeah, that's true. There's  
**[0:18:49-0:18:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:18:49):**  a element in these health crises where you're never gonna it's never gonna be 100%. Right.  But all you can do is put the odds in your favor. And I guess that effectively communicated  the hierarchy of those actions. So as long as you stick to the big to the big essential  ones. Yeah, yeah, the big ones will will have the most impact and some of the smaller ones,  you know, will be mitigated by the fact that everyone is taking these huge steps, you know,  
**[0:19:15-0:19:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:19:15):**  like just not going to work, not being on crowded subways, those types of things. But  once that message starts relaxing, it's Yeah, it's gonna be a pretty, pretty major second  wave. And I think that's going to be the communication challenge when those those next waves come  and people are over this, you know, one of the things in misinformation that gets talked  about a lot is the difference between qualitative and quantitative information. And a quantitative  
**[0:19:40-0:19:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:19:40):**  information is much easier for people to misuse, to confuse, and that there needs to be qualitative  voices out there saying that may seem like they're coming down, but they're they're actually  just coming to the level that we're at quantitative is the numbers, right? It's, it's the numbers  of deaths, it's the graphs and charts that we're we're looking at. And qualitative is  the context behind that. What does that mean? And one of the, you know, depending how you  
**[0:20:08-0:20:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:20:08):**  look at it, one of either the benefits or the dangers of the internet age is that we  all have a lot more immediate access to quantitative information. You know, some of these drug  trials were seeing information about them far earlier than we would ever see them years  earlier than we would see them in normal circumstances. And all of a sudden you have people trying  to make their own home remedies and getting sick and dying from them. That's the quantitative  
**[0:20:32-0:20:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:20:32):**  home remedies from the president. I'm interested on social media at the moment. I mean, the  main messages that I tend to see on social media where people starting to question whether  the government has been effective or not. And the other is argument about graphs, argument  about the data that's coming out. And I, I don't reckon that many people really understand  the data that's coming through and that's got a cause for problems.  
**[0:20:55-0:20:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:20:55):**  It is. And I, it's, you know, it makes me think of the other major threats to humanity  right now. This virus and climate change, and both of them suffer from kind of being  negative action. And what I mean by that is if you succeed, nothing will change, right?  If you succeed, you won't, you won't see the worst case scenario. It's very difficult to  communicate success because success looks like we overreacted to this.  
**[0:21:18-0:21:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:21:18):**  Interesting. And you've, you've, you've, you've delivered the segue beautifully for me. You  know, cause you know, we've, we've talked about COVID and we talked about the kind of  communication that's the most successful, you know, which again, it's targeting that  single message outcome, the anticipatory guidance, don't over reassure, share dilemmas, et cetera.  And so the question is, well, what can we learn from what governments have done well  
**[0:21:42-0:21:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:21:42):**  and what they've done badly, how we have responded as a society and how can we, how can we find  parallels? Are there parallels with these, you know, these big public health crises that  we know are coming and yet we still don't seem to be doing an awful lot about, and obviously  climate change is one, biodiversity loss is another. To me, COVID is different. It is  an immediate threat and these interventionist responses around freedom and expenditure are  
**[0:22:12-0:22:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:22:12):**  temporary. Whereas trying to solve climate change, it isn't about a temporary change.  Frankly, if you need to remove people's freedoms and create a massive economic depression in  order to solve climate change, I don't think many people are going to volunteer and say,  yeah, let's do that.  Yeah, I certainly don't disagree with that. I do feel that this, it's not as much an apples  
**[0:22:35-0:22:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:22:35):**  to oranges comparison as it's that this pandemic is a hyper focus. It's a shortened timeline.  You know, if we do look at the stages, we have a period where there was denialism. We  have the social media posts I see from the doubters are also the same people who are  climate change doubters actually on my feed. They question the numbers. They say, oh, hospitals  are just labeling everyone as COVID-19 when that's not really what's happening. They say  
**[0:23:00-0:23:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:23:00):**  influenza is worse. So I think we're actually seeing a lot of the same issues just in a  very focused, heightened timeframe. So I do think we, there are things that we can learn  from it. You know, one thing that we have seen maybe to counter what you were saying  of kind of huge changes, people will take huge change if they feel the threat is real.  Now convincing them the threat is real has of course been one of the most difficult challenges.  
**[0:23:25-0:23:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:23:25):**  But the other piece of this has been leadership has not been there right across the climate  issue. And I think an idea that it's just going to be a grassroots groundswell that  will fix this and save us from this ecological catastrophe is wrong. It's going to take government  leadership. And what we know now is people will respond to government leadership.  I think it's hard to communicate. And I think that it's dangerous if we start confusing  
**[0:23:50-0:23:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:23:50):**  the sort of, you know, the actions that we're being asked to do around the corona crisis  with what actions we would want society to take around climate. That can take us down  the wrong path. I think, you know, if we zoom out a little bit, to me, what the corona crisis  shows is that when government understands that it's a clear and present danger, it is  still the most effective force, if you like, to create change and that it's sort of rather  
**[0:24:20-0:24:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:24:20):**  than I feel like in climate discussions, in sustainability discussions more broadly, we  put, you know, put all the effort on the consumer, if you like, or the citizens' choice, and  that it's all about influencing, gently nudging and influencing behaviour change. But to me,  what stands out with the last few weeks is its regulation and its orders that is coming  with a, you know, unison argument behind it is, you know, changes things much quicker  
**[0:24:53-0:24:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:24:53):**  and much more drastically than a nudge ever will. And then obviously, we need to try and  figure out how do we not make those orders all be negative and sort of negatively influence  everyone's day to day living. And how do we make them also about, you know, really kind  of powering up the green, you know, the green shift, if you like, and putting our money  behind structural, you know, structural changes and using the kind of power of government  
**[0:25:20-0:25:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:25:20):**  to steer society in a different direction.  interventionism seems to be a lesson that's coming out of this. But surely that's not  a lesson that's going to that's going to hold going forward. I mean, over the last 30 years,  there's been this this huge schism between the liberal left who have been proposing interventionist  policies to solve climate change. A lot of people on the right denying that climate change  
**[0:25:41-0:25:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:25:41):**  exists because the solutions are so unpalatable. And, and only recently if we started having  a, you know, really intelligent and grown up debate about how we balance out that need  for regulation and a bit of intervention with, you know, market innovation and competition.  And so if the lesson coming out of COVID is the intervention is the way to go, you know,  we've got some challenges with climate change, you know, still, even though we've got some  
**[0:26:04-0:26:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:26:04):**  governments, you know, the right on the right in the UK in the US that have intervened in  this instance, it is because they believe it's a temporary intervention. It's not because  they suddenly had some political epiphany and change their mind about, you know, the  way the world works.  Yes, I agree. I guess the the premise, in this case, intervention, this seem to have  
**[0:26:25-0:26:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:26:25):**  worked because the key actors all agree on the clear and present danger. And I guess  the beginning of our conversation was how do we how did we get to a situation where  there was so much agreement on the danger that the main focus of communication and debate  have been around how do we best mitigate and prevent this. And if you get to that point,  then we know the clear orders and regulatory guidance, if you like from from governments  
**[0:26:54-0:27:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:26:54):**  is is extremely is extremely effective. Obviously, when it comes to climate, we still we're still  faced with that first challenge, which is, you know, how do we make sure that the politicians  and an industry and the key actors agree on the agree on the on the danger so that we  can move to that more constructive part of the conversation and look at how do we how  do we generate the shift that we need.  
**[0:27:18-0:27:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:27:18):**  And I'd say that there is a few specifics we can learn from the Coronavirus communication  and that apply to climate and probably some other issues where we're dealing with science  and societal change that needs to happen. And, you know, there's two places I think  they failed on the climate change side, the scientists and the activists. One is having  that single message outcome, having something that they're trying, they're communicating  
**[0:27:42-0:27:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:27:42):**  the science for a purpose. There's been this belief and complete objectivity. And if they  if the IPC just comes out and says, this is just the science, do what you will with it.  And also some over reassurance. Their models are are on the conservative side. So I think  that's been a mistake in communicating the science. I talked about trust and action at  the beginning underpinning everything is values. And the scientists have values. I don't think  
**[0:28:07-0:28:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:28:07):**  it needs to be an agenda, so to speak, but they have values guiding what they're doing  and being transparent about those actually will drive more trust. And the other piece,  as it applies to the activists, is sharing dilemmas. We've talked about these huge changes  that will need to happen, but not in a way that shares the dilemmas behind them. The  hard choices that will have to be made, the sacrifices that will have to be made that  
**[0:28:29-0:28:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:28:29):**  honours those people making those sacrifices. And so I think if we can start having that  conversation about those dilemmas we're going to face as a society and economic choices  we're going to have to make, then it'll prepare people for moving forward with that.  There's an interesting crossover with a couple of things that you were talking about there.  There's that whole kind of don't over reassure. And a whole way that the IPCC has approached  
**[0:28:52-0:28:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:28:52):**  this is by, as you say, downplaying the risks, not factoring in the impact of feedbacks like  tundra melt and that sort of thing. And then there's that whole sort of element of denialism  and the focusing on numbers. And in the same way, I was talking about social media, people  arguing about the numbers, which graph is most telling. I think that there has been  a huge focus on the number of degrees in a minute. One point five degrees, two degrees  
**[0:29:21-0:29:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:29:21):**  to most people, they're not thinking of it as an average across the planet. They're thinking  of, well, what does two degrees mean for me? It means I get a better summer. And that fixation  on the numbers obfuscates entirely the impacts of what we're talking about. Whereas perhaps  with coronavirus, it would, you know, going back to that conversation we were having earlier  about why we as individuals decided to have our freedoms restricted and that emotional  
**[0:29:46-0:29:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:29:46):**  theme, we can see our family in danger. And if we focus more on the consequences of climate  change and less on the number of degrees, maybe that would be a start.  You know, the thing that cuts through the numbers is the human stories. And with COVID,  you know, it's these images of these nurses and doctors talking about having to inform  families over FaceTime or a doctor standing outside his house waving at his young child,  
**[0:30:18-0:30:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:30:18):**  young, healthy people having to lose a leg because of complications of COVID-19 and even  dying because of it when young people felt they were invincible. In climate, we have  the stories already. It's already impacting people. When farmers start saying, here's  what I'm seeing, the impact on my crops, here's how my life and livelihood has changed because  of climate change, that cuts through all the noise about how many degrees and parts per  
**[0:30:43-0:30:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:30:43):**  million and the numbers. And I guess what we've been talking about  is that those stories and the people who, you know, generating those stories, I guess  it needs to be coupled with a really clear definition of what we would want people to  do with that information. So that would be one of the other key lessons that I take from  Corona is that there is a responsibility that falls on scientists to be clear about what  
**[0:31:10-0:31:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:31:10):**  kind of change they want their findings to have. And maybe there's even a sort of opportunity  to take, you know, in finance, you've got this sort of subsection of people who call  themselves impact investors who are unapologetically looking to spend their money in a way that  will have a clearly defined societal or environmental impact over and beyond the sort of financial  return. And I think getting some of that kind of thinking and language also into the scientific  
**[0:31:38-0:31:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:31:38):**  community where sort of impactful communication or measuring the impact the findings are having  on society or however you want to define it, that that becomes part of how scientists are  rated, how their careers develop, that we need to maybe look at how universities rate  their researchers, that there are things that are perhaps more important than just being  cited by other academics and other academic journals.  
**[0:32:05-0:32:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:32:05):**  It seems to me that the IPCC in itself is a problem in this in terms of communicating  the urgency of climate change, because it's a political institution informed by science.  And so when we get these, you know, these big assessments that come out, it's a piece  of diplomacy. It's the lowest common denominator. It's what everybody's been able to agree to  from the most denialist states that, you know, that are most oil dependent in the world,  
**[0:32:33-0:32:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:32:33):**  you know, those states that are most bought into the the urgent need to deal with this.  And so by its very nature, those messages are going to be, you know, very conservative.  And then there's the element where, you know, governments want to be seen to be in control.  But actually, I think what we're hearing is that governments need to be a bit more honest  about the threats that are coming, be a bit more united in talking about that, and then  
**[0:32:59-0:33:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:32:59):**  start to be a bit more honest about that conversation, the trade offs that society perhaps needs  to consider making. And I think that's starting to happen in the UK now that we've moved on  from a conversation about whether climate change exists or not. And we're now in that  place where we're starting to have a conversation about how quickly, how successful, which party  is going to drive emissions down fastest.  
**[0:33:20-0:33:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:33:20):**  Yeah, I think that's a strong summation of, you know, where we've been, where we are now  and where we need to go. And I think the one other piece that we can learn from this current  crisis is that need to challenge people and be clear about what you're asking them to  do. And I think that's really been missing from climate change. There's been a sense  that there's moral authority and just raising the alarm or putting out the science without  
**[0:33:46-0:33:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:33:46):**  asking anything of people. And we have to admit we've moved beyond that point. We need  to start sharing those dilemmas and then asking people to be part of taking tough, what may  be tough actions and challenging to be part of that solution.  Fantastic. I mean, I've kind of, you know, I've been trying to sort of scribble down  some of these, these learnings that we can take as we've been talking and you know, the  
**[0:34:07-0:34:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:34:07):**  one there was that challenging of individuals, you know, why is it, why is there anybody  in the UK who is concerned about climate change that isn't on a renewable energy tariff? That's  something that everybody can do and something that we all should be doing, especially because  the prices are, you know, entirely competitive with, with old fashioned fossil fuel energy.  And then there's that whole thing of forgetting the numbers. Just let's stop talking about  
**[0:34:34-0:34:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:34:34):**  degrees, stop talking about parts per million and start focusing on the impacts, the impacts  right now in our society, how it's going to impact on me, on my community, on my country,  on my food security, as well as those impacts around the world. And let's get that single  message outcome as well. Let's talk about fossil fuels. Let's talk about CO2, bringing  that down instead of getting focused as we have done recently on whether people should  
**[0:35:04-0:35:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:35:04):**  be vegetarian or whether they shouldn't be vegetarian, focus on the things that matter  and that's stopping using fossil fuels. And then there's, there's that whole piece we've  just touched on now about being honest about the risks and having a debate about how we  as a society, what those trade-offs are and those choices we should make.  As I hear you put all them together, there's a word that comes to mind, which is justice.  
**[0:35:25-0:35:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:35:25):**  And that in the response there needs to be, there won't always be fairness, but there  needs to be a sense of justice. And that's what we're saying. You know, in this it's,  it's not fair that kids can't go to school. It's not fair that people have to stay home.  It's not fair that we can't enjoy the park on what is a beautiful day today here in New  York. But by looking out for those essential workers, we're, you know, we're taking part  
**[0:35:47-0:35:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:35:47):**  in a form of justice. And I think with climate and other major issues, the kind of value  framing for looking at those dilemmas and those tough choices is really about it being  rooted in justice.  It's interesting you say that because of course there was this whole conversation certainly  here, you know, at the beginning where politicians were saying, look, and the media was saying,  
**[0:36:07-0:36:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:36:07):**  look, coronavirus is the great leveler. Anybody can get coronavirus. It doesn't matter where  you come from in society. But actually that isn't true. The people who are getting coronavirus  the most are those who are, you know, in those key worker jobs, people with big houses and  big gardens aren't suffering from the lockdown to the same extent that people living in,  you know, tower blocks are. The people who are contracting the virus are those who are  
**[0:36:31-0:36:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:36:31):**  going out working in shops on a daily basis, working in the health service, collecting  our BIMs. So it isn't a great leveler. And we, I think you're absolutely right that that  sense of justice has to be at the heart of our response to dealing with climate change  and biodiversity loss. That's all we've got time for. I'd like to thank my guests, Jason  Wojciechowski and Oystein Torsen. If you've enjoyed listening, please come back and listen  
**[0:36:56-0:37:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mass-mobilisation--coronavirus--climate-change-edjtie#t=0:36:56):**  to more. Tell your friends, like us, review us and share our links. Farmgate is a partnership  project for Farmwell and FAI Farms and you can join the conversation on Twitter by searching  for Farmgate podcast. I've been Finn Lo-Kustein. Bye for now.  