### Farm Gate  (2021-05-08)
**[0:00:00-0:00:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to FarmGate, I'm Finlow Costain. This programme is part of a series in which  I talk to farmers who are delivering agro-ecological agriculture on their farms. The farmers in  this series are working with the Soil Association as Agroecology Ambassadors and as part of  their 10 Years for Agroecology project. The series has also been inspired by the Food  Farming and Countryside Commission's work on farming for change. As Agroecology Ambassadors,  
**[0:00:30-0:00:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:00:30):**  the farmers in these programmes are inviting people, virtually of course, onto their farms  to help develop a better understanding of what agro-ecological farming entails. Today  we're looking at mixed farming and I'm joined by two superb farmers, both tenant farmers,  who are putting agro-ecological principles into action.  Ben Andrews farms at Broadwood Hall in Herefordshire. He farms beef, cereals and veg, with his father  
**[0:00:53-0:00:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:00:53):**  in around 600 acres of organic land. He can be found on Twitter and on Instagram under  the handle at BenTheoAndrews. Robert Wilson farms at Cowbog Farm in the Scottish Borders.  They have around 250 head of beef cattle, but the stars of the show, they say, are their  Romany Hereford herd. You can find Robert on Twitter under the handle at FarmandKitchen,  or on Instagram as at Wilson's Farm and Kitchen. Welcome both. To start us off, I wonder if  
**[0:01:19-0:01:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:01:19):**  you could just briefly describe your farm and tell us what you produce and what agroecology  really means for you. And Ben, I wonder if I can come to you first.  So our farm split over two sites. So there's 450 acres, which is down on what's called  the Hereford Lowlands. We've got the River Arrow right through the middle of it. That  floods the river meadows annually, which is where we graze the cattle. Then we have some  
**[0:01:45-0:01:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:01:45):**  really top notch grade one and two agricultural land that we grow our cereals and vegetables  on. Being a mixed farm, of course, everything's interconnected. The cattle, when they're in  the sheds, they're housed on nice fresh straw. And then in the spring, summer, sheds are  mucked out and the manure goes to fertiliser ground.  So just to clarify, I mean, I said 600 acres and you said 450. There's a bit of a discrepancy.  
**[0:02:09-0:02:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:02:09):**  And that's the 100th… You've got the new farm as well, but we'll come to that. And  that's your extra 150 acres. I wonder if you could just sort of sum up, you know, what  agroecology means for you and, you know, why you think of yourself as an agroecological  farmer.  Well, we've been organic now for 20 years this year. The initial change to organic farming,  
**[0:02:27-0:02:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:02:27):**  you think, well, organic is just conventional farming, but without the inputs. So without  the synthetic fertilisers and the synthetic pesticides. But you need to think about it  in an ecosystem point of view. So you need to be encouraging natural predators to control  the pests because you don't have synthetic pesticides to use. You need to look at ways  to build soil fertility without the help of synthetic fertilisers because you've got  
**[0:02:55-0:02:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:02:55):**  no other way of doing it. And if you don't build fertility, then you have poor soil health  and you can't grow crops. So you have to really think about working with nature instead  of against it to really make the most of farming without any chemical inputs.  And Robert, what is it that you farm?  We farm, well, the 250 head of herefits that you mentioned and also some arable ground,  
**[0:03:18-0:03:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:03:18):**  which is predominantly malting barley for the brewing and distilling industry.  And what about agroecology for you? What do you think it is that you do differently from  a standard conventional farmer?  Well, although we're conventional, which is probably slightly different to some of the  other Soil Association ambassadors, we try and farm with nature in mind and with the  
**[0:03:39-0:03:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:03:39):**  biodiversity in mind. We're an alolan farm similar to Ben that floods quite a lot in  the bottom and we've got a lot of water margins and watercourses. So we've made a conscious  decision to fence off as many of those as possible so stock can't get in. Where there's  an arable field, we've got a six metre grass margin alongside these watercourses.  Now you talked about having your 250 herefits and you have pedigree herefits as well. I  
**[0:04:05-0:04:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:04:05):**  think that's a smaller number, isn't it? And how big is the pedigree herd?  Of the 250, we've got 70 pedigree hereford cows and they are followers. So we've probably  got about 170 pedigree herefits in total and the rest are commercial cattle. It takes up  most of the time the pedigrees are feeding the stock. So certainly over the winter, you're  looking after them in the sheds very similar to what Ben's doing. Some of the commercial  
**[0:04:30-0:04:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:04:30):**  cattle are still outside on root crops.  Fantastic. Now, you're both tenant farmers and so I think it's worth sort of having just  a chat through that element a little bit. Ben, your family have been tenants on the  land since the 1930s. I think you're third generation. I just wonder how being the tenant  rather than the owner affects the decisions that you're able to make about the farm.  
**[0:04:50-0:04:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:04:50):**  There are definitely certain things that we can't do and we have to apply for permission  to do such as use of buildings or where we could maybe add some value somewhere else.  It's not quite as straightforward as just cracking on with renting out extra shed space  to someone else. There are other things like planting trees. I'm keen to look at planting  more trees on the farm, but again, this is something that needs to be discussed with  
**[0:05:19-0:05:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:05:19):**  the landlord. But the other thing, of course, being tenants is that you have to make every  acre count. We don't own this farm. We've got no equity in it. So, when we leave, we  just walk away from it and it's just despite being here for 90 years. So, you really do  have to think about what can I do to make this work? You have that rent check to pay  every month and you need to be making money from it, which a lot of people will say that  
**[0:05:50-0:05:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:05:50):**  being organic farmers or agroecological farmers is not as commercially viable as conventional  farming. But like I said, we've been doing it for 20 years, so we're still here.  And Robert, you're also a tenant. You've got two farms under your control as well and you've  got different tenancy agreements. One's on a secure tenancy.  The secure tenancy, which is on Cowrog farm, it was started in 1938 by my grandfather.  
**[0:06:16-0:06:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:06:16):**  He came into the farm. It's much more secure. Ben talked about the equity. Well, we can  get compensation for improvements that we've done to the land and we've done to the farm  over those last 80 years. Recently, the Scottish government and the Tenant Farming Commission  have been shoring up those regulations about leaving and what you can be refunded for.  It gives you a little bit more security.  
**[0:06:42-0:06:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:06:42):**  My understanding is that security is generational as well, that if you have successors that  want to take the farm on from within the family, then it's secure for them too.  Yeah, we could pass our lease on to any blood relative who can fit the criteria to look  after the land and look after the farm properly. And that's gone further now. Any tenant farmer  who wants to retire can assign the lease to a new entrant or a progressive farmer on the  
**[0:07:09-0:07:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:07:09):**  understanding that the landlord doesn't want to take the lease back in hand himself. So,  if he does that, he has to compensate the tenant. So, there is a little bit more equity  involved in leases now.  So, Ben, clearly Scottish law is different to English law.  I'd say we are fairly secure. We're on a three-generation, it's called Agricultural Holdings Act tenancy,  
**[0:07:30-0:07:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:07:30):**  which is a fantastic tenancy to be on. And my dad renegotiated, so he's the first tenant,  I'll be the second. And then so if I have kids and they want to farm, then they'll have  the right to be the third. Improvements to the buildings are a little harder. So, we're  on a full repairing and ensuring tenancy. So, we're responsible for the buildings. If  we put a building up, then we can get it down as tenants' improvements. But that's only  
**[0:07:58-0:08:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:07:58):**  if they agree to it. And after 25 years, it then automatically becomes their property.  Whereas if we wanted to put a shed up and they didn't agree, it would be tenants' fixtures.  And when we came to the end of the tenancy, we'd have to take it with us.  So that's tenancy and that's your farms on tenancy. Well, Ben, you've just bought 150  acres up on hillier ground, which must be fantastic for a whole range of reasons. First  
**[0:08:23-0:08:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:08:23):**  of all, it won't flood in quite the same way. But also it's your own. You can do whatever  you want to do with it.  I'm so excited about it because it is a really beautiful 150 acres of ring fenced land. The  main farm that we're tenants on is on the edge of the town. It's got a road running  through the middle of it, another main road and a railway track on the edge of it. So,  
**[0:08:45-0:08:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:08:45):**  it's not quite the bucolic idyll that a lot of people might think farming is. So, up in  the hills, it is absolutely stunning. We've got some incredible features like gullies  with these massive oak and ash trees shooting up out of them and gets a bit more snow up  there. So quiet. And it's perfect for conversion to organic ground, which is what we've done  from 1st of January. It's in organic conversion and also enrolled into the mid-tier countryside  
**[0:09:13-0:09:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:09:13):**  stewardship scheme as well. So, there's some things we're going to be doing up there to  encourage wild birds and just generally to boosting biodiversity.  It's ruminants on there.  It's going to be keeping on with the mixed theme. So, there will be some fantastic grazing.  There's some lovely patches of woodland for woodland grazing, spring fed ponds for watering  
**[0:09:33-0:09:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:09:33):**  over the borehole up there as well. But yeah, there will be also some arable land into the  rotation where we will grow whole crop silage and some spring beans, just all keeping it  growing all our own feed for our cattle. We're not no-till. It's quite hard getting onto  the no-till bandwagon as organic. We do plough, but we also integrate long clover lays. So,  we've got five years of fertility building clover to help boost nitrogen, but also organic  
**[0:10:03-0:10:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:10:03):**  matter as well.  When we've spoken in the past, you've talked about the area being great for agroforestry.  And I wonder if you have a sense of, you know, what does that mean for you? What do you hope  to do? What, in a perfect world, what would you like to do? And would that planting be  integrated with the stock or separate from the stock?  
**[0:10:18-0:10:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:10:18):**  Well, to integrate more silvopasture into the system. So, that's woodland grazing, being  able to plant some trees that can be harvested for firewood or for, you know, general energy  crops through pollarding. But also the trees, different trees are beneficial to cattle in  different ways, you know, as natural wormers. And they will, then browsing animals, cattle  aren't designed to just graze one variety of grass. In the wild, ruminants would have  
**[0:10:47-0:10:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:10:47):**  taken a little bit from this plant, a little bit from that plant. And so, just trying to  reintroduce a bit more of a natural habitat for them.  Robert, just going back to your pedigree, Romany Hereford's, they're at the centre of  your business and you also produce beef and malting barley for the whisky industry. What  made you choose the products that you produce?  
**[0:11:04-0:11:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:11:04):**  I think the farm did, basically. It suited, I don't want to sound like a traditional farmer  saying, oh, just what my grandfather did. It does suit the land we've got and suit the  land. The cattle are very easy doing. They suit our permanent grassland that we graze  them on. We've got very few grass lays. The only ones we've got are in the arable rotation  just to retain a bit of organic matter and give the soil a rest. So, they suit the land  
**[0:11:30-0:11:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:11:30):**  that we're grazing them on. And the malting barley, we've got fairly light land and it  doesn't suit big wheat crops. So, it suits to growing low nitrogen.  So with the barley, you're moving that, you're rotating that around the farm as well?  Yes, we tend to grow it for a few years in the same field and then break it up with grass  or root crops for the cows. And we've also got a neighbour that grows some broccoli on  
**[0:11:55-0:11:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:11:55):**  our land if we feel we need something just a little different.  As an agroecological farmer, are you sort of taking steps to reduce the amount of fertilisers  and so on that you're using?  Yeah, we're lucky being a mixed farm that we've got a lot of access to farmyard manure,  which can go back into the system and go back into the soil and provide nutrients that way.  
**[0:12:16-0:12:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:12:16):**  With the grass lays, certainly we've got fairly high percentage of red clover in those lays  and that again fixes a lot of nitrogen in the soil. A lot of the less productive land  we have put over to environmental crops, especially down by our riverside. It's very, very light  land there. It suits us better to put those into crops that last all year, providing a  negative source and a food source for birds over the winter, a nesting habitat for ground  
**[0:12:45-0:12:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:12:45):**  nesting birds in the spring. And even if we don't make any money on that, we were losing  money when we were trying to grow crops on it. So it fits our system.  So do you find yourself using chemical sprays in addition to those measures that you've  talked about?  We do. We use as little as possible, but we do need to... A lot of the crops being a bit  
**[0:13:05-0:13:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:13:05):**  further north, the weather can be a bit inclement and we need to watch the likes of fungicides.  We don't use pesticides on the arable crops, but we do use herbicides and fungicides.  What level of control would you say that you have over your routes to market? I mean, I  imagine with the pedigree herd, you're much more in the position of being price makers  rather than price takers, but are you sort of fixed into contracts and have limited control  
**[0:13:33-0:13:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:13:33):**  over the other things? Or do you feel that you have some measure of control?  We've got some measure of control in that you can look at the future markets and see  what price you can get at harvest time next year. So last week on a bit of land that we  contract farm for our landlord, we sold the wheat for next November at a price that I  thought was economic for us to do so. And again, with the crops we've got in the ground  
**[0:13:57-0:14:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:13:57):**  or we will put in the ground in March and April, we can take a price now for selling  them at harvest. So it is the market price, but we can choose when to take it or we can  have a gamble and just see what it's like at harvest. With the beef side of the business,  like you say, the pedigree stock, we can be price makers on that and we can also make  a better price by producing or demand a better price by producing better cattle. The beef  
**[0:14:21-0:14:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:14:21):**  side of it, the cattle aren't good enough for selling as pedigree cattle. Some of those  were probably our price takers, but we're trying to increase the price we can get by  selling a bit more beef directly to consumers.  Ben, you produce vegetables, cereals and beef. You contract it to M&S, I think, for your  beef. What happens to the cereals and the veggies?  
**[0:14:42-0:14:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:14:42):**  The cereals, most of them actually end up going for stock feed, but if we can get the  right spec on the oats, then we have managed to get them to organic porridge oats, which  is fantastic. The vegetables all go to Able and Cole. It's a big box scheme that operates  across the whole of England now, mostly in the UK as well, I think. They are a fantastic  company to deal with. We are at that sort of stage where we are probably growing too  
**[0:15:13-0:15:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:15:13):**  much to just serve locally, but not quite big enough to go into supermarkets. So there  aren't many spaces within that. So finding someone like Able and Cole that are fair to  deal with, who you can have a constructive conversation about prices and that don't screw  you over when you're unable to fulfil an order, it's really refreshing, especially considering  I speak to friends who have supermarket contracts and when it goes right, it goes really bright.  
**[0:15:41-0:15:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:15:41):**  But then if they don't want something, they will find any excuse to reject it. So it's  nice to be working with people who are so fair, really. With the beef, like you said,  the M&S contract is great, but I'd like to supply more locally. Over the past few years,  there's been quite an issue with the number of abattoirs really decreasing and there's  been just the growth of three or four major players, like ADP or Foil. It just means that  
**[0:16:13-0:16:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:16:13):**  there are much fewer organic certified slaughterhouses to send your cattle to. So where we are, the  closest is Ellesmere, which is a good over an hour's drive away. And with a push by the  government to reduce the amount of time that animals can spend in transit to an abattoir,  it's really something needs to happen to maybe bring a few smaller ones back because the  small ones around us are just too small. One thing I would just point out is that from  
**[0:16:40-0:16:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:16:40):**  the COVID outbreak, if they had an outbreak in these meat processing factories, it would  shut them down. And that meant that if they're shut down, that's doing a lot more damage  than say one or two localised food processing centres getting shut down would be. So we  actually had some cattle having to travel to Glasgow because that was the nearest place  to send them. That doesn't sit right with me.  
**[0:17:04-0:17:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:17:04):**  Mason. Absolutely. And I guess with all things, what we're talking about with agriculture, land use, the types  of products that are being produced, the type of slaughterhouse, it's diversity. It's trying  to make sure that there is something that serves all different stages, different scales  of production, and that that's available to people when they need it. You've got 11 hectares  of vegetables. And I just wonder about your growing season, what you actually produce,  
**[0:17:30-0:17:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:17:30):**  how that works.  Well, like Robert, we've come to know what we can grow on our farm. So we've tried pretty  much every vegetable going in the past and you just learn what grows well and what doesn't.  So things like carrots don't tend to do as well because our soil can get quite heavy.  And if it's a little bit wet, then you end up with some really muddy carrots and nobody  
**[0:17:51-0:17:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:17:51):**  loves muddy carrots. So we've settled on salad crops. So lettuce is probably our biggest  and brassica is sort of what, it's about 50-50. So kale, cabbage, cauliflower. We seem to  grow those incredibly well. And I've got a friend who is a brassica agronomist down in  Cornwall and he came up and visited about a year ago now and looked around the farm  and he said, to be fair, these are growing as well as most of the conventional crops  
**[0:18:19-0:18:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:18:19):**  I see.  There's a lot of talk, isn't there, about, you know, growing lettuce and things like  that in big stacked systems in old industrial sites or down on the London Underground. Have  you got subways tunnelled out on your farm or is it outside?  Well, I think the infrastructure costs of building that would take some paying back  
**[0:18:38-0:18:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:18:38):**  when we've got such fantastic, rich, fertile soil that we can just grow it in so effortlessly.  In the city centres, then I think these could maybe be answers to food shortages, but I'm  not that keen on growing all our food in sanitised boxes. I quite like the idea of getting a  little bit of dirt on my cabbage and eating that.  Absolutely. So, Robert, over the last 20 years or so, you talked about the fact that you've  
**[0:19:04-0:19:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:19:04):**  made lots of ecological changes, ecological improvements. And I wonder, when we've talked  in the past, you said that, you know, there's a price tag attached to these things. So,  I wonder what sort of things you've done and where you managed to find the funding to do  what you've done.  Well, we started about 20 years ago trying to improve the biodiversity in the farm, taking  
**[0:19:22-0:19:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:19:22):**  these unproductive areas of land out of mainly cereal production. So, at that time there  was funding available and quite a lot of funding. So, there were capital payments that we could  fence off these areas, we could put new hedges in. Then in these areas we planted a mixture  of crops. So, imagine a bowl of muesli and just putting that on the ground and you've  got oats and barley and maybe not cranberries, but you had fodder radish and sunflowers and  
**[0:19:50-0:19:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:19:50):**  a really purple crop called phacelia. Phacelia is really good because it's great for bees  and it's great for birds as well. So, we put these in and we were paid for doing so and  that provided, you know, provided a great boost for nature on what had been a farm that,  as Ben mentioned, you tried to work hard to make a return from every acre. So, it wasn't  a crop or it wasn't grass. So, the funding was there to do that and it has been there  
**[0:20:15-0:20:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:20:15):**  to do that over the last 20 years, but on a diminishing amount. I guess I've got a slight  concern at the moment that these funds are, there might be a bit of a gap for two or three  years until our new agricultural system in Scotland is worked out as to what's happening  in 2024. My concern on the agri-cology point of view is whether there will be consistent  funding.  
**[0:20:39-0:20:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:20:39):**  Do you feel that if the funding does reduce as a result of Brexit, that you'll be less  able because you're in this position as a tenant farmer of needing to make every acre  count as you both talked about, do you feel that there is a danger that you won't be able  to do as much in terms of the ecology on your farm? Or do you think you're in a position  now where, you know, you've been doing it for 20 years and you can kind of just get  
**[0:21:02-0:21:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:21:02):**  on with it even if there is a dip?  Yeah, I think we will and certainly the areas that are fenced off, there's absolutely no  reason because they were fenced off for a reason and that was because they were unproductive.  The only way I could see them coming out of the management options that we are using them  for is if they were going back to grass and I can't see us taking out a fence to put them  
**[0:21:22-0:21:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:21:22):**  back to grass for a short term period. The fact they're fenced off means there would  be the option to plant trees on them with a little bit more investment in fencing.  Ben, your main farm's down on the flood plain and I think you were saying something like  a third of it gets flooded for a couple of months and even one year recently it was six  months. That's pretty serious, that's a lot of your land that's had a production for a  
**[0:21:44-0:21:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:21:44):**  long time. How does it affect your management?  Well, one of the reasons that we have put it all to permanent pasture is in the past  that we had tried growing things on there and we'd lost that game far too many times.  So putting grass there is about one of the best things you can do because you've got  permanent grass, deep roots, it helps with the infiltration so it can hold a lot more  
**[0:22:10-0:22:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:22:10):**  water. If you're ploughing it, there are a lot of farms along the river, gets ploughed  and then heavy rainfall, you get a lot of topsoil runoff into the water, into the rivers,  which is an absolute disaster for wildlife. So we've saved some recovery from flooding,  so 2019, from the 1st of October 2019 until sometime in March in 2020 our flood land was  pretty much constantly under water. We had two of the worst floods we'd ever had and  
**[0:22:42-0:22:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:22:42):**  so if you think, I think at parts it was about five foot under water. So if you can imagine  five foot of water for six months pressing down on grass, there's not going to be an  awful lot alive in that soil by the end of it. So when it dried up, we go through it  with a subsoiler, just help alleviate some compaction and it's amazing how some of these  old river meadows just recover, they just bounce back. We found we don't have to do  
**[0:23:11-0:23:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:23:11):**  a lot of reseeding or anything like that. There were patches where the extensive water  had just completely ruined it but you can throw a little bit of grass seed on top of  it and it bounces back. But the good old grass species that are there, you know, they've  developed to be there because they can take a bit of a beating from some water.  Jason Vale Just again, because you know, not everybody  
**[0:23:33-0:23:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:23:33):**  who's listening is a farmer. What does subsoiling mean?  Daniel Disney So subsoiling basically alleviates compaction.  So if you think in your garden, you might go with a with a fork, put your foot in the  fork, put it in the ground, give it a bit of a wiggle, gets a bit of air into the ground  and kickstart it back to life. Jason Vale So it's the same kind of process  
**[0:23:50-0:23:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:23:50):**  but with a tractor and a thing on the back. You know, I wonder because we talk about the  soil carbon sponge and the amount of water that can be held and the healthier the soil,  the deeper the root systems, the more water can be held there. And because you know, the  way that you've been managing it, I wonder if obviously it's easier if you're a bird  and you can look down on these things. But whether you get a sense in the summertime,  
**[0:24:13-0:24:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:24:13):**  whether your land is in a better condition, you've got less bare ground in the sward than  some of your neighbours that are managing in different ways.  Daniel Disney Well, I actually bought a drone last year  to just to do that very thing. The biggest problem with last year, like I was saying,  massive floods, and then it stopped raining in March and then it didn't start raining  
**[0:24:33-0:24:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:24:33):**  again, I think until about June. So actually, the subsoiling was one of the worst things  we could have done because it then just dried the ground out too much. One thing I'm doing  is this year, my top of my priority list is better grazing management. So looking at rotational  or mob grazing to more intensively graze areas for short times and then move them onto fresh  patch to allow that grass then a good month to regrow, you know, to regrow not only on  
**[0:25:05-0:25:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:25:05):**  the surface, but also the roots as well. Up at the new farm, the field sizes haven't changed.  I've got a map I think from 1885, the field sizes are all exactly the same. It's a fairly  small, pretty square fields and it just lends itself perfectly to that rotational grazing.  Just looking at it slightly differently, one of the other issues from having mild wet winters  that we have is the pests that we have on the vegetables. So normally you need a good  
**[0:25:32-0:25:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:25:32):**  frost to kill off the aphids, the white flies that we have on the brassicas and the lettuce.  So bringing more mild winters as we've seen with the recent emergency authorization on  the neonicotinoids on sugar beet, you know, their argument was that not having decent  frost to kill off the aphids. So we need to look at ways, we already do things to encourage  beneficial insects on the farm such as planting buckwheat, which attracts hoverflies and lacewings  
**[0:26:02-0:26:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:26:02):**  that feed on aphids. So we need to do more things to encourage those beneficial insects  to keep on top of those pests because otherwise we will have more and more cases of pests  and diseases that are usually killed off by the cold snap that we tend to have in the  winter.  Jason Vale – So it's about managing nature better, allowing nature to manage itself better,  
**[0:26:22-0:26:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:26:22):**  having again more diversity within the insect life and the bird life that exists, restoring  that natural balance I suppose that we've been so good at kind of eliminating over the  course of the last 70 years in one way or another. Robert, just, you know, clearly Scotland  gets a bit of rain as well. Are you thinking of looking at mob grazing and that sort of  thing on your farm?  
**[0:26:42-0:26:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:26:42):**  Robert Poulson – Yes, we are. We tend to do it, but not very scientifically I would  suggest. We have big enough herds that we, or big enough mobs that we move around, but  there's not the, there's not the planning to it and we don't maybe take into account  residuals enough moving the stock on. So I think it is something we need to look at.  Jason Vale – You've both talked about wildlife quite a lot. You're clearly both  
**[0:27:05-0:27:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:27:05):**  very proud of the wildlife that you have on your farm, particularly the bird life. And  Robert, during the COVID lockdowns, you were telling me that you've taken time to sit  down and actually count the birds that you've got at Cowbog. What did you find?  Robert Poulson – Well, like I say, we sat down and I thought I'd seen quite a lot  this year and I think possibly just being at home that little bit more, not attending  
**[0:27:27-0:27:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:27:27):**  agricultural shows for two or three weeks in the summer meant that you saw a full season.  On our two farms at 420 acres, we found 85 species of bird on it, not including seagulls,  because they confused me a little bit. I can pick one or two out, but not all of them.  And that was, it was reassuring that what we were doing was providing enough food sources  and nesting sites for both ground nesting birds and, you know, hedge nesting and tree  
**[0:27:54-0:27:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:27:54):**  nesting birds. Jason Vale – 85 species is a really good,  healthy number. And for those, were you tending to see sort of ones and twos or were you seeing,  you know, sort of decent sized flocks? Robert Poulson – Well, I guess a lot of  our barn owls that need a bit more of a territory, we weren't seeing those so much. And certainly  last year, whether it was with the dry weather, they didn't have fantastic broods last year  
**[0:28:16-0:28:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:28:16):**  because somebody comes in to ring them on their legs to take account. But our partridge  that we've seen last year did surprisingly well. Probably the best grey partridge broods  we've seen over winter, whether it's because it's a little bit harder, we've seen tremendous  flocks of linnets and red wings and bramblings. And just a couple of mornings ago, saw about  150 skylarks when I was out moving a fence for some cows in the field. So I think there  
**[0:28:42-0:28:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:28:42):**  are enough numbers of priority species. Jason Vale – Excellent. I think you might  have Ben coming for a visit because Ben, you told me that you've become something of  a twitcher recently and that this is a newfound passion for you. Do you think there've always  been loads of birds on your farm and you've just been unaware or has there been an increase  recently? Ben L – I definitely think there's been  
**[0:29:01-0:29:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:29:01):**  an increase. Like you said, it's a relatively recent interest in that I'll be out picking  vegetables all day and you'll just hear some bird like just twittering away and then  you'll get your phone out and you'll start sort of going through the RSPB website, just  looking at, you know, trying to listen to various calls to try and figure out what it  is. We have got a fantastic range of birds and the wild bird mix that we have as part  
**[0:29:31-0:29:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:29:31):**  of the countryside stewardship scheme where we've got sunflowers, millet, quinoa, things  like that, all these seeds. We've got charms of finches, absolutely insane amounts, it's  murmurations that I've never seen. You know, I've always ever seen a couple on a hedge  or something, but to see them in these numbers is absolutely mind-boggling. So that's when  you start thinking, oh, so what's that? And then a couple of different types of bird,  
**[0:30:00-0:30:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:30:00):**  stonechats and reed buntings, which I'd never heard of before. And yeah, they might have  been there, but maybe it's just that I wasn't looking for them. So again, skylarks, wagtails,  yellow and grey wagtails, which are, you know, these, a lot of these birds are the skylarks,  the wagtails, meadow pipettes, they feed on invertebrates. So they're also helping us  with our pest problems. They'll be taking slugs, they'll be any little bugs, flea beetle,  
**[0:30:30-0:30:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:30:30):**  they'll be pecking away trying to get hold of those. So it's, yeah, it's fantastic to  see them. And you know that if you've got healthy bird populations, then they're only  there because they've got the feed source there for them. If you've just got farms without  any space for nature, then you can't expect them to thrive.  Jason Vale,  
**[0:30:53-0:31:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:30:53):**  So, you talked about things that you've done on your farm specifically to help different  species.  Yeah, we've got plots for ground nesting birds. So the hectare of just bare earth, which is  to encourage lapwings. And lapwings are a bird that we, when I was growing up, we always  used to get, my parents used to take me in the car and we used to go down and they're  
**[0:31:25-0:31:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:31:25):**  fantastic birds and they're cool. And they're slightly curvy wing shape. And we had so many  of them. And then I don't know why, but we just suddenly stopped seeing quite so many.  We weren't really intensifying our farming practices, you know, quite the opposite. Like  I said, 20 years ago, we went organic, but we have started to see them come back and  you'll get one come back and then it'll go away and then you might get a couple. And  
**[0:31:51-0:31:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:31:51):**  now we're starting to see groups of them sort of colonising this wild bird nesting area.  And that's fantastic to see. And as again, I said, the wild bird mix that we plant specifically  for them, but in the veg crops, we do have a lot of fat hen, which is one of the, one  of our biggest weeds we have on the farm, but the seeds from the fat hen, birds absolutely  love it. So if they, if there's space within the crop to encourage birds as well, rather  
**[0:32:19-0:32:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:32:19):**  than just having lots separately to encourage them, then I'm all for that.  Jason Vale,  It's interesting, isn't it? One of the things that I've heard about the, you know, the decline  in wildlife and bird life on farms is that it's partly just because, you know, machinery  and farmers themselves are becoming more efficient. So the less waste just lying around on the  
**[0:32:36-0:32:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:32:36):**  farm, less grain that gets spilled. And obviously farmers don't want to spill grain unless they  really need to. But what you're doing there is creating those habitats, it's creating  the wildflowers. So that seed is, you know, is having the chance to produce itself. And,  you know, it's really good to hear. Robert, we're nearing the end of the programme and  I just wanted to come back and touch on something else before we finish. And when we talked  
**[0:33:00-0:33:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:33:00):**  before the programme, you'd said that you wanted to develop your farm, bring the public  onto the farm and make it a sort of distant cousin of River Cottage. You know, what does  that mean? What do you want to do?  We're really keen, I think, like a lot of farmers, and we're really keen on trying  to help share our story and tell people how, or show people how their food is produced  
**[0:33:22-0:33:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:33:22):**  and try and dispel some of the myths. There's an awful lot of noise about at the moment  from well from from everywhere about you shouldn't eat this and you shouldn't eat that. But we'd  rather take people around the farm on tours that we run and show them what we're doing  from an agroecology point of view, but also see how it relates to their to their food.  And so you're actively bringing people there, you're inviting groups to come and have experience  
**[0:33:46-0:33:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:33:46):**  days and that sort of thing. What would an experience day entail? What would it feel  like if I came to your farm with my family?  When people arrive, we also welcome them and we give people a little bit of the history  of the farm and why we're here and how long we've been here and a little bit about the  area and what we're doing on the farm in terms of the Hereford cattle and the malting  
**[0:34:08-0:34:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:34:08):**  barley production. Then we generally we jump on tracks and trailers and we tour around  and show people the crops, you know, explain the difference between an oak crop and a barley  crop and why we're growing it. And then on to our cattle, which are, you know, they're  very friendly cows, our cows, and they'll wander over to a trailer and they'll like  a head scratch. So explaining to people how they're grazing the grass rather than having  
**[0:34:33-0:34:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:34:33):**  to rely on soil, which they, you know, there's a lot of ruminants get blamed for soil production  and how it relates to a more sustainable product in the UK. And then once we've done that,  we invite people back in for a meal of our products and neighbours products. And as much  as we can, we're doing that from an on-farm basis. So we're just about to put up a small  polytunnel to, you know, if we need chilies, we'd rather have them from our own farm  
**[0:35:00-0:35:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:35:00):**  than nipping off to the grocers and getting some from who knows where in the country.  Fantastic. And your wife is helping, I think, with the catering. And so you're doing  catering on the farm as well, and that's becoming part of your business.  Oh yeah, I'm absolutely atrocious in the kitchen. I'm much better on the farm. So  Lucy, my wife, she's more or less on the back of COVID and having to stop farm tours  
**[0:35:21-0:35:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:35:21):**  and guests, she's started her own catering company and that ties into our tours and she  knows how to make best use of the seasonal products that we've got here.  Fantastic. That's been a really interesting sort of whistle-stop tour through mixed production.  We've been talking about cereals, vegetables and beef all mixed in there, as well as the  issues around, you know, diversification. So bringing people onto the farm, having experience  
**[0:35:47-0:35:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:35:47):**  days, the joy for farmers of seeing the wildlife and the bird life doing their thing on the  farm. So that's fantastic. That's all we've got time for. I'd like to thank my guests,  Ben Andrews from Broadwood Hall in Herefordshire and Robert Wilson from Cow Bog Farm in the  Scottish Borders. Our Agroecological Beef podcast is already available and there are  more programmes in this series coming soon. If you've enjoyed listening, please come  
**[0:36:11-0:36:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Mixed-farming---Putting-agroecology-into-practice-eq4cs8#t=0:36:11):**  back and listen to more. Tell your friends, like us, review us and share our links. Farmgate  is a partnership project for Farmwell and FAI Farms. We're funded by Sam Kalper and  you can join the conversation on Twitter by searching for Farmgate podcast. I've been  Finn Low-Kastain. Bye for now.  