### Farm Gate  (2020-15-17)
**[0:00:00-0:00:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to Farmgate, I'm Finnlow Kirstein. Today I'm talking to Robin O'Brien,  who in September 2020 was named in the Forbes Impact 50, a list of the top impact investors  in the USA. A key influencer around food quality and health in particular, Robin is the best-selling  author of The Unhealthy Truth and her TED Talks have received over a million views.  Today we're here to talk about Replant Capital, a new fund to help finance scalable climate  
**[0:00:34-0:00:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:00:34):**  solutions. It's based in the USA and it's worth $250 million. Replant's flagship fund,  its soil fund, is focused on the transition of American farmland to regenerative agriculture.  Welcome to the programme, Robin. And I wonder if we could just sort of start at the beginning.  What is Replant Capital and what do you think it is that makes it special?  Well, thanks so much for having me. It's great to be with you today and thank you for asking  
**[0:01:00-0:01:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:01:00):**  what makes Replant special. We clearly believe that there's an enormous opportunity to really  step into a leadership role and invite others to do the same and think about capital as  the most important ingredient in our food and agricultural system. We all around the  world have inherited a very extractive, very broken food and agricultural system. And you  can see that play out by what is actually happening to the financial and economic wellbeing  
**[0:01:24-0:01:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:01:24):**  of farmers. And as we looked at that, we thought, you know, there is no food security if there  is not financial security for farmers and there is no climate security unless we really  get at this issue of soil health. So as we were really putting our heads together, there  are three co-founders, myself, Dave Haynes, who comes from a private equity background  and the company was a B Corp. And then Don Schafer, who comes from an integrated capital  
**[0:01:47-0:01:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:01:47):**  background as the CEO of RSF Social Finance for 10 years. We put our heads together and  we thought, how can we create a financial services firm that is mindful and aware and  integrated with these issues as opposed to extractive? Because so many of the financial  partners that come into these partnerships for food and ag, they come from a very extractive  place. They don't have an understanding. They aren't mission aligned. They aren't value  
**[0:02:11-0:02:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:02:11):**  driven. They're simply there as the bank to extract what they can from that client. And  as a result, we now have inherited these very extractive, very broken financial and agricultural  systems. So we flipped it and we said, you know, what would it look like if capital was  value aligned? What would it look like if there was a financial services firm that was  mission driven and value aligned with a team that understood not only food, but understood  
**[0:02:33-0:02:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:02:33):**  the economic and the financial crisis that's happening on U.S. farmland? And you highlight,  you know, the U.S. farmers. That's who we're starting with. We've had to be very disciplined  in the beginning of the fund. It's a 250 million dollar fund, as you highlighted, really disciplined  on working with replacing these extractive loan terms that American farmers have been  under and replacing them with loans that are actually tied to soil health. So if you want  
**[0:02:58-0:03:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:02:58):**  to talk about that a little bit, you know, that's where we get really excited, because  loan terms are always dictated by the banks. And there was not a lot of creativity and  there was not a lot of innovation. And for whatever reason, the financial industry sort  of got stuck. The rest of the world has moved into the 21st century. We talk about pretty  much every other industry in a very different way today than we were 20 or 30 years ago.  
**[0:03:19-0:03:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:03:19):**  But for whatever reason, the financial world got stuck. And so they're measuring these  food companies and these agricultural companies using the same metrics they always have for  the last 30, 40, 50, 100 years. The invitation is to really update that and say, you know,  what are the metrics that are relevant to 21st century farming? What are the metrics  that are relevant to a 21st century shareholder? What are the metrics that are relevant to  
**[0:03:41-0:03:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:03:41):**  a 21st century food company? And if you were to be in an interview or in a conversation  with General Mills or Nestle or Denone or any of these companies, they are capturing  different metrics today than they were capturing 30 years ago. But Wall Street's not asking  for that. So we've got a really antiquated, outdated, ignorant financial system as a partner  in food and ag.  
**[0:04:02-0:04:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:04:02):**  Well, let's get into that information about the metrics and the loan repayment terms and  that sort of thing a bit later. But let's sort of take a step backwards, if we may,  at this stage. And in the UK, where I'm based, the whole conversation about regenerative  agriculture is probably only about two years old. Is it a longer timeline in the USA? Have  you been talking about regen ag for longer?  
**[0:04:22-0:04:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:04:22):**  That's a great question. So, yes, in the United States, we have an institution, an organisation  called the Rodale Institute. And the founder of the Rodale Institute was actually talking  about regenerative agriculture 60 years ago. I think, you know, as we as we think about  this and as we consider what is now emerging as this very powerful force in food and ag,  a lot of times we get the question, you know, what is regenerative agriculture? I think  
**[0:04:46-0:04:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:04:46):**  to step back from that just a little bit, the bigger question is, what is soil health?  How are we defining soil health? Because how we define soil health is actually how we define  regenerative agriculture. So we've been talking about soil health for a while. And in the  last 10 years with soil scientists, there's really been this emergence of this realisation  again, leveraging 21st century technology, that soil serves as a really powerful database.  
**[0:05:13-0:05:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:05:13):**  So now that we have this awareness and the technology and the tools to access that database  that is soil, that's the conversation that's changing. And that's my point exactly with  the prior issue is, is we are in the 21st century and we have tools and we have metrics  and we have technology that we didn't have 30 years ago. So it changes our ability to  talk about these things. So as we begin to talk about soil health, and the regeneration  
**[0:05:36-0:05:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:05:36):**  of soil health, we can then include these metrics like carbon sequestration, water conservation,  water infiltration, soil organic matter, nutrient density, we can talk about these metrics today,  because we now have tools to capture that data. If you want to flip it, if we talk about  regeneration, the reason we've all been brought to this point of talking about regeneration  is because agriculture up until this point has been about degenerating, it has degenerated  
**[0:06:02-0:06:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:06:02):**  the soil, and degeneration has been the issue we have extracted and extracted and extracted,  both financially from the farmers that are serving the soil and serving the food and  ag industry. And we have extracted so much from the soil itself through this agrochemical  model that was so widely embraced for the last 30 years. So all of a sudden, we've all  kind of hit this point where we've realized, wow, we can't extract more financially from  
**[0:06:27-0:06:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:06:27):**  farmers. I mean, in the United States, US farmers carry $426 billion of debt, that income  on a farm on any given year is in the it's negative, it's a negative $1,800. So I can't  imagine trying to sell that proposition to any 30 year old who wants to go into farming.  So we've got a really, really upside down economic and financial situation for farmers.  And then on top of that, as they took out more and more loans to finance that agrochemical  
**[0:06:53-0:06:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:06:53):**  model, they got further and further into debt. And so we have applied these agrochemicals  across the soil, harming the soil, we now know we stand on soil that is damaged. And  then at the same time, we've got this economic problem for the farmer. And that duality is  what we saw as both the problem and the enormous opportunity to come in and say, what does  it look like to think about capital in a regenerative way for the farmer at the same time we're  
**[0:07:17-0:07:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:07:17):**  talking about regeneration of the soil.  And that experience that you describe of the debt burden that's on US farmers, of course,  you know, that's replicated in so many countries around the world. And I'm, I'm interested  because of course, you know, some of the people that you're looking to fund and that you're  working with the people like carbon cowboy, Will Harris from White Oak Pastures, and you  
**[0:07:37-0:07:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:07:37):**  know, he has turned his whole business around.  Exactly. And I think, you know, Will's a great example, because in our conversations, I asked  him once I said, what was the hardest part for you transitioning to regenerative agriculture?  Because as you highlighted, I mean, these guys are fifth, six, sometimes seventh generation  farmers that have been farming conventionally. So in that initial transition, that can feel  
**[0:07:59-0:08:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:07:59):**  pretty radical. And I asked him, I said, what was the hardest part? And he paused, and he  got really quiet. And he said, I'll tell you what the best part was, the best part was  that my kids came back to the farm. And so again, if we're going to be talking about  food security, if we're going to be talking about farming in any country, and you're right,  because I have dual citizenship, my mother is from New Zealand, the debt levels in New  
**[0:08:21-0:08:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:08:21):**  Zealand are equal, equal to debt levels here in the United States, when you look at the  percentages, if we're going to be talking about food security for any country, we absolutely  have to secure that career, we have to secure that legacy and that succession of farmers,  young farmers, stepping into this and taking over the farm. And so what we're hearing from  farmers is, and what I love about the regenerative movement in the United States is that what's  
**[0:08:45-0:08:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:08:45):**  happening is the farmers are coming in first, this isn't being dictated by the consumer,  some of the food companies are pretty loud about it. But it's the farmers themselves  who are coming in, out of curiosity, out of concern that their kids don't want to take  over the farm out of concern for the debt levels out of concern for soil health, because  they're standing on that soil that they have routinely treated for 20 or 30 years of these  
**[0:09:07-0:09:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:09:07):**  chemicals, and they understand what has happened to it. So if you're going to go from this  kind of really intense chemical input model, which is what we have had for the last 20  or 30 years, really, with genetically engineered crops, and all of the portfolios of chemicals  and herbicides and fungicides and insecticides, if we're going to go from that chemical input  model and all of the debt that was required to finance it into a service model, the other  
**[0:09:30-0:09:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:09:30):**  piece that's going to be required are these technical assistance partners. So guys and  women on the ground, who can walk a farmer through that transition. And again, it's  not going to be one size fits all. You got a guy like Will out in Georgia, and the technical  assistance and expertise that he's going to need to transition to regenerative is going  to be so different to the technical expertise that would be required of almond growers in  
**[0:09:54-0:09:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:09:54):**  the San Joaquin Valley in California.  Before we come into the detail around the type of loans and the metrics and that sort  of thing, I just wonder if I could talk to you, Robin, about your own journey, because  it's, you know, it's quite unique. You did a TED Talk about the connection between food  quality and health maybe 10 years ago. But I wonder if you could talk us a little bit  
**[0:10:12-0:10:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:10:12):**  about your background and how you came to be involved in this work.  Yeah, my entire career has been in food and agriculture. And I'm actually named after  a farmer who lives in New Zealand in Palmerston North. You know, I think back to that. And  it's, it has always been the work that I have done when I got out of graduate school and  got out of business school. I joined an investment team. I was the only woman on the team. So  
**[0:10:34-0:10:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:10:34):**  the guys had me cover the food industry. I was not in any way emotional about this. I  was not in any way dialed into organic. This was back in the late 1990s, early 2000s. And  so I simply was analyzing the food industry from that purely mechanical analytical place.  My heart was not involved in all and I liked it that way. It was safe, you know, but I  could see how, and we were celebrating this at the time, how real ingredients were taken  
**[0:10:57-0:11:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:10:57):**  out, artificial ingredients were put in, drove margins, drove profitability. And that's what  we rewarded in the marketplace. That's what we were looking for as shareholders. So I  understood that incredible drive and that incredible pressure on these companies by  Wall Street because I was one of the people doing it. So, you know, as we sat with those  teams and learn those models, and then a few years later, we started our family and we  
**[0:11:19-0:11:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:11:19):**  moved to Colorado. So to move from Texas to Colorado at that point in time was like moving  from Earth to Mars. You couldn't have picked two cultures that were more different going  from oil and gas centered economy out into the Rocky Mountains, you know, where nature  and the environment, everything was protected and taken care of. So as I was moving into  this space, it was sort of that awareness, you know, like this whole other way of thinking  
**[0:11:42-0:11:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:11:42):**  about things. And then my kids got sick. And so as the kids were getting sick, I was looking  at food because they were having these reactions. And as I was looking at the size of these  boxes, I was like, what in the world is this stuff? You know, we had compensated the management  teams because they were driving profitability. But when you suddenly flip that box of mac  and cheese over, we're not just talking about noodles and milk and cheese anymore. You know,  
**[0:12:06-0:12:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:12:06):**  there's a list of probably 29 ingredients that you can't pronounce. And so as I was  turning back into that, you know, coming at it from this different angle as a mother of  a child that was sick, I went back to my team and I said, you know, all of these chemicals  that are that are now in our food system, why did we not cover that when I was covering  the food industry? And they said, well, the chemical industry analyst covered that. And  
**[0:12:26-0:12:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:12:26):**  I said, well, these these shouldn't be in two separate buckets. You know, if the food  industry is using genetically engineered ingredients and Roundup at record levels, we should be  talking about that in those conversations that we're having with the food industry.  And I felt so strongly about that, of marrying those two things back together, because by  separating them, they had been able to avoid some of these harder conversations. And the  
**[0:12:50-0:12:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:12:50):**  further I got down that path, talking to former analysts talking to different partners that  I had worked with, the more I understood why. And it had really been this effort to keep  the consumer in the dark. And you guys in Europe, Australia, New Zealand, India, China,  Russia, everybody labeled genetically engineered ingredients when they were first introduced  in the 1990s. In the US, we were never informed, we were never told and they were never labeled.  
**[0:13:14-0:13:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:13:14):**  And to me, that was such a massive infringement on our freedoms, and on our right to know.  And it really challenged sort of how I viewed our ability to have information and freedom  of access and an informed choice as an American. And so I began to make to make noise on that.  And it was incredibly uncomfortable. I come from a really conservative family in the south  and to have to sort of step out and speak out. I mean, people would use the word activists,  
**[0:13:40-0:13:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:13:40):**  and I was like, that's not the right word. This is just, you know, it's driven by love.  This is a love thing. It's so wrong that we haven't been told this. And if you love your  family, of course, you want to make the best choice. But how can you make the best choice  if you don't even know that this change had happened? And so as I did,  Did you find when you started doing that, that other people started coming out of the  
**[0:14:00-0:14:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:14:00):**  woodwork, mothers and fathers around you and started, you know, realizing that you were  championing something really important? Yes, but that did not happen immediately.  In the very beginning, people looked at me like I had three heads. I mean, no one was  talking about GMOs. And it was, you know, no one could believe that the US government  had introduced an entire new modality to agriculture without informing the public. I mean, that's  
**[0:14:19-0:14:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:14:19):**  a pretty big challenge, you know, and so I had to say, Look, this has really happened.  And the way that I was able to convince people was to take Kellogg's or Kraft or one of these  American food companies and show two boxes side by side of the two boxes and the different  ingredients and how in the US, we use these cheaper, chemically packed, you know, ingredients  and products. And then in Europe, for example, you aren't allowed to use artificial colors  
**[0:14:46-0:14:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:14:46):**  that are linked to hyperactivity, you aren't allowed to use the high fructose corn syrup.  And if they're genetically engineered ingredients, and they're labeled, and when you can see  that exact same box side by side with two very different ingredient panels by our own  American companies, that was the game changer. That's when people were like, you know what,  that absolutely ticks me off, because what they're doing is they're making cheaper ingredients  
**[0:15:10-0:15:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:15:10):**  for our families that put our families at risk while they are making better ingredients  and better products for families overseas. And that double standard was a universal offense.  And so once I landed on that, once I could talk about that and say, Look, here's an example  of how it's played out against us. That was when people mobilized around it. That's when  other families and other organizations started to mobilize, but there were probably two to  
**[0:15:35-0:15:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:15:35):**  three years to at least two to three years in there that were just painfully isolating.  Being tenacious. Yeah, yeah. So that was your sort of entry point into sustainable food.  And obviously, you've traveled a million miles, and now you're part of replant. How did that  come about?  So you know, it was really interesting, because we, all three of us come from, we've all been  
**[0:15:58-0:16:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:15:58):**  in this space our entire careers, but you know, coming in through very different doors.  And so for me, you know, as I began to speak out on this, and then really, you know, Random  House published my book in 2009. But it was really that 2011 TED Talk that really was  the catalyst. And that was a terrifying moment, because you're standing on that stage completely  by yourself, you know, and you're delivering this story. And one of the first CEOs that  
**[0:16:22-0:16:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:16:22):**  I heard from was the CEO of Nestle's frozen food division. And he reached out and he said,  Look, you can say things I can't say. And he said, I'm deeply concerned about what's  happening here. The shareholders don't understand, my board doesn't understand, you know, if  I keep going down this path, I'm going to be laying off my employees who are like family.  So he was an incredibly good guy, and had me come out to Ohio to meet with his team.  
**[0:16:45-0:16:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:16:45):**  And as we started, as I started to work through this, you know, I began consulting with these  different companies to really help them understand the fundamental shift in the 21st century  consumer, the fact that things like food allergies and diabetes and pediatric cancer, they are  not a fad, they are not a trend. These were actual data points that we could sit down  and discuss and explain why the 21st century consumer was looking for free from food. So  
**[0:17:11-0:17:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:17:11):**  it began to shift their portfolio with Nestle, for example, seven years later, they were  able to introduce an allergen free USDA organic GMO free, you know, chocolate chip, and it  took that long. So once the food industry realized they were on the wrong side of this  issue, they began to acquire the organic companies like Annie's and Applegate. And that began  to change the DNA inside these companies, it also began to change the leadership inside  
**[0:17:36-0:17:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:17:36):**  these companies, we still have the problem where Wall Street didn't have a clue. So you  know, Wall Street's still grading General Mills and Nestle and all of these publicly  traded companies on those same old metrics from 1975, instead of asking them about conversion  to organic farmland, and what are the, you know, programs that you have in place. And  so it quickly became clear from these multinationals that the supply chain was the crisis. And  
**[0:18:00-0:18:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:18:00):**  we had, the consumer had moved into the 21st century, the consumer was asking for free  from food, because of all these conditions that we see now in the US. The problem was  that, you know, if 80% of consumers were asking for organic, and now 75% of grocery store  categories are carrying something organic, because these companies listened, the problem  is that only 1% of US farmland is organic. So you can't grow an industry on 1%. And as  
**[0:18:27-0:18:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:18:27):**  I would meet with these executives, I realized Wall Street wasn't going to give them the  bandwidth to convert that farmland, because Wall Street's grilling them and drilling down  on them on that quarterly earnings model every three months, what is this? What is this?  What is this? You can't convert farmland in three months, that's a three year process.  So that timeline tension created a problem for these brands that knew that the consumer  
**[0:18:50-0:18:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:18:50):**  had moved into the 21st century. They knew that the consumer was asking for organic food,  they were developing the product line, but the supply chain isn't there. So somebody  needed to step in. Yeah, I was frustrated because the organic industry was doing an  amazing job, sort of on the consumer side of things. And on the shelf side, and the  innovation there was great. Nobody was looking at procurement and nobody was trying to solve  
**[0:19:13-0:19:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:19:13):**  for supply chain at scale. And Dave Haynes, who was private equity at Greenmont Capital,  he was frustrated because at that point, everything was just, it was just flipping deals, and  it was hot. And it was, again, the values were starting to erode. And then Don Schafer  had come in from the debt side. And he had seen how hard it was for some of these companies  to get access to capital and loans. So the three of us were putting our heads together.  
**[0:19:37-0:19:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:19:37):**  And we thought, you know, how do we actually solve for the supply chain crisis? And how  do we come in and actually provide capital? And so the concept of the SOIL Fund emerged  and what's been fascinating is that it's been, you know, again, like, we're not talking to  Wall Street, like those guys are stuck, you know, we could be banging our heads against  those walls for the next decade. Our focus was there's a lot of capital, philanthropic  
**[0:20:01-0:20:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:20:01):**  capital, high net worth individuals, family foundations, donor advised funds, there is  a lot of capital that is out there. And it needs, you know, for us, it was as that capital  was channeled and transitioned into regenerative agriculture. So we really emerged as a very  powerful platform for that capture. And what has been absolutely fascinating is that a  lot of our lead investors are female. A lot of them are women, a lot of them are mothers,  
**[0:20:30-0:20:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:20:30):**  and you don't even have to get four sentences in before they understand exactly what this  is about.  So help me clarify here, you've got $250 million. And as I understand it, the plan is to use  80% of that for loans, and 20% of it going towards investments in regen agri tech. And  so so how does that break down? When you talk about the soil fund? What is that within that  
**[0:20:52-0:20:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:20:52):**  $250 million?  So the soil fund is $250 million, 80% of that. So 200 million of that is are these loans  that we are deploying to farmers. And, you know, it's when we sit down with Danone and  these companies like General Mills or Driscolls, you know, to sit down with them, and they  say, our farmers are under these enormously extractive terms. We want to replace those  
**[0:21:14-0:21:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:21:14):**  and have capital that's aligned with this greater mission. So with Danone, for example,  this is powerful stuff, all of the savings that they generate through the loans that  they will be offered through replant and through the soil fund, whatever savings are generated,  those savings are going to be immediately deployed back into regenerative agriculture  and other regenerative projects. And so you know, we have the opportunity to say, you  
**[0:21:36-0:21:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:21:36):**  know, this extractive capital, these extractive terms can be replaced by regenerative capital  and regenerative terms that allow a farmer to actually grow into regenerative agriculture  and grow into organic agriculture, because it's at the point like you touched on earlier,  they are in such a financial crisis that even if they wanted to transition, they don't have  the financial bandwidth to do it. So we realized you had to go in there and create that bandwidth.  
**[0:22:03-0:22:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:22:03):**  So 80% of the fund are these, you know, reconstructing these loans to farmers, and then 20% of the  fund, so 50 million is in the space of ag technology. And the reason we see those things  side by side is because we're hearing from the farmers themselves, all these different  companies are coming at them, they don't know how to do due diligence on them, they don't  know how to sort through the companies themselves, like Danone and Anheuser-Busch, you know,  
**[0:22:24-0:22:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:22:24):**  they're seeing kind of different opportunities come at them. So to conduct that due diligence  on the ag technology, but we're specific because the companies that were interested in that  space are directly tied to soil health. So how can an ag tech company that we may be  talking to on the equity side work with the farmers that we have on the debt side? And  how can we talk about, you know, there are different examples of algae, where algae,  
**[0:22:47-0:22:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:22:47):**  you know, companies that are developing technology through algae that's restoring soil health  is breaking that chemical dependence that the soil has. So there's so many different  opportunities. And we see so many synergies kind of across that, you know, equity to the  farm level side.  So we're going to talk about the farm loans in just a second. But I'm just interested  
**[0:23:04-0:23:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:23:04):**  to sort of drill into that agri tech, you know, to a greater extent, and whether you're  able to give any any sort of specific examples about the type of thing that you mean? Is  it sort of, you know, things that monitor soil carbon or collect data? Or is it things  like robots that might go out and help with weeding? What sort of things are you thinking  of?  
**[0:23:22-0:23:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:23:22):**  It's across the spectrum, you know, I think for us, it's, you know, we we are not going  to necessarily say this is what we think is best. But as we work with farmers in our network  to be able to go to the farmers and say, is this something you would use, you know, because  I may think that they would use it or Dave may think that they would use it and the farmer  might look at us and be like, you guys are crazy. We're not going to use this. So it's  
**[0:23:44-0:23:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:23:44):**  that it's that ability to sort of do a focus group or test across the acreage that we have.  So you know, the answer is yes to those ag tech solutions that are really getting at  this intersection of soil health and climate. So if there is technology that can facilitate  and expedite the building of soil health, and if that is, you know, in some kind of  cover cropping way or some kind of weeding way that enables us to break that dependency  
**[0:24:13-0:24:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:24:13):**  on the chemical ag system that yes, you know, in terms of ag technology, but there are a  million ways that it can go because as you touched on, you know, as the carbon market  continues to gel, you know, I think we're still a few years out from the actual mechanics  of that and the metrics of that. But you know, in terms of capturing carbon in soil and measuring  carbon in soil, that data, those metrics are incredibly powerful. And the same goes for  
**[0:24:37-0:24:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:24:37):**  water. I mean, my bias is actually towards water. I think the water conversation is absolutely  critical. So the ag technology that we can be using and deploying around water sensors  and infiltration and conservation and the way that we think about water, especially  as we deal with almond growers in places like the Central Valley and California. So it's  really that, you know, I think that the field of ag tech as we see it today, 10 years from  
**[0:25:01-0:25:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:25:01):**  now is going to be defined in so many different tiers and so many different ways as it continues  to emerge.  I wonder if you have any sense of how big the average loan is likely to be. What sort  of scale of farm are you talking about?  You know, it's interesting. So, you know, Danone, for example, sent us a list of 10  
**[0:25:19-0:25:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:25:19):**  farmers that they were hoping to sort of restructure their loans. Those 10 farmers alone carried  $289 million in debt. So, you know, if we wanted to, that could be the whole first fund.  We don't want the first fund to only be for one partner, but it sort of speaks to the  scope and scale and size of the problem, which is also the size of the opportunity. So for  us, you know, what we see is the ability to do this at scale and with alacrity. So the  
**[0:25:46-0:25:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:25:46):**  urgency around the work, around soil health and as it relates to climate for us is huge.  All of us are parents. We see the enormity of the task at hand and also the opportunity.  So for us, it's to work with these multinational companies so that we can do this quickly and  at scale. But then, you know, to me, and I think it's because I am named after a farmer  that runs a small farm, you know, we can't we don't we that's a place of privilege to  
**[0:26:11-0:26:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:26:11):**  say, oh, we're only going to work with the large scale farmers. We need to be working  with all of them. So we are in the process right now as these smaller farms come in,  you know, contacting us through the site and other means to figure out how we can create  opportunities and bundles and loans that work with all farmers. So we're in the process  of actually collecting that data right now as it comes in to understand, you know, if  
**[0:26:33-0:26:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:26:33):**  there's a farmer in Washington state who has 500 acres and is looking to transition to certified  organic, what are the needs there? So we're really in a data collecting mode right now  and all of that.  And it seemed earlier on that you were indicating that, you know, you're starting in the US,  you're being disciplined, but potentially if the fund goes well and you feel like you're  
**[0:26:52-0:26:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:26:52):**  making a difference and you're able to scale those solutions, that perhaps there is an  intention to move outside of the US in due course?  I mean, you know, as a dual citizen with New Zealand, I would love that because, you know,  we see and we hear consistently from farmers in Australia that are really in this climate  crisis, especially as it relates to water. We've heard from farmers in Pakistan, India,  
**[0:27:12-0:27:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:27:12):**  you know, just around the world, Europe, of course. For us, we are not territorial because  there is not time. There is not time to have that mindset of scarcity. So, you know, as  we have these conversations, you know, our goal is you can open source this. We can show  exactly what we're doing. We can demonstrate it because clearly the scale of the debt problem  for farmers around the world is massive. And replant is not of the mindset that this is  
**[0:27:36-0:27:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:27:36):**  ours to solve alone. What we hope to create is an industry that thinks about capital differently,  that services farms differently. And so where we're tying our loans to soil health, what's  to say that the next company that emerges can come in and say, you know what, let's think about  capital as it's tied to the United Nations sustainability goals. And the more that this  organization or this farm hits those goals, then the lower the cost of capital. Some of the farmers  
**[0:28:00-0:28:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:28:00):**  that we're in conversations with, they're B Corp certified. So what would it look like for a  financial services firm to come in and say, you know what, we're going to work with B Corp  certified farmers. So there's enormous opportunity to think about capital in this collaborative,  creative way. And that's what we're modeling and that's our invitation to others to come in beside  us and help grow the industry. So you talked about the importance of soil health metrics there. And  
**[0:28:23-0:28:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:28:23):**  that kind of brings us on to the repayments because that's one of the sort of interesting  and unique elements that was talked about in Forbes magazine recently, the way in which you're  planning to tie the interest rates with the success, for example, that farmers have in  boosting soil carbon levels. Right, that's right. So that's where these third party technical  assistance partners come in, because, you know, for that to have validity, we can't be doing that  
**[0:28:45-0:28:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:28:45):**  ourselves. It has to be independently verified. So we work with different partners, you know, again,  depending on the crop type, depending on the region, depending on the soil type and figure  out what those metrics should be. So if it's water conservation on a dairy farm in Ohio,  if it's carbon sequestration, if it's soil organic matter, to determine at the start of the loan,  what those metrics are going to be. And then a huge part of the loan package is that guaranteed  
**[0:29:10-0:29:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:29:10):**  buyer. So we're bringing in this third, you know, the multinational food company as a guaranteed  buyer so that the farmer has that buyer guaranteed for offtake at the end of the three year conversion.  So as we looked at it, we thought, you know, how do you actually offer capital that helps mitigate  the risk for the farmer as he steps into the conversion? Because it is a three year process.  So, you know, it's not something that we can figure out in year one. However, what we are  
**[0:29:37-0:29:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:29:37):**  seeing is if there's a farmer, for example, like one of the growers that we know in Indiana,  and he was converting his farmland from conventional soybeans and conventional corn,  he had 7000 acres. And as he stepped into regenerative agriculture in that first year,  just the reduction of chemical inputs saved him half a million dollars. So, you know, again, it's  recognizing this is not going to be one size fits all. And as we work with dairy farmers and a  
**[0:30:03-0:30:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:30:03):**  company like Denone with dairy, or we work with Anheuser-Busch and barley and rice growers to  really sit down and figure out what are the terms of that loan that work with the barley growers and  the metrics for soil health on a barley farm as we capture them. So that's Don's experience as CEO  of RSF Social Finance. He was able to really creatively create integrated capital metrics  and loans and terms that allowed him to meet the needs of the specific organization that he was  
**[0:30:32-0:30:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:30:32):**  working with. So we're bringing that skill set to replant. So do you find, are you planning that  the interest rates will actually change, that you'll be rewarding success? That's the goal.  Yes, that's the goal. So the stronger the metrics are on soil health, the lower the cost of capital.  Really interesting to hear what you're saying about using different metrics for different farms,  you know, based on a whole range of different elements in terms of what they're trying to  
**[0:30:57-0:31:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:30:57):**  deliver, what you're trying to get them to deliver. And I'm wondering in terms of assessing that  baseline data, how many metrics you're sort of starting from? Is there a suite of 20 or 30  metrics that you kind of got to begin with that you then start to narrow down or to prioritize?  Or is there, you know, it's just, you know, there are three or four key metrics and those are the  ones that you're starting from? You know, that's a great question. And I think those metrics, again,  
**[0:31:23-0:31:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:31:23):**  if you think about soil as a database, you could have hundreds of metrics if you wanted to,  you know. So for us, it's not to try not to pre-determine what those should be.  Are there sort of checks and balances in there to make sure that there isn't too much  emphasis on any single metric so that you're not driving unintended consequences?  Yes, exactly. And I mean, I think that's exactly the critical issue, I think, and is to be mindful  
**[0:31:50-0:31:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:31:50):**  of unintended consequences and the ability to pivot as needed if those start to arise. So,  you know, again, I think it's, you know, for us, it requires radical transparency.  And with ag technology, there is a transparency that we can bring to farming. Like you touched  on with drone technology, I mean, they're all different ways to capture this data. Again,  you know, what is the farmer going to engage with? What is he actually going to use? That's,  
**[0:32:15-0:32:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:32:15):**  you know, that's a big part of the conversation. And with some of the different ag tech companies  that we've we've spoken to, I mean, one of the first questions I'll ask them is, do you have  a farmer on your board? You know, because you can raise millions of dollars and have an idea that  you think is absolutely brilliant on paper, but if it's not going to be deployed on the farm,  it's a waste of everybody's time and resources. So again, for us, it's having the farmer at the  
**[0:32:36-0:32:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:32:36):**  centre of these conversations. For too long, the farmer was sidelined and treated as just a servant  in the process. Robin, it's been so interesting talking to you. That's all we've got time for.  I'd like to thank my guest Robin O'Brien, the co-founder of replant capital. You can find out  more about replant on their website replantcap.com. And if you've enjoyed listening, please come back,  listen to more, tell your friends, like us, review us and share our links. Farmgate is a partnership  
**[0:33:02-0:33:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regenerative-finance-The-one-with-Robyn-OBrien-entud5#t=0:33:02):**  project for Farmwell and FAI Farms. We're funded by Suncalpa and you can join the conversation  on Twitter by searching for Farmgate podcast. I've been Finn low-custaine. Bye for now.  