### Farm Gate  (2020-55-09)
**[0:00:00-0:00:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:00:00):**  Hello. On the Farmgate podcast today, I'm talking to Leontino Balbo Jr. from Sao Paulo.  He is a rock star of regenerative farming, a phenomenally successful sugar producer,  an inventor and philosopher. His farm is highly productive, it yields 35% of the world's  organic sugar, sequesters more carbon than it emits, and his land is now one of the most  biodiversity rich areas in the region. He spoke to me from Brazil.  
**[0:00:35-0:00:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:00:35):**  Leontino Balbo Jr, we hear constantly that monocultures are bad things, and yet you produce  35% of the world's organic sugar in a monoculture. So what's so different about yours?  Monoculture is a relative concept. So after more than three decades without burning, no  chemicals, protecting the soil from the UV ray from the sun and soil mobilization, we  got back hundreds of different species of spontaneous plants, what they call weed. So  
**[0:01:19-0:01:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:01:19):**  in spite of having large areas of cane, we let the cane to coexist with hundreds of different  species of weed because the weed or a spontaneous plant, which nowadays we call companion plants,  they are the best nature sense to fix or to accompany the plants of the crop. So we do  not see the crop itself. We watch the environment as a whole. If you have a stream, if you have  a forest, if you have a crop, and if you have people and other vertebrates. So we watch  
**[0:02:02-0:02:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:02:02):**  and we take care about the farm or the environment as a whole. So the first thing, what is different  is the way we fill the environment. It's a change on people's minds. We see the farm  as a way of life and not a way of production.  So in fact, if we were looking, if we were flying over your farm and it's 20,000 hectares,  isn't it? It's a big farm. What we would see would look like a monoculture, but what you're  
**[0:02:35-0:02:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:02:35):**  saying is that it isn't. The sugar cane is just one product, one crop amongst a remarkable  diversity of life on the ground.  The most important thing that we stop thinking, we quit thinking that the man, the humankind  knows how to nourish and to protect the plants. This is two potentials. So in the forest,  who protects and nourish a plant is the soil life, what we call biota, all the fauna and  
**[0:03:08-0:03:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:03:08):**  flora which lives in the soil. So what we learned to do is to feed the soil life and  then the soil life itself takes care about the plants, the crop. And so in a way that  for the first time in history, we have a large scale organic project producing 24% more than  conventional in some public states.  And you've done this by taking almost by taking man out of the system and reintegrating the  
**[0:03:45-0:03:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:03:45):**  complexity of nature.  So I was 24 years old when I got here. I was in a recent graduated agronomy and I got frustrated  with the cane burning, with chemical application, say I proposed to my parents and then my uncles,  my parent partners, that if I could start making change in a cane harvester in a way  that the harvesters could harvest green cane instead of burned cane.  
**[0:04:19-0:04:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:04:19):**  So just because people won't be familiar necessarily with the process of burnt cane harvesting.  Could you describe what the farm was doing 35 years ago?  Yeah, the canes were burned at night. In the other day, thousands of people used to start  cutting with a long knife and one cane cutter used it to do 7,000 cuts per day. It's a very,  very consuming and severe job and which I wanted to replace.  
**[0:04:56-0:05:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:04:56):**  And as we started mechanizing the harvesting, we started training those people to assume  or to occupy another positions in the organic management. Some went to work in biological  control, weed control, or they became mechanics, machine operators, drivers. No one was dismissed  because of the harvesting mechanization. And the thing is I was 24 when I started that  and I thought I was going to take my whole life to get to accomplish this task. That  
**[0:05:36-0:05:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:05:36):**  may, I mean to harvest green cane, but I do that when I was 29.  And people said you couldn't do it. It's remarkable.  And then I said, should I retire myself? So what's next? Then I thought I have to eliminate  the herbicides and then I have to eliminate the chemicals. And so I studied about, I started  studying about the traditional organic production, which implies in having cattle manure and  
**[0:06:11-0:06:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:06:11):**  cattle manure composed and so on. And I thought, Oh my God, I would have to take on my back  a cattle or a call wherever I go. So then I got completely lost. I was a traditional  agronomist. I went to a forest, I was lost and I thought I have to recognize I know anything  in order to start learning. And then I start watching the trees. I noticed that the leaf  cutting ants were not cutting any leaf inside the forest. And that there was a different  
**[0:06:48-0:06:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:06:48):**  order and natural water in charge of the natural production processes. And so I suddenly I  had maybe an insight and I started seeing everything happening, you know, like an infographic,  like a film. And I realized that instantly, I realized that in nature, everything is about  minerals or live organisms and energy. So, and I thought I must integrate, promote a  deep integration among energy, minerals and energy in a way that the alive organism in  
**[0:07:34-0:07:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:07:34):**  the agricultural ecosystem permeates the minerals along the food chain. And so I thought, okay,  I in green harvesting, I have the trash like here in the forest. Now I have to take all  this life to my landfill. And I started transferring termites, all the things people see as flames.  Leontino, Leontino, before we go into that detail, I want to go back because I want people  to be able to get inside your mind to an extent. And I want to go back to that point at which  
**[0:08:08-0:08:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:08:08):**  you started experimenting and building a machine for the green cane because for the green cane  harvesting because it wasn't an overnight success, was it? It took several years. And  so you as an engineer, as a mechanic, as a problem solver, you just worked and worked  and worked to make sure that whoever said, no, it can't work, that they were wrong and  you were right. And it seems to me that that's a process somehow that you've then taken into  
**[0:08:40-0:08:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:08:40):**  the forest and your amazing brain that just is able to break apart the components and  understand the minutiae of how things work, that that's what you took into the forest  and that's what you brought out of it, having seen what was happening and how nature was  functioning. Yeah, the machine, we took five years and 10,000 hours working day and night  until we finished the machine. In the middle of the development, the machine manufacturer  
**[0:09:11-0:09:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:09:11):**  himself didn't believe we couldn't harvest green cane. I told him, okay, you let here  mechanics that we are going to weld and cut this machine until we harvest green cane.  I don't know if I'm too stubborn or determined, but in everything I do. So, but on the forest,  I was grew in a farm. I was six years old. I used to catch snakes with my hands. I used  to be like the Mowgli, you know, I used to, I used to feel myself part of the natural  
**[0:09:49-0:09:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:09:49):**  elements. So my connection with the, the, the, the earth, the soil, the water, and so  on, I was too strong. I was too strong. I used to stay just on shorts, you know, barefoot  walking everywhere alone. I used to go 15 kilometers by bike to begin dangerous rivers  to fish and so on. So then when I grew, I went to the universe then we started living  in a city. But when I come back to work in the farms, I felt that I was reconnected to  
**[0:10:25-0:10:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:10:25):**  those natural forces. And I then learned how to learn from them, how to read, how to understand  what nature's wants to tell you, you know,  And so you went into the forest and you saw this living infographic, um, of, of, of everything  just working. You say the leaf cutter ants and, and that there wasn't destruction going  on there. It wasn't the one species was attacking another species, but there was a certain natural  
**[0:10:57-0:11:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:10:57):**  harmony that you thought to yourself, that's something I can recreate on my farm.  Yeah. Yeah. But, but this, this also, this also demands from the observer a certain consciousness  expansion. So we have somehow to open our minds and our heart to what we want to learn.  You know, we have to disattach from all the prejudgments or, uh, some, I would say that  analytical science and why we, and I lead to science is good in a certain aspect. It  
**[0:11:43-0:11:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:11:43):**  puts some limits to people's mind, you know, because people will stay attached to certain  paradigms, which then I lead to science creates for instance. Um, I used to take soil analysis  and in the last 15 years I take this soil in my hand, I smell the soil. There are other  biological indicators that can tell us how the soil is without having to do a soil analysis.  What kind of indicators are those? For instance, the solar coil, the solar aggregates, you  
**[0:12:22-0:12:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:12:22):**  know, the most important in soil is its stability. And we, we measure soil stability against  water through analyzing it. The soil aggregates because sand, silt and clay are sticked together  by a proteomic glue produced by a bacteria, a colemolus, which is a micro insect, insect  and a littering. And all this alive organism has been killed by the chemicals applied in  the conventional agriculture. And now, but this, this proteomic glue, it presents a validity  
**[0:13:07-0:13:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:13:07):**  about 60, 70 years. So we are seeing what we are seeing the world is that the green  revolution techniques were applying in the fifties or in the sixties of the last century,  but now it's most harmful collateral effect is appearing 60 years later or after they  started applying this high productive production system. So because it was applied over soils,  which bio-extructure was integrated, was good. And, but along the years and the decades,  
**[0:13:52-0:14:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:13:52):**  now the soil is becoming pulverized and the soil is losing its functionalities. It's losing  for instance, its capacity of holding water. And if the soil loses the capacity of holding  water, you are not going to have water stock to feed the streams, the aquifer, the clouds  and the plants. And your water and your water relationship has changed as well, hasn't it?  Your infiltration and retention has just improved enormously. Yeah. For instance, our conventional  
**[0:14:27-0:14:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:14:27):**  soil in the neighbour farms here is compacted, not because of just of a high pressure dryers,  but they are compacted because they don't have bacteria, earthworms, fungus, which keeps  the soil structure alive, active. We need the soil structure to be active. It's a kind  of a live soil. So their soil holds like 60 or 70 litres of water per square metre of  soil. While our soil retains or hold 300 litres, five times more than a conventional soil.  
**[0:15:11-0:15:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:15:11):**  So in this, avoid an irrigation system. So you do not need to go to the bank to raise  a finance in order to buy the irrigation equipments. You are going to save water and then you are  going to save energy. It's just there because you've managed the soil, you have the irrigation  system is provided by nature. And you mentioned earthworms, but they're just one of a cornucopia  of a huge range of creatures, arthropods, mammals, amphibians, reptiles that you have  
**[0:15:46-0:15:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:15:46):**  on the farm. What kind of numbers do you have? So in terms of earthworms, in January is the  best is when the population of earthworms is in its peak. You can find between one and  two million active earthworms per hectare. They can move between 300 and 600 tons of  soil per hectare per year. There's no machine to do that. On vertebrates, so and also we  live after every year, we live all after harvesting the cane, we live 20 tons of highly dignified  
**[0:16:31-0:16:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:16:31):**  trash per hectare per year. So we have insects like termites, we have birds, we have caterpillars,  we have fungus, we have meat which decomposes this trash. And I remember hearing that originally  you had ants or a type of ants and a type of termite that were highly destructive, but  that that's changed. And what's changed is that you've got more species of termite, more  species of ant and they're sort of almost controlling each other. Yeah, we had one species  
**[0:17:10-0:17:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:17:10):**  of harmful termites to the cane. And now then after removing, after eliminating burning  and chemicals, the termites which eat death matter in the forest and green waste, they  migrate to the cane fields and they eat the death trash and they banish in a way, they  banish the bad one. So now we don't have the bad one for the cane and we have another eight  different species of termites which are not harmful to the cane. So the biodiversity of  
**[0:17:50-0:17:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:17:50):**  termite was multiplied by eight times in the same way with ants, happening with ants and  all other insects. So our last insect or art approach survey indicated that we have almost  400 different insects living in harmony in the organic cane fields. And these insects  and communities, they compose the basis of the food chain. So then we have two species  of ant eater inside the cane fields, you know, be sustained by these termites and ants. And  
**[0:18:32-0:18:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:18:32):**  we have more ant eaters per square kilometer than in the forest because we have more trash  to be decomposed and then we have more insects per hectare. So we estimate that we have seven  tons of a live organism per hectare in the peak of the summer.  Just remarkable. And I'm struck, you know, your story about creating the machine that  harvested the green cane, there's a mechanical problem and you get to a point where you solve  
**[0:19:07-0:19:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:19:07):**  it, you get to the end, you have a machine, you don't need to reinvent the machine. But  with nature, it feels like it's different and you've been phenomenally successful. 35%  of the world's organic sugar, a resilient business. Since transition, you've had no  lost years. But the process of learning it seems continues. It's constantly observing  nature and using high technology sometimes to collect and replicate and spread nature's  
**[0:19:36-0:19:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:19:36):**  best practice that you've observed then around the rest of the estate, for example, using  drones to spread fungal spores. After getting to harvest green cane, we enter  in different phases. We needed to know how the plant works inside because everything  we do outside the plant has a reflecting side. Since we started learning, for instance, the  plant can activate different physiological modes. So when the plant is inserted in a  
**[0:20:11-0:20:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:20:11):**  natural ecosystem, the plant turns its physiology to proteosynthesis. And when the plant is  living as a crop and has been submitted to chemicals or chemical fertilizers or too much  soil mobilization, the plant changes its physiological mode and which attracts plagues and diseases.  And so we had to learn how the plant works inside its cells, its proteins, how the protein  is formed and so on in order to adjust the plant feeding. And also we have to learn about  
**[0:20:57-0:21:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:20:57):**  how the different insects live in nature because sometimes a certain insects become a plague  because you are not managing that insect or the crop in the right way. So just by through  managing, by through changing the stewardship, we could resolve 70% of the plague and disease  thing, you know, and the rest of the 30% is controlled biologically. We have labs where  we produce fungus, bacterias and insects, which we use as natural enemies of the plagues.  
**[0:21:46-0:21:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:21:46):**  And they are releasing the field just when we feel or we detect that the other insects'  population are going out of control. So, and then nowadays we have, we create a department  where we have biology, agronomies, and where we keep developing. We run research all time,  all along the year, since different tires, not to smash the soil and to guarantee a friendly  atmosphere for the bacterias and fungus underground until new natural enemies raising and so on.  
**[0:22:28-0:22:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:22:28):**  Because we've got producers and farmers that will be listening to this, if we could get  back to basics and I wonder if you could describe the life cycle of your system. What happens  from harvest to harvest? What actually physically happens in the fields?  After we give the first cut in the cane, we have the trash and we do not mobilize soil.  We do not seal. So we use special tires. They are expensive. They are constructed with a  
**[0:23:00-0:23:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:23:00):**  different rubber compost, but they allow us to use very, very, very low pressures. And  this avoids tilling in the future, which is not good in tropical areas. So we do not change  the soil. We do not move soil along seven, eight, nine years. And what we do after harvesting  is to add powder rocks or lime and some organic matter, you know, in order to feed, to feed  the soil life. That's what we do. And then we say that we activate our bioreactor. Of  
**[0:23:47-0:23:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:23:47):**  course, that we learn a lot on how to feed in a proper way, the soil life. We are still  learning, you know, but now we are much better than 10 years ago. And then the soil life,  they communicate with the plants through the plant root as it dates. So the plant root  as it dates, they indicate to bacteria, fungus and insects, what kind of work they have to  do in order to best support the plant growth. That's what we do. Just managing with the  
**[0:24:24-0:24:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:24:24):**  biota, not the cane itself. The cane here is a beneficiary of the system, not the main  reactor. So I noticed that you don't leave the soil bare, that the waste from the cutting  process is scattered back onto the field. Do you use some kind of cover crop or break  crop? Oh yeah. In between harvesting we use three or four different legumes, a jamboree  a giant bean called mikuna, another giant plant called crotalaria labilabi. Sometimes  
**[0:25:01-0:25:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:25:01):**  we do a cocktail of 13 different plants. And in our soil, in our restored soil, these crops,  they reach 70 ton of green biomass within 90 days after seed.  What do you do then? Do you then harvest those crops?  No, they no. We plant directly over these crops. These crops, they have a kind of root  system that breaks the soil. They go deep in the soil. They absorb lost nutrients from  
**[0:25:43-0:25:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:25:43):**  deep in the soil and they bring it up in the surface in order that we restore, we recover  lost nutrients along the soil profile. And these plants are considered, the four plants  I use, they are considered the four best soil recovering plants in the world. And we plant  them with the only purpose of recovering the soil and absorbing nitrogen. For instance,  crotalaria after three months occupying the soil as a rotation crop, it fix 450 kilogram  
**[0:26:27-0:26:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:26:27):**  of pure nitrogen. And then we plant, we use big month planters, automatic planters with  GPS and we plant directly or directly over these four meter high crop. And we let them  on the surface being decompose, decompose it at the nature space, at the nature space.  We do not bury, we do not bury any rotation crop. You will have to leave them like in  a forest decomposing over the surface, on the surface of the soil.  
**[0:27:05-0:27:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:27:05):**  And of course you don't use any chemical fertilizers or pesticides, but you do spray waste products  from the sugar processing back onto the fields.  Yeah, one of the nice things we have here is the venescence. So we have both sugar and  ethanol production. We produce organic ethanol. We supply some important cosmetic companies  which use organic alkyl for perfume production. And the alkyl is produced by unicellular fungus  
**[0:27:44-0:27:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:27:44):**  called the yeast. Okay. Saccharomyces cerevisis. So we feed this fungus with organic sugar  cane juice. The fungus eat the sugar and some nutrients and the fungus release ethanol in  the tank. We, we remove that ethanol by distillation and what is left is venescence is a explain,  it is a organically explained it fertilizer. It's a certified organic fertilizer. We sprayed  over the trash. The trash absorbs the content, the nutrients contained in the venescence,  
**[0:28:25-0:28:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:28:25):**  which is used by the organic, the alive organism as a source of energy and nutrients to decompose  the trash. So it's a closed cycle in a way that our soil becomes more and more rich and  it's fertility level class goes going up along the time. For instance, according to the Brazilian  soil classification or according fertility related to fertility, 25 years ago, our soil  was class three, you know, class three. Now it's class one. So this is a case of a soil  
**[0:29:11-0:29:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:29:11):**  restoration because of the anthropological interference and composting is integral to  that as well. And when I think of, you know, farms around where I live with forever seeing,  you know, matter that's being composted on, on a farm yard in a farm yard, then scattered  back onto the field. But you have an innovative approach to composting as well, composting  in the field and recreating nature again, through building up those layers of decomposition.  
**[0:29:42-0:29:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:29:42):**  What I learned, what I learned most important in that forest is that you shouldn't pile  compost or any organic matter, you know, you have to promote spontaneous composting over  the crop land in the presence of alive plants, because in nature, the, the spontaneous composting  in layers you see in, in, in the, in the floor of, of, in the ground of the forest is a directed,  is, is an intelligent process of composting. And it is led by the plants, you know, the  
**[0:30:25-0:30:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:30:25):**  plants as they as they to liquids from they are photosynthesis on their roots. I don't  know, you know, but from everything the plant produces from the photosynthesis 20% is as  outdated by the roots in order to feed the soil life because the plant needs the soil  life to promote a symbiotic relationship. The plant feeds the soil life with amino acids,  sugars, acids, organically composts on the counterparty, the soil life to fix nitrogen,  
**[0:31:04-0:31:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:31:04):**  solubilizes phosphorus, synthesizes hormone growths and so on. Produces antibiotics for  instance, the Bacillus subitilis, this bacteria produces antibiotics for the plant, for the  plant. So most important is to have in the field alive plants because they are going  to direct the spontaneous composting results to what is most needed in that ecosystem at  that time.  
**[0:31:37-0:31:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:31:37):**  So in this, this transformed regenerative agriculture system that you have where not  only the things that we've talked about, but, but also you're running a carbon sink because  of the amount of carbon that your soil and your crops are drawing out of the air. You  have a low input system working with nature, remarkable success, higher than average yields  for the region. Is every farmer around you trying to replicate what you do?  
**[0:32:07-0:32:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:32:07):**  I have teachers, small growers, we have transmitted to them the technology since they become exclusive  suppliers because unfortunately we have at the moment an excess of organically certified  sugar in the world. And ultimately this is a business, but I promised myself that I should  do something which, which what I know, you know, so I don't think God gave me a gift  in order to promote my, just my wellbeing or my prosperity. So I, then I started providing  
**[0:32:46-0:32:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:32:46):**  consultancy both to small growers and to medium and big growers in other crops, which do not  compete with against us. So I did, for instance, a very, very successful production of a reproduction  system in soybean, in corn, we were working with cotton, and now I'm assisting a family  which runs 6,000 nectars of lemon and orange in some public state is where the greening  disease is worst. And I did a protocol to fight against the greening disease biologically.  
**[0:33:28-0:33:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:33:28):**  We already have three or four fun views. We have some, but the two areas and it's going  very well. It's going very well. We change it 100% from, we switch it from a chemical  fertilization to organically and powder rock fertilization. And for the first time after  40 years, they are fruits are not painted. We're not attacked by fungus after eight months  of work. If you were talking to other farmers, other producers who were perhaps in cereal  
**[0:34:04-0:34:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:34:04):**  or vegetables, then what, what do you say? What's what, how do they take the first step?  What's the first thing that they need to do? I think the biggest problems is on people's  mind. For instance, some producers, a producer who have 100 actors, they asked me if they  can change the 100 actors. If I can, if we can apply the technology there, I usually  say, you start with one actor. That is going to be that your test hub is there is where  
**[0:34:40-0:34:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:34:40):**  you are going to learn. You need to let the plagues to eat a little bit more until you  have to approach the place, the way they behave. And you will have to understand why a certain  insect can be a plague or not, you know? And when I tell them that they have to separate  one actor from 100 actor to do that, they say, no, I'm not going to do that. No. So  the, the biggest barrier is not in the field, but on people's mind.  
**[0:35:14-0:35:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:35:14):**  What do you think is the key to your success?  Yeah, I think that I, I think that I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm very lucky that I grew in a farm  until my, I was 10 years old and I have this special connect, connect, connection with  the, the, the water, the plants and, and the earth and the soil. I think that people are  living a two urban life and people should walk barefoot. Sometimes it's just a matter  
**[0:35:50-0:35:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:35:50):**  of becoming feeling that we are becoming part of the environment. Again, we are organic  beans, we are alive beans, and we must feel that we are part of the environment.  And Leontino Balbo, Jr. Thank you so much for sharing your truly remarkable journey.  Thank you very much, Ufin. Have a nice and splendid day.  That was Leontino Balbo, Jr. from Sao Paulo in Brazil. In terms of land use today, there  
**[0:36:29-0:36:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:36:29):**  are three things that really matter. High quality food production, climate change mitigation  and nature restoration. A great farm must do all three. I hope you'll agree that Leontino  is living proof that regenerative agriculture provides the blueprint for the global land  use reform we all depend upon and the transition we urgently need to see. If you've enjoyed  listening, please come back and listen to more. Tell your friends, like us and share  
**[0:36:56-0:37:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Rock-Star-e9vqun#t=0:36:56):**  our links. Farmgate is a partnership project for Farmwell and FAI Farms. And you can join  the conversation on Twitter by searching for Farmgate Podcast. I've been Finn low Kastain.  Bye for now.  