### Farm Gate  (2022-26-06)
**[0:00:00-0:00:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to Farmgate. This episode is the recording of a recent webinar, Regen Dairy's  Round the World Tour. Hello, thanks for joining us. I'm Finnlow  Costain, the Chief Executive of Farmwell, and welcome to our Round the World Tour of  regenerative dairy. I'm thrilled to be hosting this opportunity to circumnavigate the globe  with four very different regenerative dairy farmers, all of whom are quite exceptional  
**[0:00:29-0:00:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:00:29):**  in their own way. We'll be taking a whistle-stop tour of regenerative  dairy in the UK, Germany, the USA and New Zealand, and following the conversation, which  will probably take around 40 minutes, there'll be a Q&A, so please do put questions in the  chat box, and feel free to introduce yourselves and make comments as we go, as I can see you  already are. So this Round the World Tour is part of the  
**[0:00:51-0:00:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:00:51):**  Regen Dairy project, which was set up by FAI Farms and Farmwell in collaboration with Arla  Foods, Barry Callebaut, Ben & Jerry's, Unilever and Woolworths South Africa. Through this  project, we aim to define what regenerative dairy looks like from the bottom up and throughout  dairy supply chains, and to engage dairy farmers and food businesses around a practical vision  for a productive and profitable global dairy sector that also restores its relationship  
**[0:01:17-0:01:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:01:17):**  with nature. So, to our guests, Blake Alexander is a fourth-generation  dairy farmer from Alexander Family Farm near Crescent City, California, USA. Richard Park  is from Sizer Farm near Kendall in the UK, which has probably been farmed since the Vikings  colonised Britain, probably 1100 years ago, I think is how far back the records go. Mark  Anderson is a fifth-generation farmer from South Otago, New Zealand, and Annabel Girard  
**[0:01:45-0:01:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:01:45):**  is a first-generation dairy farmer from Lower Saxony in Germany. So, welcome everybody.  Thanks for being here. Could we start perhaps with just a one-minute introduction to your  farms please, farm size, herd numbers, breed, yield, climate, and what products you sell.  And Blake, could you perhaps start us off? Yeah, coming from extreme Northern California,  kind of the most Western point in the continental United States, and very cool season climate  
**[0:02:13-0:02:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:02:13):**  here where we've been grazing cattle for, well, four generations in my family. We actually  manage about 9,000 acres and about 9,000 head of cattle. So, half of those are mature, organic  dairy cows, and we milk on five different farms. We own all the farms. It's my wife,  Stephanie and I, and our five grown children are mostly part of the business. Our oldest  three are married and all work full-time for us. And we launched our own brand about five  
**[0:02:43-0:02:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:02:43):**  years ago and sell fluid milk around the United States. And we've also make some yogurt and  as well as kefir coming. We've been regenerative for about two years and organic for more than  20. Fantastic. Richard, could you tell us about your farm?  My farm is in the Northwest of England. We've been here for just over 40 years. My parents  came here 40 years ago. The farm is leased or rented from the National Trust, which is  
**[0:03:11-0:03:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:03:11):**  a UK charity that own a lot of historic buildings and land. We milk 170 crossbred cows. We are  on about 380 acres, 155 hectares, about 45 meters, 144 feet above sea level. We get about  55 inches of rain, about 1400 millimeters. So, we're in an extremely good area for growing  grass and we utilize that with the cows. We've been on and off organic for the last 15 years.  And I guess the regenerative journey probably the last four years.  
**[0:03:49-0:03:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:03:49):**  Lovely. And just to put that wetness in context, Cumbria is probably one of the wettest parts  of the UK. Would that be fair? That would be correct, yes.  Thank you. Annabelle, could you tell us a bit about your farm?  Yes. Hello everybody. So, our farm is located in the North of Germany. It's called Huftangseel.  And we farm about 300 acres. 200 of them are grassland and 100 acres are arable land. And  
**[0:04:15-0:04:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:04:15):**  I'm not alone. We are a group of six people. We are farming together. And 10 years ago,  we leased this farm from a nonprofit organization. So, our goal was to produce regional and sustainable  organic food. So, we developed the farm with dairy, with our own creamery, with big beef  and pork production, with eggs and a lot of varieties of vegetables. So, within this context,  we have a herd of 30 milking cows that contains of 25 milking cows and five nurses. We keep  
**[0:04:50-0:04:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:04:50):**  all the cows at the farm and all together we have around 100 heads of cattle. So, we  raise and finish them by grass. Because from the beginning, we were searching for genetics  that fit to our circumstances. Our herd is really mixed. So, we have Holstein Frisian  and old German Frisian. We have brown Swiss and old brown cattle. And we have mixtures  out of this. Our yield is around 5000 liters milk per year per cow. And the climate is  
**[0:05:23-0:05:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:05:23):**  yes, it's continental. So, we have hot summers, cold winters, and we can have periods of drought  and less rainfall in the spring, in the summer, in the autumn and in the winter. So, we have  650 millimeters of rainfall, but it's really unsecure when it will come or if it will come.  Yes, and the average temperature is around eight degrees.  And Mark, just last but not least, could you tell us about your farm in New Zealand?  
**[0:05:53-0:06:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:05:53):**  Thanks,  Mark.  So, we've been holding to what it is now a larger monoculture milking 620 cows today.  For the last five years, we've bred away from the traditional New Zealand Frisian towards  Normandy and Fleckley. And the focus there has been on the dual purpose animals with  
**[0:06:28-0:06:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:06:28):**  superior foraging capabilities. And that will be a low input animal with a good fit for  our mob grazing and our once a day milking system. With dry land, so we receive around  700 to 800 mils of rain annually, and we're very greedy. So, we like to capture all that  rain in our soil and not give it away. Yeah, focusing on soil health is a big one for us.  Our pasture yields are somewhere around that 11 tonnes annually. And we supply milk to  
**[0:07:00-0:07:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:07:00):**  our local co-op with independent beekeepers on farm. Yeah, we're just looking to diversify  more and scale up on silver pasture and agroforestry, we see huge potential.  Fantastic. That's really helpful. Thanks so much, everybody. That's a really good starting  point. Now, Richard, you've been, as you said, you know, you've been organic or thereabouts  for 20 odd years. And you told me that as an organic farmer, originally, you looked  
**[0:07:26-0:07:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:07:26):**  at regenerative farming in a bit of a snobby way. And I wonder, what do you mean by that?  What was a snobby way? And what changed for you?  Yeah, I think it's because organic, you know, there's a procedure to follow, there's a conversion  period, there's a set of standards that you have to meet, you're inspected quite rigorously  every year. So, you know, this regenerative term came along with quite a lot of actually  
**[0:07:50-0:07:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:07:50):**  crossover with organic. You sort of thought, well, you know, is this going to undercut  organic? I'm quite an inquiry mind. I, you know, I'm always up for doing research. And  once I got to looking into it, I realised that it actually complemented what we were  doing very well and actually allowed me to take the sort of next step, if you like, from  where I was with my organic farming. So, it perhaps started off as a fear of competition,  
**[0:08:17-0:08:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:08:17):**  that there were sort of these young upstarts who were coming in with their new way of doing  things. And organic was perfectly good. And there was perhaps a fear that it was going  to undercut the market to an extent?  Possibly, and that's the thing with organic, it allows me to access a higher value market  and those people that are buying those products, you know, they're guaranteed the standards  
**[0:08:38-0:08:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:08:38):**  and the production system. Regenerative though, I feel, allows people to come in at all sorts  of different entry levels. And then as they get more confident, they can then sort of  move up through, whether they become, we convert to organic, it all depends on, you know, the  market that they might be aiming for.  And then, so it was quite a gradual change for you. It wasn't like you sort of woke up  
**[0:08:58-0:09:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:08:58):**  one morning having had a revelation in a dream and thought, no, I'm going to be regenerative  now. It was something more gradual.  It was definitely more gradual. It was really, there was a bit of a light bulb moment. I  did the holistic management course. That was really the start of the journey.  Well, that's a good segue really, because Annabelle, you've also done the holistic management  
**[0:09:19-0:09:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:09:19):**  course, but I wonder from your perspective, what was it that made you want to become regenerative  in the first place? And why was it so important for you to make the transition?  Yes. The reason is I was in a crisis. My opinion was that the status quo was no option anymore  for us. So the story begins in 2013, when we leased the farm. From the beginning, we  were struggling with the agricultural circumstances. So we really have poor growing conditions.  
**[0:09:52-0:09:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:09:52):**  And especially the water cycle is really difficult to improve. And we have sandy soils, it's  with low organic matter. If seven days, no rain and sun, the grass will stop to grow.  So yes, it's no wonder that all the farmers around us, they started already 50 years ago  to build irrigation systems. And we also built an irrigation system, and we tried to really  to improve circular farming. But we had a low stocking rate, and we still have a low  
**[0:10:25-0:10:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:10:25):**  stocking rate. And the fertilizer, the manure is always the limiting factor for us. And  we started to make a strong marketing, we started the community supported agriculture  that enables a high stability, we created the own processing, the own creamery. And  so we have a high diversity of products. And yes, we did, our basic assumption was when  we work hard, we will fix it, we will win, just work hard and everything will go in the  
**[0:11:00-0:11:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:11:00):**  right direction. And we thought organic is king, it's the solution. And so we used all  our tools that we knew to improve the growing situation. And then in 2018, we were in a  real drought that was really dramatic for us. So for the vegetables, we had irrigation  for the arable crops, we had to take decisions what to maintain and what to give up. And  for the grasslands, there was no technical solution. We feel like we were victims of  
**[0:11:31-0:11:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:11:31):**  the drought. And it was psychological, really dramatic for us. That was the time where I  had a different perspective, because I was out of the daily work. I had born our second  child and with a baby I was walking around, I saw everything and I asked myself, what  are we doing here? I don't see any perspective for the next 30 years here in this area with  this farm. So this was a kick in my ass. And I became open minded and I took an account  
**[0:12:05-0:12:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:12:05):**  that I could be wrong.  Fantastic. That's a really, really, really good description. We'll go into some of that  in a bit more detail. And a little bit later, and I just wanted to pick up on that community  supported agriculture thing, because it's probably a term that other people weren't  necessarily understand. So what it essentially means, and correct me if I'm wrong, is that  
**[0:12:25-0:12:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:12:25):**  you have a fixed group of customers that you're supplying for and there are fixed prices.  And I think you said to me before that basically everything you grow has already effectively  been sold because of that relatively new piece of legislation in Germany.  Yes, that's true. Yes.  Thank you. That's really interesting. And Blake, you were the first dairy farmer to  
**[0:12:44-0:12:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:12:44):**  actually be certified regenerative in the United States. I wonder how important that  certification has been for you in terms of selling your product and making your case,  demonstrating your regenerative nature to customers.  Yeah, I think I should back up to, you know, really 30 years ago when when Stephanie and  I bought our main ranch, which was an expansion away from our families, we really got into  
**[0:13:10-0:13:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:13:10):**  building organic matter and soil and paying attention. And we've always been grazers for  generations and so, so we were building organic matter and then along came a market for organic  milk and so 25 years ago, we decided to, you know, venture into that because we wanted  to create a future for our kids that was probably more profitable and kind of in a sense we  were chasing that that market. And then, much like Richard was saying, and then along came  
**[0:13:38-0:13:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:13:38):**  this new word regenerative here a few years ago, and we asked our daughter to participate  as a pilot program with a couple of the groups that were certifying regenerative farms nationwide  and so at that point we then two years ago we're launching a couple of fluid items nationally  and Whole Foods, the large retailer here, Natural Products asked us for a certification  they said hey you say you're regenerative but you know, do you have anything to prove  
**[0:14:06-0:14:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:14:06):**  it and so we went to the Savory Group Land to Market and asked for their verification  program and they gave us, you know, a document and at the same time we were working with  the Regenerative Organic Alliance and they also gave us a document so we became the very,  the very first certified and verified farm in the United States by both of those groups,  and it really wasn't, you know, a goal that we had set out to do it just kind of happened  
**[0:14:32-0:14:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:14:32):**  and the timing worked in our favor, and I believe that it has opened up a lot of doors  for us, doors literally to this panel today and we've done a lot of interviews, a lot  of podcasts.  Certainly retailers and consumers are really resonating with the word regenerative and  you know I would like to just give you my take on what I believe the word means and  
**[0:14:56-0:14:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:14:56):**  how it kind of resonates in our world.  You know first we're Christians and you know so we kind of have always paid attention to  some biblical principles, and I believe that this term regenerative is just absolutely  farming in harmony with God and our nature and you know our creator if you will, and  paying attention to the system that we've been, it's been designed for us and so as  
**[0:15:21-0:15:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:15:21):**  a farmer now I just simply pay attention to that and I'm fully aware of the biology and  the soil and my job is to do no harm and to feed them and help them do better so that,  you know, our plants and our animals eventually do better and our yields go up and so that's  what it means to me right now and also you know we're sequestering carbon at a pretty  fast rate, it's part of the solution to global warming and climate change and all the concerns  
**[0:15:51-0:15:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:15:51):**  that a lot of people have and so it's been a really nice word or concept to help summarize  that entire story.  I love the idea that effectively over the course of the 30 years you were already regenerative  and that partly through that kind of biblical spirituality you were already starting to  pay attention to the biology perhaps in a way that some other people around you weren't  
**[0:16:14-0:16:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:16:14):**  but the name regenerative in society has sort of caught up with you as you've gone along.  Mark, like many your transition to regenerative dairy and like Annabelle grew out of crisis  and yours was a financial crisis and I wonder if you could talk to us about why it was that  you began to make the transition.  Thanks, I guess I was financial but also there were many other tension events that came together.  
**[0:16:40-0:16:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:16:40):**  We seem to have this mindset drilled into us at young ages that we must get bigger or  get out and that kind of mechanistic mentality values kind of positions and stuff more than  experience and kind of wisdom or knowledge and it's almost an inbuilt story that we have  told ourselves.  We got caught up in that story.  
**[0:17:06-0:17:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:17:06):**  We picked about 950 milking cows twice a day but we were faced with low milk payouts, consecutive  dry seasons, we had a couple of quite bad droughts and I also had a health scare and  autoimmune disease and at that time we were employing contracting milkers and the focus  really with that system in New Zealand is production at all costs and chasing this production  was putting a large strain on the land and the people and the animals.  
**[0:17:39-0:17:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:17:39):**  Yeah the farm had become more of a machine than a living system I think.  Yeah we just started to ask more questions, we read more, we met new people, we researched  principles of permaculture and regenerative agriculture.  When I was ill I realised that the farm was like a mirror image of the farmer itself.  You know the farm was losing soil, we were losing nitrate, animal health was poor and  
**[0:18:06-0:18:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:18:06):**  chemical use had increased so I really took a look in the mirror and asked the hard questions.  Once we gained that knowledge and we wrapped some support people around us that kind of  gave us the confidence to move forward in a new system and I guess that's when we started  to rapidly remove winter cropping and tillage and move to just bale grazing and tall pasture  for wintering.  
**[0:18:33-0:18:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:18:33):**  We moved very fast to take synthetic nitrogen out of the system and today we make compost  and then we implemented mop grazing into the once a day milking system so we made many  changes.  Now we also removed in-shed grain feeding and we really redefined what success looks  like with a kind of 100 to 200 year vision.  
**[0:18:57-0:19:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:18:57):**  Annabelle I wonder if I could come back to you.  When you decided to transition I remember that you struggled to convince your partner  that this was a good idea and I wonder if you could tell us what he said and what happened  next.  Anika Leinbach So yes, we needed really a shift in the mindset  
**[0:19:20-0:19:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:19:20):**  and this shift for me was like a revolution in my head and my revolution took part one  or two years before his revolution in his head.  So I began with these thoughts but then I did the basic course, holistic management  and holistic plant grazing and in spring 2020 I told my husband that I want to do holistic  plant grazing with two of our herds and he did not see a sense in it and he was really  
**[0:19:57-0:19:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:19:57):**  critical.  His critical points were who was going to do the work so there will be a lot of fencing,  we don't have the water infrastructure and how can I mow or mulch, how can I control  the weeds and everything.  So we will have much more work and for what.  
**[0:20:16-0:20:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:20:16):**  So he said you can do that but you will do it alone and then I did it alone and it took  about four months and then we were both convinced because we saw the effects maybe not for an  outstanding person but for us.  We know the land for years and we know our struggle and our problems with the grassland  and so we both saw the effect and then yes, we started to continue our way together and  
**[0:20:50-0:20:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:20:50):**  now it's a strong part of our relationship and it's a shift from struggling and fighting  against a lot of things to use the power and the processes of nature to create stability  and resilience.  For example, at first we thought the milk yield has to be 6500 litres per cow so that  was our goal and now it's just the question how can we best integrate our cows, our cattle  
**[0:21:25-0:21:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:21:25):**  in the ecosystem processes, how can we best integrate them and then yes, we will harvest  milk and we have to see how much milk is it.  Blake, I'd like to think about scale for a moment and the scale of your business is  significantly larger than many of the other regenerative dairy businesses that we found.  What do you think it is that's enabled you to succeed at scale?  
**[0:21:47-0:21:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:21:47):**  I think the question of whether we've succeeded at scale is still yet to be answered so we're  still working on that.  It's a struggle.  I think it's important that I just point out I grew up on a 150 acre farm with 150  cows here in Ferndale and Hovoldt County and I've just been very, very aggressive and  
**[0:22:08-0:22:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:22:08):**  I've kind of dragged my wife along that path and eventually our kids have helped a lot.  We just grew and grew because we were the very first organic dairy farm in our region  and there was a lot of need for that 20 years ago and so we just had a milk market that  was asking for more supply.  Then things went on a down cycle and neighbours started to go out and so their land became  
**[0:22:33-0:22:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:22:33):**  available and that's when we stepped in because we could always use more grass and that's  kind of how we grew.  To be at the scale that we're at, it really comes naturally.  We also get a lot of rain here, 45 inches here in Hovoldt County but about 80 to 90  or even 100 inches of rainfall in Delmar County where the majority of our cows are.  
**[0:22:59-0:23:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:22:59):**  And so it's extremely wet, much like I think the climates and environments that New Zealand  and maybe Richard's in.  And so it's been a lot of fun because as we get better and better at being regenerative,  yields go up and that's the message that I tend to give to my conventional neighbours  or conventional farmers across the United States is that I believe that everybody should  
**[0:23:24-0:23:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:23:24):**  look at the principles involved here and pay attention to the soil biology and the roots  and the plants and the benefit that happens when you keep basically your land covered  with plants and certainly green plants are better than brown plants.  Everything is better than bare soil and so that's the message.  Mark, thinking about the bigger picture, why is a regenerative transformation so important  
**[0:23:51-0:23:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:23:51):**  do you think for the global dairy sector and also how do you measure regeneration on your  farm?  That first one's a pretty big question.  I think it's very important in many ways.  One would be decoupling of the externalised costs or damage caused by the current model.  
**[0:24:12-0:24:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:24:12):**  Here we're trying to internalise those costs now and as a large industry I think we need  to reduce our dependence on energy along with most fertiliser inputs, some of which are  already past peak supply.  These inputs are non-renewable.  That means our current trajectory is not sustainable and sustainability is a byproduct of regeneration  
**[0:24:38-0:24:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:24:38):**  so it's in our best interest to move in this direction I feel.  I think we'll need more people on the land, for example we now need more people in our  system with scaling our own fertility programmes, so with our compost.  So it's a lot of talk about less production and less people needed but actually it's the  opposite once you start layering more pre-reality into your system, whether that's fruit and  
**[0:25:07-0:25:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:25:07):**  nuts, vertical grazing, silver pasture etc.  So yeah, the systems have gone so far mono I think it'll be like a large restoration  phase leading into regeneration and yeah that'll be not so much land use change but layering  diversity back into our system to make it more resilient.  I believe it's also really important for local food security, you know if food security is  
**[0:25:38-0:25:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:25:38):**  linked to soil security so we need to nurture our soil, look after our soil and that's the  base from there we build from there.  And I think once you are starting to move in the most regenerative practitioners are  thinking this way, they're thinking how can we layer complexity back into the landscape,  how can we increase biodiversity and make our system more resilient.  
**[0:26:04-0:26:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:26:04):**  So you're seeing the regenerative change and I think also you've got university students  coming onto the farm, you know monitoring various different things.  I think you were having some super high worm counts when we spoke to you for one of the  podcasts and people can listen to a bit more about your system in the podcasts on the Farmgate  channel.  
**[0:26:22-0:26:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:26:22):**  Richard how has your approach to farming changed since you decided to adopt those regenerative  principles?  Yeah as I said I did the holistic management course and then there's the three principles  there, there's the decision making process, there's the social, the environmental and  the economic are the three things that you need to consider with every decision.  
**[0:26:43-0:26:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:26:43):**  But on the land I was, I guess I got in a bit of a rut, you know how can I implement  those things that I'd learned, you know the holistic plant grazing, all those really good  things.  I was able to read the land, I was able to see that I had problems, I had bare soil,  I had you know water not getting away quickly enough, I had weeds coming, we had the docking  
**[0:27:06-0:27:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:27:06):**  you know is a big weed for us.  It was how I could move on and really the regenerative principles that I've adopted  in a relatively short space of time, you know literally a couple of years, we're moving  forward so we're moving more towards the taller grass grazing which is a challenge for me  anyway I think for dairy farmers because you just worry about you're going to lose that  
**[0:27:32-0:27:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:27:32):**  quality that you need.  I have much more diversity in the pastures than I had before and that's either coming  back or I'm introducing that when I'm doing any reseeding.  I'm also introducing that into the silage as well, we house the cows during the winter  so we're feeding silage and with more diversity so that's benefiting things.  
**[0:27:54-0:28:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:27:54):**  The slurry is one that all the composting and stuff, I mean at the moment we've a lot  of work to do there but there's different people doing different things and I think  that's all part of this great journey that there are some people that are further ahead  than you are and I'm perhaps further ahead than others and we're all learning our feature.  That knowledge sharing element of regenerative seems to be really exciting and I think it's  
**[0:28:20-0:28:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:28:20):**  partly when organic was first developed we didn't have the social media and these sorts  of opportunities that we do now whereas regenerative kind of has a head start in that way.  Blake, you've been doing this for a long time and I wonder when you're talking about why  you do what you do to conventional farmers, what do you say to convince them that regenerative  dairy is also good business dairy?  
**[0:28:43-0:28:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:28:43):**  I believe it totally increases yields and we certainly have diminishing returns on fertilisers  and so folks that are growing basically corn and soybeans across the United States, those  are the two primary cash crops, every year they've got to use more fertiliser to grow  the same yield and that doesn't necessarily mean that they're going to get the same yield  that they got last year.  
**[0:29:06-0:29:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:29:06):**  To me that's a perfect example of how some of those commercial fertilisers are harming  the biology and so it might be two steps forward, one step back, they need to pay attention  to that and so again I tell the farmers to pay attention to some of the principles, they  don't have to switch churches and religions all at the same time, I'm not asking them  to go certified organic or anything like that, they can certainly pay attention to these  
**[0:29:32-0:29:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:29:32):**  regenerative principles and kind of honour that soil system if you will and I believe  make their farm more profitable and it's a long term effect.  There was a question here on the side that what have we noticed in our soils and I guess  I'd like to say that 30 years ago we started paying attention to building organic matter  and so on our primary farm at home we've gone from 2 or 3% organic matter in the soil to  
**[0:30:00-0:30:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:30:00):**  8 to 15 now and it's crazy, that's just a tremendous growth and so I think of it as  in our farmers literally getting one inch taller every decade or something and we are  doing everything we can to haul in fish waste from the coast, we bring in a lot of wood  chips from the lumber mills and then of course our manures and we are composting as much  as we can and trying to spread that out on about 25% of our farm every year and just  
**[0:30:29-0:30:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:30:29):**  rotate that around, nothing scientific, we just drive by and if it looks like it made  the low end of the list we run with that, it's really a simple program.  The other thing I just wanted to mention was that you know, I guess for Annabella, our  favorite breed of cows, we use all crossbreed cows but we're using the barbarian Fleck V  which is a German breed and dual purpose, I heard Mark mention that and we absolutely  
**[0:31:00-0:31:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:31:00):**  are in love with those cows and so the majority of our animals are all Fleck V cross and we  also focus on the A2 protein and so everything we sell is A2 milk.  Jason Vale, PhD Blake, even without knowing that you've just  performed the perfect segue because you're talking about your breed and I wanted to ask  Richard next about genetics because it's something that you've worked hard on Richard over the  
**[0:31:21-0:31:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:31:21):**  last 20 years and I wonder how important this has been in terms of your success across that  time and particularly for your regenerative approach now.  Richard Clark, PhD Yeah, I would start crossbreeding probably  20 odd years ago. My philosophy then and it still is now is that the cow changes to suit  the farm and not the other way around. I was on a treadmill before of changing the farming  
**[0:31:43-0:31:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:31:43):**  system to suit the cow and now it's definitely the other way around and it's brought a lot  of benefits. We block calve in the autumn, well we're three quarters of the way through  calving now and it's just you know, they calve easily, they're healthy, we have very, very  little mastitis, we haven't used any antibiotics for two years, we have very good fertility.  The buildings that we have are certainly aren't very modern but the cows for the housepear  
**[0:32:08-0:32:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:32:08):**  are happy in those and perform well and my feeding system is very simple and I just select  the best, the cows that are performing the best are the ones that I breed from. For each  generation I'm seeing an improvement. I've sort of pretty much stuck with the Scandinavian  Red, the Holstein and the Montbelliard and I put a little bit of Jersey in there now  and again but those are the breeds that suit me and I have tried you know some of those  
**[0:32:35-0:32:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:32:35):**  other breeds but I've just found that those breeds suit this farm the best.  Jason Vale We've just got another couple of questions  before we go into that Q&A and Annabelle, while regenerative agriculture is becoming  quite well known really for farmers in Britain, it's you know it's in the media quite a lot  now as well as in the USA and in New Zealand. It's a much newer concept in Germany and I  
**[0:32:56-0:33:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:32:56):**  wonder why that is and how difficult it's been for you to find information to support  your own transition. Annabelle Bremen Yes, it's really an interesting  question and concerning regenerative agriculture we're a kind of developing country so and  especially for region dairy, there are no farmers at all, as I know. So, what is the  reason, what are the reasons, I don't know really. One could be the language, because  
**[0:33:28-0:33:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:33:28):**  a lot of farmers, they don't speak that good English. For me the regenerative agriculture  seems really practical driven or a bottom up process. So, the farmers have to think  how to change their practice and so they have, they need access to the information or to,  yeah, they have to get inspiration about different ways of farming. So maybe the language is  one problem, and maybe our agricultural system, because we are a country of wealth, yes, we  
**[0:34:05-0:34:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:34:05):**  face the planetary boundaries, but we are addicted by fossil fuels, we have, yes, high  technical standards, high energy input, and our climate usually is quite moderate. Actually,  it's changing. And the European policies, they try to protect farmers, and maybe they  don't, they protect the system that is not regenerative. And I think as more crisis,  we will have is more regenerative agriculture will start, will grow. But at the moment,  
**[0:34:40-0:34:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:34:40):**  there's no authority that recommends regenerative agriculture. And yes, it's also it's a long  term perspective. And at the moment, we are farming short term farming.  Mark, just finally, before we go to the audience, I want to talk about the big issue. Again,  you're getting lots of big issues of greenwash, the idea of companies making grander claims  than they're able to deliver. And I wonder how significant you think the threat of greenwash  
**[0:35:08-0:35:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:35:08):**  is for individual farmers and for the dairy sector more broadly?  Yeah, good question. I think there's the gates are open, really. I think that with the  nothing there's potential for the greenwash or to mislead or present false information  to our potential eaters. Yeah, I guess at the farm level, we are in control. So we're  in control of that story until it leaves the gate. If you want to sell direct to the eater,  
**[0:35:37-0:35:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:35:37):**  you better be true to your word and transparent because eventually you'll be found out or  exposed, I guess. And that goes for middle industry too. So the threat of greenwash is  large and real. And the backlash from a more conscious eater is very large, I would presume.  And we're in this agriculture, we're in this for many generations, and we're in it for  the long game. So we don't want to do something in our nest that we wouldn't go and sit in.  
**[0:36:12-0:36:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:36:12):**  I guess on our farm, we can now map the five or six years of third party data via what  was originally integrity soils and now Michael Cashmore. And we can showcase that, we can  showcase our regenerativity and how that's progressing over time, how our counts have  been increasing, how our soil organic matter, our rooting depth, our water infiltration.  So we can we can map that and present that. I mean, I do I value the outcomes based monitoring.  
**[0:36:46-0:36:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:36:46):**  I think for a sector, we need animals back on pasture, we need them back on land, mimicking  nature. I love the idea of living barns, which are trees, more trees in the landscape, less  concrete, improving our soil to the point where we can hold our animals on the soil  for more of the year. Yeah, I guess it's a real challenge, especially for higher import  of dairy. And I see the greenwash sitting in pretty fast. I guess regeneration is built  
**[0:37:17-0:37:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:37:17):**  on indigenous wisdom and, you know, these methods of farming that are traditional. So  it's, we need to take that with the latest science and move forward from there, I guess.  Thanks so much, Mark. We're going to leave it there in terms of my questions and turn  to the audience just for a moment. So thanks so much, everyone. I think it's been a fascinating  conversation so far. And I just want to mention before we go into the questions about our  
**[0:37:43-0:37:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:37:43):**  Regen Dairy Farmers Survey. And I'd like to ask you if you have any contact with dairy  farmers at all, if you're a dairy farmer yourself, to please share it with your contacts and  fill it in. It's a really important part of our research in the Regen Dairy Project. We  need responses from as many dairy farmers as possible, including from conventional farmers  who are perhaps more sceptical about regenerative dairy and regen agriculture more broadly,  
**[0:38:07-0:38:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:38:07):**  getting an understanding of all farmer perspectives we think is really important. And so this  is a fantastic opportunity really through the survey to inform both the project and  also the future direction of Regen Dairy, certainly in the minds of the companies that  we're working with on this. If you go to the regendairy.org website, then you'll find  it, the survey at the top right there. So to the questions, this is sort of building  
**[0:38:31-0:38:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:38:31):**  on a question that came in earlier, Blake, around where you were talking about an inch  of soil organic matter a decade. You were talking about the amount of sequestration  that you're getting in your soil. And I wonder how long do you think that sequestration will  carry on for? Do you think it'll carry on indefinitely or is it sort of over a finite  period?  
**[0:38:50-0:38:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:38:50):**  As far as I understand at this point, it will carry on. And organic matter converts down  to humus and humates and it becomes part of the soil stability. And so I don't know if  there's a limiting factor. I don't believe there is at all. We just keep adding on and  on and it gets taller and bigger and better. And so I see it as a long, long term solution.  I think you've already answered this question as well, Blake. It's another one for you.  
**[0:39:19-0:39:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:39:19):**  Is regenerative agriculture a protected legal term in the US is the question. And then there's  a sort of supplementary there about how many certification schemes for regenerative agriculture  exist and are any of them dairy specific?  Yeah, nothing dairy specific for Regen at this point. And, you know, there's the two  that we participate in. They were the first two here. There's a couple new ones now. You  
**[0:39:42-0:39:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:39:42):**  know, I think that greenwashing is absolutely real. I don't know exactly whether that really  hated or to just feel bad about it, because at least it gets people talking about it and  the concepts eventually work out. But, you know, I think it's important for us farmers  to always remind everybody this does need to start at the ground up. And I've talked  to large retailers and you know, world well, Danone, let's put it that way and told them  
**[0:40:07-0:40:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:40:07):**  that, you know, I don't want to speak to their farmers unless it's coming from farmer to  farmer, I don't want to educate Danone to go out and preach from the top down. This  is absolutely a bottom up and ground up movement and it needs to maintain that so that we have  integrity. You know, again, I think that this is the solution to our global crisis that  we tend to all have in developing countries and emerging countries. And so, you know,  
**[0:40:36-0:40:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:40:36):**  I think it's here to stay. And yeah, we can just keep sequestering more and more carbon.  There's a more specific question here and, you know, open to everybody, anybody that  wants to take it on. And it's, I guess, looking at the conflict between how we make environmental  progress at the same time as how do we protect farm animal health and welfare. And so this  is from Ryan. It says, I'm curious of everyone's worming policies. Do you all vaccinate for  
**[0:41:02-0:41:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:41:02):**  lungworm, for example, to minimise the use of ivermectins, which are the most harmful  to soil biology? Is this something that any of you have particularly thought about and  would like to have a quick comment on? I'm looking perhaps at Richard in the first instance  to have a go at that one. Yeah, I can answer that. Yeah. So, we don't  use any ivermectins. They're not allowed in organic systems anyway. We don't use any  
**[0:41:27-0:41:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:41:27):**  wormers during the grazing season. And we do regular faecal egg counts to monitor those.  We do vaccinate for lungworm, and then we'll monitor fluke as well. But we found that with  the rotational grazing, particularly the slightly longer rotations that we've now adopted with  the taller grass grazing, you know, that sort of 30 plus days, that's certainly breaking  that cycle, especially with the, you know, the younger cattle. Just weighed in the other  
**[0:41:54-0:42:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:41:54):**  day, actually. So, it's very timely, you know, we were targeting 320 kilos at 12 months,  and we were average 355. So, you know, really pleased with that result.  Fantastic. This is a question from Lottie, and it says, and maybe, Annabelle, this is  a good one for you, because when we've spoken, you said, you know, you've come from the conventional  world into the world that you are now. And that perhaps gives you a bit of an insight  
**[0:42:17-0:42:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:42:17):**  into how, you know, how conventional farmers continue to think. And so, the question is,  what would you say is the biggest barrier for a conventional farmer looking to move  towards regenerative practices?  I didn't come from the conventional farming. I came from organic farming. But maybe it's  the same, somehow. I think a lot of farmers think never change a running system. So, if  
**[0:42:45-0:42:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:42:45):**  you have something that works, then you will continue. So, really, for me, it was necessary  to be in a crisis, to be, to accept that I, maybe that I'm wrong. Yeah, it's a process  that you have to do by yourself. Nobody can just force you to do that. It's something  you have to do by your own.  Yeah, absolutely. Okay. And a question perhaps that, Mark, you could have a go at, because  
**[0:43:14-0:43:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:43:14):**  I think you've touched on some of these elements. And the question is, to what extent do the  panelists see regenerative agriculture practices going beyond the benefits of carbon sequestration  by adding mitigation potential of nature-based solutions in the water cycle? So, I guess  the question is around, you know, that sort of climate change adaptation and mitigation,  but that biodiversity increase and the managing of the soil carbon sponge as well.  
**[0:43:38-0:43:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:43:38):**  Good question. I guess here, we're now seeing that there's a lot of talk about carbon  tunnel vision and people focusing in just on carbon. So, we think increasing carbon  at all trophic levels, like I'm talking soil, pasture, trees, animals, that birds, these  are all carbon-based elements. So, just focusing in on one is not good enough, I don't think.  It's a system within systems. And that's how we can really tap into increasing biodiversity  
**[0:44:16-0:44:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:44:16):**  and really pulling back on some of these inputs or crutches that we've held onto for a long  time. Increased biodiversity will increase our resilience and help us get off some of  these external inputs that are having some kind of pretty negative effects, to be honest.  There's a question for all of you and maybe just, you know, jump in if you want to have  a go. The question is, for Mal, could companies who farmers sell their milk to not be instrumental  
**[0:44:46-0:44:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:44:46):**  to help share and spread regenerative agriculture knowledge? And I wonder how you think they  might do that? I can start on that. I mentioned Whole Foods.  They're a large retailer here with over 500 stores in the United States, and they're certainly  the leading retailer of natural foods. And they have absolutely embraced what we do as  regenerative farmers. And they're kind of putting their money where their mouth is in  
**[0:45:13-0:45:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:45:13):**  that regard. And I think that other companies will follow along that line. I'd also like  to maybe just touch back. I was sitting here thinking to one of the other questions about,  you know, this regenerative and how long can we, you know, keep it up. I just want to remind  everybody that all of our ancestors going back for thousands of years have been regenerative  farmers. And we get all wrapped up in this weird conventional versus organic versus now  
**[0:45:39-0:45:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:45:39):**  regenerative. And while I'm just saying regenerative is back to full circle, what our great, great  grandfathers were doing in another era, and before synthetic fertilizers and other things,  you know, we just have a whole lot more awareness of the biology and the understanding and the  relationship and the symbiotic relationship between roots and and critters in the soil.  So that's the answer to how long term this is and how sustainable it is.  
**[0:46:07-0:46:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:46:07):**  That's all we have time for. So our round the world tour has come to an end. And I'd  like to thank our panelists who I think have just been fantastic. It's a shame on Zoom,  you don't get to give a round of applause. But you know, I think they deserve an enormous  round of applause for the work they've done this evening. So I'd like to thank them, Annabel  Girard from Germany, Mark Anderson from New Zealand, Richard Park from the UK, and Blake  
**[0:46:30-0:46:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regen-Dairy-round-the-world-tour-edited-e1osord#t=0:46:30):**  Alexander from the USA. And thank you too for joining us for your comments and questions.  And can I please remind you again about the Regen Dairy survey, which is for all dairy  farmers, not just Regen Dairy farmers on our website, regendairy.org. Thanks so much. I've  been Phil O'Kastain. Bye for now.  