### Farm Gate  (2022-30-15)
**[0:00:00-0:00:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to Farmgate. I'm Finn Loke stain, the chief executive of Farmwell and  founder of the Food and Global Security Network. Jyoti Fernandes is from the UK Land Workers  Alliance and well known as a campaigner working for the rights of small farmers and peasant  farmers. She's also a Dorset smallholder, farming regeneratively and producing fruits,  cider, lamb and cheese, which are all sold locally. We're talking today because Jyoti  
**[0:00:28-0:00:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:00:28):**  recently wrote an open letter to The Guardian writer George Monbiot, whose book, Regenesis  and the articles he's written to promote it, undermine and distort public awareness  of the regenerative solutions to the ecological crisis that this podcast supports. Jyoti has  known George for many years, campaigning alongside him on issues such as GM foods and invasive  species. In her letter, Jyoti says, demonising organic pasture fed meat is unhelpful, polarising  
**[0:00:55-0:01:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:00:55):**  and alienating. The suspicion it casts on organic farming as a whole threatens to undermine  the agroecology movement, which provides the most compelling future narrative that I have  found in 30 years of campaigning. Jyoti, welcome to Farmgate. You wrote in your letter, I feel  duty bound to intervene. Why? What is it that's upset you so much about George Monbiot's  book?  
**[0:01:18-0:01:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:01:18):**  Jyoti Fernandes I work every day with peasant farmers, indigenous  people around the world who are practising small scale agroecological farming, and that  might be forest farming, it might be working as nomadic pastoralists, it might be people  that have a small scale farm where they use livestock as part of the farming system that  also generates arable crops, it might generate dairy products, and have fruit as part of  
**[0:01:43-0:01:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:01:43):**  it as well. But all across the world, these small scale farming systems provide a huge  amount of global food supply and a huge amount of the actual nutrition security that's out  there. It might not be the bulk amount of calories that are out there that the global  food system produces, but it's the part of the global food system that provides the most  nutrition security. And within all of these systems, livestock plays a very important  
**[0:02:05-0:02:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:02:05):**  role. Livestock, there's too much of it, you know, there's huge factory farms, there's  industrial farming, there's huge amounts of land that are dedicated to, you know, monocultural  production of animals, and it's taking up too much land. But livestock is still an important  part of our global food system and important part of it for the future. And in peasant  farming systems, it's particularly important because in peasant farming systems, livestock  
**[0:02:27-0:02:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:02:27):**  plays an important role in nutrient cycling and making sure that fertility goes back to  the land, you know, when animals graze, then that manure is then composted, and it's put  back into the land to provide soil fertility. Often it provides transport, you know, and  plowing. And many times it also uses the waste food that's part of the arable system, you  know, there might be like the byproducts of a production system, and the animals eat those  
**[0:02:50-0:02:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:02:50):**  byproducts or those co-products or those waste products, and then they generate, you know,  really high quality nutrition security by having dairy or meat that's available for  families to eat in their local community.  I think people listening would agree with the vast majority of what you just said there.  One thing I want to pick up on is the idea that perhaps farming is taking up too much  
**[0:03:07-0:03:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:03:07):**  land. Is it taking up too much land or is it that certain types of agriculture are taking  up more land than they should and that the way that we farm sort of needs a redistribution  around the land that's already being used?  Yeah, we're very much about the idea of fair share and balance. And I think the whole food  system has just gone severely out of balance. It's gone out of kilter because we've got  
**[0:03:27-0:03:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:03:27):**  different forms of agriculture out there. There's the industrial food chain, which is  producing things on large monocultures, you know, using high amounts of inputs, you know,  pesticides, herbicides, nitrate fertilisers, and then selling into the global market economy.  And then there's the agroecological food webs, which is what we defend in La Verre Campesina.  And I've spent a lot of time working on thinking about how that can be moved forward into the  
**[0:03:50-0:03:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:03:50):**  future to be the basis of our local food systems. But the industrialised food chain uses almost  70% of global agricultural resources to produce only about 30% of nutritional food security  around the planet. That's because there's a lot of calories being pumped out there,  which are wasted, which go into animal agriculture in a very inefficient way. And it produces  a lot of waste where the agroecological food webs are much more efficient. And sometimes  
**[0:04:16-0:04:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:04:16):**  they might be extensive. It's not just about yield, they might be extensive, but they're  providing a valuable ecosystem service. And they're there as a part of an agroecological  food web that's actually providing nutrition security. Yield isn't everything, but we've  got to think about balance. And when we think about balance, we think about reducing the  amount of livestock that's out there, but thinking about increasing the amount of agroecological  
**[0:04:39-0:04:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:04:39):**  food that's being produced and distributing more efficiently so that people can be fed  on it.  And I think that, you know, that phrase that you used, ecosystem efficiency, I think that's  the thing that George Monbiot in particular seems to undervalue. You know, he's sort of  focused on climate and he's focused on resource efficiency, but other ecosystem elements seem  
**[0:04:55-0:04:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:04:55):**  to get lost. Now, we're going to talk more about the book later and some other themes  that you've already picked up on. But for now, something that comes across really strongly  in your letter is the sense of betrayal that you clearly feel, a betrayal of the movement  that you've spent your working life supporting. Tell us more about that movement as a whole.  What sort of people are represented by the Land Workers Alliance and by the global organisation  
**[0:05:19-0:05:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:05:19):**  to which it's affiliated that you mentioned, La Via Campesina?  So the Land Workers Alliance is a small and family farmer's union and also for foresters  and land-based workers. So we also represent people who are looking after our woods and  our woodland. We are a part of La Via Campesina, which is a global movement representing over  200 million farmers across the world. That's farmers, peasant farmers and indigenous people.  
**[0:05:41-0:05:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:05:41):**  Also people who are part of the rural economy and foresters across the world as well. We  represent people in about 82 different countries and that's ranging from the National Farmers  Union of Canada to the vast movements of small scale farmers across Latin America, also representing  indigenous people in those contexts, Africa, India, all across Asia, up into Russia, members  all across the world providing food for their local communities.  
**[0:06:07-0:06:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:06:07):**  Now I often work as a representative of La Via Campesina in international circles and  I think this is where that sense of betrayal comes from in understanding how difficult  it is for us to get our message across. Because often I sit in the committee on food security  and it meets in October in Rome and there's meetings throughout the year. I've been on  the livestock group, the committee on food security, as well as many other ones looking  
**[0:06:29-0:06:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:06:29):**  at sustainable development goals. I've been to COP26 as a representative of the farmers  constituency there. And when you sit in those places, it's a huge contest. It's a contest  and it's a competition and it's a battleground for the narrative of the future of our food  system. The private sector is there in full force. You've got Nestle, Bill Gates, McDonald's,  all these corporations there. And actually the committee on food security recognises  
**[0:06:52-0:06:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:06:52):**  them as people that have a legitimate right to speak. They get a place to sit with a little  microphone they can push and a little sign in front of them. The same as every nation  does and the same as all the representatives of civil society like La Via Campesina representing  peasant farmers, the indigenous peoples movement, the World Workers Union, the consumer health  advocates and all of the representatives of civil society. We also have our own seats,  
**[0:07:16-0:07:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:07:16):**  but we're up against the private sector and we're up against the narrative and the spin  on what the future of our food system is. They're always promoting yield. They're always  promoting technological solutions, liberalisation of the global market economy. It's very difficult  to get our message about agri-ecological food webs in there. And whenever something pushes  forward the narrative that supports their idea that the solutions need to come from  
**[0:07:40-0:07:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:07:40):**  science or from people in a laboratory creating something that can be bought, sold and traded  makes it very difficult to get the support that we need for our own seed-saving networks,  for development based on peasant farming knowledge and indigenous peoples knowledge, for the  social innovations and the economic innovations we need to make our local food systems efficient.  Things like co-operatives and distribution hubs and processing. And particularly we need  
**[0:08:05-0:08:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:08:05):**  support for the development of default livestock systems. That means livestock that works in  a secular way with the land so that we're using co-products, waste products and byproducts  to have efficient production of meat on a small scale level.  I'm really interested in what you were saying about the committee on world food security  and the balance between nation states and private enterprise and then organisations  
**[0:08:29-0:08:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:08:29):**  such as yourselves. Now obviously the nation states are there. We take that as read. And  I mean you talk about individuals like Bill Gates. Are they representing themselves or  is he representing Microsoft or representing his foundation?  Yeah, it's really interesting because in the civil society mechanism that operates at the  committee on food security, we have one representative for each of those key stakeholder groups.  
**[0:08:55-0:08:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:08:55):**  And the key stakeholder groups, the rights holders, are in the millions. You know, it's  the global population of the planet in the case of consumers because everybody eats food  across the whole planet. And they operate in the civil society mechanism according to  a rights-based approach to food. That everybody has the right to food and it's government's  responsibility to implement the policies needed to make sure everybody has access to healthy,  
**[0:09:16-0:09:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:09:16):**  affordable food, sustainably produced so future generations can also have food. And they step  back and take that broad approach. The private sector mechanism is actually placed on equal  footing in the committee on food security and they're there representing their own private  sector corporations. And they're there because governments around the world have moved into  this neo-liberal theory towards the market solving what we need to do with our food system.  
**[0:09:41-0:09:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:09:41):**  It's this whole move globally towards the market solving all of our, you know, taking  care of all of our basic needs. And it's very difficult sometimes to place that in your  mind theoretically on equal footing with the rights holders of the planet because really  the rights holders are representing the public good, the common good. The private sector  should actually just be a tool if it's anything, but it shouldn't be seen as rights holders.  
**[0:10:04-0:10:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:10:04):**  They're actually, they're not the stakeholders, they're the stake eaters is what we call them.  You know, one time I was supposed to be speaking on behalf of civil society on a certain topic  and we spent a lot of time, two weeks in the run up to this plus a whole process for all  of our organizations to come up with our collectively held positions, you know, so that when we  speak, we're speaking on behalf of millions, we're not speaking as individuals, you know.  
**[0:10:27-0:10:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:10:27):**  And then we get our position together, it's collectively decided, we put forward, you  know, a rotation of different spokespeople trying to get people from the very grassroots,  even from villages or fishing communities or indigenous landscapes to come and speak  and represent what's happening to them. But it can often be that the spokesperson from  Nestle can be put in the speaking order ahead of you. And sometimes you don't even get time  
**[0:10:46-0:10:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:10:46):**  to be able to speak. And I remember this one time after, you know, we'd spent two weeks  preparing this position I was supposed to present when actually that happened, that  representative from Nestle was giving the speaking spot instead of civil society. We  were quite upset about that. And I tell you, you know, these power politics are in play,  you know, across the UK government as well. You know, with the Landworkers Alliance, we've  
**[0:11:07-0:11:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:11:07):**  been working quite hard to try and get a share of our piece of the pie for the UKRI development  funding, innovation funding for agriculture. And whenever we try and put in bids, the shape  of what the forms look like very much favors the private sector instead of knowledge intensive  agriculture or concepts like default livestock, which actually can save farmers money because  you're reducing the amount of inputs that go into agriculture. It favors the kind of  
**[0:11:33-0:11:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:11:33):**  input driven innovation and research and development because it asks for what your return on investment  is. So you have to be in partnership with a private company in order to put the bid  in and then you have to illustrate what the return on investment is. And the private sector  partner can, it's only a partial funding that they give them to put in towards it because  they have to pitch in their own money. So they want their own return on investment as  
**[0:11:55-0:11:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:11:55):**  well as the return on investment going into the bid. That means it has to be something  that's bought, sold and traded. And it makes it very difficult to get the support for the  agri-ecological solutions we want to research and develop and improve yields with or whatever  it is.  In your experience, and you've clearly been at a lot of these committees and you've been  
**[0:12:10-0:12:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:12:10):**  involved in a lot of government processes. Are there any companies out there that are  singing from roughly the same hymn sheet that are thinking about agroecology rather than,  you know, new tech or resource efficiency? Obviously, resource efficiency is important,  but it's just one metric amongst many metrics.  I would say that generally the corporate sector and the way that it operates, because it's  
**[0:12:31-0:12:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:12:31):**  operating according to a certain formula, it's very difficult to get the sort of agri-ecological  solutions where you want to see moving forward. And that formula is that it's trying to generate  profit and that profit needs to go back to the stakeholders. It's hardwired in their  DNA not to be compatible with the most sustainable solutions. Now there are definitely business  models that we can move forward with that's working as cooperatives, independent businesses,  
**[0:12:52-0:12:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:12:52):**  local food economies, circular economies on a local level. And there's companies like  Podma Dods, for example, that's absolutely brilliant. It's working with UK farmers trying  to grow pulses and grains and facilitates that development of higher yields and better  nutritional quality and better processing and the use of co-products and byproducts  for animal feeds as well through their profit that they make as a company. And that's an  
**[0:13:15-0:13:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:13:15):**  incredible example where you see cooperatives like Yo Valley that's working with farmers  to improve incomes and try and give farmers better profits. But by and large, the corporate  sector, it'd be very difficult to move forward with these kinds of solutions. That's where  I get the suspicion about the idea of precision fermentation or cultured meat actually being  able to be an open source technology or be a very useful solution when we look at our  
**[0:13:39-0:13:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:13:39):**  future scenarios for food.  Jason Vale,  and of course, you know, Podma Dods is that go to example. And what we urgently need are  an awful lot more companies like Podma Dods, businesses that are working in that way. I'm  just going to whip back to something that you were talking about earlier on where you  
**[0:14:02-0:14:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:14:02):**  mentioned the members of La Via Campesina. And within that, you mentioned the National  Farmers Union of Canada. Now, the NFU in the UK, I would not put in the same category as  the Land Workers Alliance. So I'm really interested. Are the NFU in Canada really so different  to the NFU in the United Kingdom?  In fact, NFU of Canada was one of the founding members of La Via Campesina alongside all  
**[0:14:25-0:14:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:14:25):**  these global coalitions of peasant farmers across the world, because it was recognised  that corporate control of the food system was actually one of the main problems facing  farmers and farmers livelihoods. And so National Farmers Union of Canada joined at that point,  we also have the Family Farm Defenders of America, and you know, a huge coalition of  different organisations across the United States that are members of La Via Campesina  
**[0:14:51-0:14:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:14:51):**  as well. And that's because across all of us, we see that there's a big difference between  the industrialised food chain and what that does to farmers livelihoods to the soils we  depend on and to the natural environment and agri-political food webs that we can create  in any country.  I just wonder, do you think that the United Nations and international processes like the  
**[0:15:13-0:15:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:15:13):**  COP Climate and Biodiversity Talks are becoming any better at recognising the needs and knowledge  of peasants and indigenous farmers? Because certainly, you know, that's something that  we've heard before on the podcast that there, you know, there was a big problem in the past  in getting that balance between science and capital and new tech and indigenous experience.  And while it isn't perfect by any means that there has been an improvement, would you go  
**[0:15:38-0:15:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:15:38):**  along with that?  There has been a change in thinking and partly that's from the work of civil society, from  the work of these organisations. About a decade ago at the United Nations level, there was  the report called the ISTAT report that the UN Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food  Delivery Shooter sponsored, which looked at the broken food system, it looked at the fact  
**[0:15:58-0:16:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:15:58):**  that you know, we're producing more calories now than we need to feed the planet because  of the Green Revolution. But at the same time, we still have so many people who are acutely  hungry and facing malnutrition, at the same time, loads of people facing obesity. We've  got the huge destruction that the agricultural system causes on the natural environment,  the loss of insects, you know, the fact that 30% of the contribution to climate change  
**[0:16:23-0:16:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:16:23):**  emissions comes from our broken food system and said, okay, well, what's going wrong here?  And the report basically said, where we need to move forward is in promoting agroecology,  and looking at small and family farms, and building our future research and development  on indigenous knowledge systems. You know, thinking about the agro biodiversity that's  being supported by peasant farmers, they breed so many different varieties of seed, the industrial  
**[0:16:48-0:16:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:16:48):**  food chain breeds about 12 different varieties. It's in the millions, the number of varieties  that are bred on the ground by peasant farmers, and also the livestock breeds that are kept  by nomadic pastoralists, the traditional knowledge of how livestock can fit in to sustainable  land management systems. You know, that that knowledge is there and needs to be built on.  But it also means a great deal of self reflection back on the farming movement. And like I said,  
**[0:17:11-0:17:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:17:11):**  within La Via Campesina, we have this tension, we've got some of you know, the big farms  that are small farms, but they might be 1500 acres or whatever it is in Canada, at the  same time as you know, the very small peasant farms in Eastern Europe or in Africa, the  forest farming systems of the Amazon rainforest, and we've got the indigenous people as part  of our civil society movement as well. And we've got to think about fair share. And that  
**[0:17:33-0:17:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:17:33):**  means a great deal of self reflection, of thinking about how we move and change to create  a future food system, holding those livelihoods as part of our green growth and developing  that knowledge so that it works in harmony with the earth and moving forward. And it  means self reflection, change in practice, but built on the knowledge and passion that  we've got.  
**[0:17:55-0:18:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:17:55):**  Jodie, thanks so much for that global perspective. Coming back to George, I think that most reasonable  people would recognise the environmental challenges that he sets out in Regenesis. But his solutions  are firmly anti-farming. What are your chief fears about the approach that he's taken in  the book?  Well, my worry is that he has not made a distinction between different forms of agricultural systems.  
**[0:18:20-0:18:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:18:20):**  As I mentioned, there's the industrial food chain and the agri-ecological food webs. He  has to a certain extent, you know, he's talked about how small scale agroecology and small  and family farms are important, but excluded a huge amount of those that actually have  livestock as part of their system.  He seems to sort of mention them and then disregard them.  
**[0:18:36-0:18:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:18:36):**  Yeah, to disregard them, particularly because quite a few have livestock, you know, and  it's a really important part of many agri-ecological food systems. You know, stockless organic  is very important and they're very interesting and wonderful stockless organic agri-ecological  farming systems. But there are also many, many where livestock plays an important role.  And by discounting all of the livestock based farms, you're discounting a huge amount of  
**[0:19:00-0:19:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:19:00):**  agri-ecological systems across the world. And in a sense, it's kind of said, well, neither  land sparing nor land sharing is good. Actually, the problem is farming. And that is a big  problem because it actually means that, you know, that's a real threat to livelihoods  across the world. You know, I want to mention the example of India, because I think that  is case in point where the perspective I'm coming from, I'm not talking so much from  
**[0:19:23-0:19:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:19:23):**  the perspective of large dairy and beef and sheep farms here in the UK, which I think,  you know, we need to see a reduction in quite a few of those. But, you know, I'm talking  about the livelihoods of millions and millions of small scale livestock producers around  the world. In India, 95 million people are dependent on small scale dairy. 75 million  of them are women. 15 million are landless people. And, you know, that's a huge amount  
**[0:19:48-0:19:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:19:48):**  of livelihoods. And the average size of those herds is two to four cows. Yet India is the  largest dairy producer in the entire world. Most of that dairy production is default livestock  production, meaning it's very sustainable because the cows are fed on waste products.  You know, they eat the leftover banana peels and the, you know, fodder that's leftover  from, you know, harvesting crops, you know, for their grains or, you know, the parts of  
**[0:20:12-0:20:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:20:12):**  vegetables that people don't eat or waste fruit or whatever it is. And then they produce  milk, largely hand milk, and farmers get a really good price for that production. Now,  if you try and say that that is an inefficient system, or that livestock production is bad,  and that needs to be replaced by something else, it could be replaced by something like  precision fermentation of a powdered substance very much like milk. And that's actually what's  
**[0:20:36-0:20:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:20:36):**  already happening, you know, or, you know, Europe is exporting milk to places in the  form of powdered milk, and that comes in at a very cheap price. And that undercuts the  livelihoods of farmers that are very dependent on that small scale dairy rearing for their,  you know, well, basic food and nutrition security on a community and household level, but also,  you know, for their entire livelihoods.  
**[0:20:57-0:21:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:20:57):**  And of course, it's still milk.  And yeah, that's still milk. But if it's like precision fermentation producing a powder  that can be reconstituted into something like milk, that's even more of a threat to those  those livelihoods. And those narratives moving forward that casts one thing is quite bad  without the subtlety that actually distinguishes between different forms of systems is quite  
**[0:21:18-0:21:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:21:18):**  dangerous because it means those promoting those technologies will steam ahead, get the  research and development grants be able to get the support of the technicians that go  out there for food and from the Food and Agriculture Organization be more privy to be able to get  the loans that are available from the World Bank and the IMF, which caused tremendous  difficulties in in the global south, you know, whenever there's, you know, big shifts in  
**[0:21:42-0:21:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:21:42):**  the trajectories of where people go, and it means lots of people are left without the  livelihood. You can say just transition, just transition. But actually, there's there's  distortions in that just transition. Because if you tried to take on 95 million of those  people that are gaining a living living from small scale dairy and transition into another  sector of the economy, what sector is there that could absorb it if it's not a land based  
**[0:22:03-0:22:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:22:03):**  one, a labor intensive land based livelihood, which in general is more sustainable, you  tend to have low consumer consumer spending, etc. And you move people into cities or into  occupations that are computer programming or working for a tourism company, or whatever  it is, or living in dire poverty and slums, then what happens to the environmental impact  of their lifestyles. And I think it's much more about bringing people back to the land,  
**[0:22:27-0:22:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:22:27):**  keeping people on the land, and building up the quality of those rural lifestyles.  I agree with you completely. And I think the narrative that we're discussing here, the  narrative that George Monbiot presents is, is truly dangerous, because it does undermine  these various different things. And you say that, you know, George isn't, I mean, he says  himself that he's not land sharing or land sparing, but actually, I don't think that's  
**[0:22:47-0:22:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:22:47):**  true. I think that he is clearly one of the world's big land sparers. Everything that  he says seems to be driven by this desire for land sparing, which because that is based  around this notion of resource efficiency, a disregarding of livestock, because there's  a misunderstanding in the first instance of the role of methane and how that works in  terms of global warming. But because it puts resource efficiency as the key metric over  
**[0:23:14-0:23:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:23:14):**  and above so many others and disregards the ecosystem services that farming can deliver  and that livestock farming, you know, is part of delivering. And I wonder if you think that  Monbiot understands that in taking this position around precision fermentation and cultured  meat, even with the safeguards he suggests, such as open source technology, which frankly  are highly unlikely to happen, does he understand that he's really becoming corporate America's  
**[0:23:40-0:23:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:23:40):**  new best friend?  I'm not sure. I think he believes that you can put these things out there and it could  be. My experience is that it is quite unlikely. You know, and I did when I read his book,  I read the chapter that's about farm free foods first because of the headlines that  are in the press, because the narrative going around social media and that kind of set the  
**[0:24:03-0:24:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:24:03):**  tone before I went back and read all the part that supports small scale agroecology and  that kind of thing. I was reading it on the train on the way to a meeting with cultured  meat scientists. And I know George is largely talking about precision fermentation rather  than cultured meat. You know, he says we're going to have a hybrid of both. And I do believe  that the money that's going to go into developing these technologies is largely going to come  
**[0:24:25-0:24:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:24:25):**  from the corporate sector because we're getting very little public investment or any solutions  coming forward with agriculture. But when I went to this meeting, I had a bit of an  open mind and I was actually frankly shocked at how little control there seemed to be over  there about who's investing and how there was very little talk about ownership of that  technology. And the main investors were very large corporations that we saw a slide of  
**[0:24:47-0:24:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:24:47):**  the top 10 investors, which governments are proud of showing us, which were all the really  big, the really big corporations which control our food system.  And groups like Tyson Food that are currently, you know, a big feedlot meats company. And  it's them, you know, and others in Cargill who are investing in precision fermentation  and cultured meat. Yeah, yeah, exactly. That's what I saw. And  
**[0:25:10-0:25:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:25:10):**  also that there was a tremendous amount of lobbying that went into the legislation to  try and not label gene edited foods as gene edited or genetically modified because they  were worried that would affect the reputation of cultured meat. They wanted to leave the  doors firmly open for that to be a way for that food to be produced. And because the  public generally pushes back against that kind of thing, they wanted to make sure it  
**[0:25:31-0:25:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:25:31):**  wasn't labeled. And I found that quite dangerous as well, just to understand the amount of  corporate lobbying that's involved in the development of these sorts of technologies  basically made me worry that it's too utopian to think that they will be open source and  not lead towards more corporate control in the food sector. But more than that, it's  about the trajectory towards disconnection to where our food comes from.  
**[0:25:53-0:25:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:25:53):**  And that's the point I wanted to bring up, you know, next really, because when George  talks about farm free foods and, you know, when we take that to its sort of logical final  resting place, and we start to imagine a world without farming, you know, whether that's  the UK or whether it's the developing world, farming and agriculture have been under enormous  pressure, economic pressure for many, many years and the countryside and countryside  
**[0:26:16-0:26:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:26:16):**  economies and countryside societies and communities already aren't what they were, you know, 40,  50 years ago. But the idea that we remove farming entirely, what's left there? Who's  going to manage the countryside? How are these sort of really important pockets of national  economies going to work? And I just, I get the impression that it's an ideological thrusting  narrative that just hasn't been thought through in terms even of the things that George Monbiot,  
**[0:26:44-0:26:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:26:44):**  you know, would talk about in other columns, the importance of society, the importance  of community.  Yeah. And I think the importance of community can't be underestimated and how much working  in connection with your local landscape lends to that. And, you know, having communities  that are centred around agriculture or food forests or connection to nature are incredibly  
**[0:27:03-0:27:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:27:03):**  important to our social wellbeing, you know, that working together, that knowing where  things come from, eating together, working together on the land, it's all extremely important  to, you know, how we move forward to solve social crises alongside the environmental  crisis. What I think is incredibly important is that we think about balance here, because,  you know, we talked about yield and that yield isn't the central thing, but yield is also  
**[0:27:28-0:27:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:27:28):**  important. But what's most important is that we balance our land uses. And I think that  balance across the board is something we're severely lacking within the agroecology movement,  within the nation as a whole, with the planet as a whole, in trying to balance how we use  land better. So it's not necessarily about the yield per hectare, but it's how we balance  those various land uses. And we do need to improve yields in agroecology, but also sometimes  
**[0:27:53-0:27:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:27:53):**  an extensive system can be very valuable. For instance, livestock that graze on a conservation  meadow, that's very extensive, but we want the biodiversity that's on that conservation  meadow. It can be an important part of the heritage of a local landscape. Yet when we've  been looking at modelling land use to look at a balanced land use scenario, overall,  if we're going to use agroecological approaches to our food production and feed everybody  
**[0:28:17-0:28:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:28:17):**  in the UK, we need to decrease the amount of meat by two thirds within that system.  Right. So, so, but it still has a valuable role for livestock, but it's thinking about  the overall balance. And it's also thinking about where we produce our food.  Toby  Often we talk about the reduction in meat, but for me, that's about taking a land first  
**[0:28:36-0:28:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:28:36):**  approach. If you take a land first approach, we will by default be producing a lot less  intensive chicken. We'll be getting rid of intensive pork, but there may well be a redistribution  of livestock of cattle and sheep across the country from the West to the East as we, as  we sort of try and embody and scale up these agroecological systems because livestock are  important in those rotations. And of course, regenerative agriculture is a way of boosting  
**[0:29:01-0:29:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:29:01):**  production. And when we're talking about yield, we need to think about yield in terms, not  only of food, but in terms of climate outcomes, in terms of biodiversity outcomes, in terms  of social outcomes. So we're improving the yield of all of these various different things,  which is where things like the whole farm metric come in as well.  Now, you mentioned earlier the disconnect between people who live in the city and people  
**[0:29:25-0:29:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:29:25):**  who live in the countryside. And one of Mambio's understandable concerns is the expansion of  city populations and the ability to get affordable nutrition to those living in poorer communities.  Now, there's no doubt that this is extremely important, but surely there are better ways  of giving city populations, rather than corporations, power and agency over the nutritional choices  that they make.  
**[0:29:47-0:29:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:29:47):**  Yeah, I think an important solution is peri-urban agriculture and also thinking, you know, about  how we get greater connection for people who live in cities with the countryside. Peri-urban  agriculture is the land that's around cities. You know, it's the kind of outskirts of cities,  if you think like the donut surrounding a city. And then there's also urban agriculture,  which is right in the middle of the city. And I think there's an important role for  
**[0:30:13-0:30:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:30:13):**  both. So in the middle of a city, having green space and a place where people can connect  with growing your salad greens and your herbs and, you know, and those quite, you know,  healthy, nutritious, fresh foods that you can add to a larger diet is incredibly important  because it gets people in contact with where their food comes in and gets them physical  work in green space and that mental wellbeing of being a part of the community that works  
**[0:30:36-0:30:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:30:36):**  on an urban farm.  And just to be clear, that's not high tech vertical production of lettuce?  No, no, no. It's people actually being involved, you know, with their hands in the soil a little  bit because that connection with the soil and the connection of working with other people  to be able to produce seasonal greens and things like that, that you can add to your  
**[0:30:53-0:30:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:30:53):**  diet is incredibly important. And, you know, there's city farms that we work with in the  Landworkers Alliance that show that there's a real connection between healthy diets and,  you know, being having access to an urban farm because people understand more about  seasonality of food and they get access to things that they might not be able to afford.  But then we think about the peri-urban areas, then that's like a zone where we actually  
**[0:31:16-0:31:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:31:16):**  should be setting aside the best agricultural land for production so that, you know, the  fresh vegetables that need to go into that city are being produced in a way that they  can come in. Also your milk and things that need to be fresh. And then you move outwards  from there to a regional level where you've got farms, mixed farms that are operating  on a regional level to provide your arable crops, you know, and your meat and your other  
**[0:31:39-0:31:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:31:39):**  things that you put into part of that diet. Really exciting thing about peri-urban agriculture  and urban agriculture is that you can actually produce a lot more culturally appropriate  food and you can have communities in very diverse neighbourhoods being connected to  land and how the produce from there is produced, like what it is, what types of food it is,  and how it's butchered. So, you know, if it's a farm producing halal meat, for example,  
**[0:32:05-0:32:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:32:05):**  you know, then it can be slaughtered in a way that's appropriate and butchered so that  you can use all parts of the animal within a certain diet, you know, so that it's culturally  appropriate as well. Or you can grow different vegetables or I know, you know, amazing farms  where they produce slaughter-free dairy products for the Hindu community. You know, it provides  that diversity and that connection.  
**[0:32:22-0:32:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:32:22):**  It's such a different vision from Regenesis. And wouldn't it be amazing if George Monbiot  wrote that book? Because that's inclusive and people-centred. It's not focused on high  tech and high corporation input. Now, the core flaw in the book, it seems to me, is  that Monbiot seems to have twigged at last that the obvious extension of land sparing  is that agriculture is forced into ever smaller and more intensively managed spaces. And his  
**[0:32:49-0:32:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:32:49):**  response in Regenesis quite rightly is to say, well, hang on, this won't work. But rather  than turning away from land sparing and everything that goes with it, the carbon tunnel vision  element and turning it towards widespread agroecology in multi-outcome land use, he's  so caught up in this sparing mindset that his solution is just to say, well, in that  case, we can't have farming at all. Why? When all of the evidence demonstrates the power  
**[0:33:15-0:33:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:33:15):**  of multi-outcome land use, of people-centred agriculture, has Monbiot set out his stall  against it?  Well, he leaves space in there in his book for high yielding agroecological solutions,  but stockless ones. So the farms like Ian Tolhurst's amazing farm with stockless organic  rotations, we need to move forward with that. And I do agree, we need to move forward with  
**[0:33:38-0:33:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:33:38):**  trying to get support for small farms producing high yields of agroecology. What he's missing  is that support for the default livestock is part of it as well, that there still is  a role for default livestock in this system that we move forward with. There is no doubt  we need to take a good hard look at both land sharing and land sparing and find a balance  in between the two. We need to look at our land usage and we need to make sure that we  
**[0:34:04-0:34:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:34:04):**  have livestock in the right place and in the right amount, decreasing the overall amount.  But I would say the solutions to that are getting rid of factory farmed meat completely,  get rid of the vertically integrated poultry farms, pork factories producing intensive  pork. We should actually be banning them as a society, stop the imports of soya from places  like the Amazon and really transition workers in that agri-food chain for factory farms  
**[0:34:32-0:34:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:34:32):**  completely out of that type of farming into much more sustainable farming. But we also  have a role for livestock and we also need to look at the very large farms that are using  far more share of land. And that's where he talks about some of these  agri-ecological solutions are yield blind is that these very large plots of pasture  fed beef and lamb, I can understand they need to diversify and to think about land sharing  
**[0:34:57-0:35:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:34:57):**  as well in terms of sharing that land for other usages so that people that are woodland  workers who want to work forests to be able to produce timber and fuel wood, they also  have employment so that people growing vegetables have space for employment so that they're  using it so that it's part of mixed farming systems. So we're producing loads of other  things as well. That land sharing in that sense is also incredibly important. And we  
**[0:35:22-0:35:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:35:22):**  need to make sure we're doing our very best within the agri-ecological movement to have  a balanced scenario that we're putting forward so that we are really coming up with this  vision that's fair across the entire planet. When you talk about the way that we need to  have a balance between land sharing and land sparing, I mean, I would agree with you in  general terms, you know, clearly we need to have nature reserves and national parks, we  
**[0:35:42-0:35:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:35:42):**  need to have the Amazon rainforests. But actually, when you talk about this sort of notion of  default livestock, you know, which I would think of in terms of default agri-ecology,  it's a question of when we've got those big reserves, it's what we do with the rest of  the land. And it's making sure that we find the best multi outcome solutions, that we  are valuing the power of soil to sequester as well as trees, that we're integrating trees  
**[0:36:09-0:36:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:36:09):**  within agriculture and making sure that we're farming in a way that holds as much carbon  as possible because it is being shown that soil when it is well managed in a regenerative  manner can hold and sequester as much carbon as your basic standard woodland in the UK,  not a sickness, Bruce woodland, but your standard piece of woodland. And it's really important  to start building that into the models as well. You know, ultimately, what excites me  
**[0:36:35-0:36:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:36:35):**  about agri-ecology is that it's about putting land first, producing what that land and community  is able to support for itself. George just seems to have swallowed the Bill Gates land  sparing corporate fake food Kool-Aid and yet depressingly has this great big platform and  a vast number of followers. And it just, I wonder how you think as someone who knows  him as a friend, that we can start to bring him back. You know, why has he gone off piste  
**[0:37:02-0:37:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:37:02):**  to this sort of eco modernist world that he now inhabits? How can we bring him back to  show him that agri-ecology is actually the best hope for humanity and this planet's future?  Well, I think what we need to do is have a good balanced conversation on moving forward  with the part of the scenario that isn't about precision fermentation and cultured meat and  those techno fix solutions and focusing on the part where he talks about, let's improve  
**[0:37:30-0:37:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:37:30):**  high yielding agri-ecological land use. Let's support small and family farms and try and  get them the research and development money that they need and shape that a bit more.  Try and bring small scale default livestock scenarios into that scenario, but also unpick  more of what we want to move forward with the stock-free organics. You know, think about  our land use scenarios so that we get some balanced modelling projections about, you  
**[0:37:54-0:37:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:37:54):**  know, how much woodland do we want? How much conservation meadow do we want? How much arable  production with rotations do we want? How much, you know, food can we get from default  livestock production? You know, how do we get to the level of fruit and veg production  that we need and unpick that and lay out a plan. Let's all think about this in a balanced  way together so that we can have good concrete evidence about the possibility that this is  
**[0:38:19-0:38:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:38:19):**  possible. It is possible to actually share the land with all this multifunctional land  use for local communities to be able to feed ourselves in the future.  Jason Vale,  So it's sort of a land use framework.  Anna Hutt,  
**[0:38:28-0:38:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:38:28):**  Yeah. And I think, and I think if we started to like see how that works alongside the recommendation  he made for improving high yielding agri-ecological solutions, that might start to convince him  that we could actually have a viable future moving this forward.  Jason Vale,  It's interesting, isn't it? Because there is such a strong narrative towards the only  
**[0:38:49-0:38:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:38:49):**  way to solve environmental issues is to be vegan, is to be vegetarian. And there is an  urgent need for a counter narrative. And I'm interested in the way that you frame it because,  you know, much as George Monbiot sort of almost deliberately sets himself up as a, as a pantomime  villain in this space, through this book in promoting things like precision fermentation  over farming, that you think that it's about finding compromise, which is the way that,  
**[0:39:14-0:39:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:39:14):**  you know, we always try and approach a whole range of different issues in society. It's  about ignoring the bad as much as possible, and then trying to find the middle ground  and gradually broaden that middle ground so that there's more of a shared understanding.  Anna Hutt,  Yeah, absolutely. It's about building community. And it's about all of us working together  
**[0:39:33-0:39:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:39:33):**  as a community, as a social movement to move this forward. And that involves a great deal  of self reflection. You know, I spoke before about the National Farmers Union and Canada  being in the same movement as the indigenous people in the Amazon, and you know, small  farmers all across the world, and us as a movement reflect all the time, you know, now  when a member of National Farmers Union, Canada has the platform, and they speak, first they  
**[0:39:56-0:40:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:39:56):**  give respect to the indigenous people whose land that they took, and that they stood on  who were the indigenous communities that own that land before they set up the farms that  they have, and reflect back on that, and that legacy of colonialism that's embedded in what  they do to think about fair share, and how can we move that forward to the next generation  also has access to land? How do we bring in diversity and inclusion? You know, that kind  
**[0:40:16-0:40:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:40:16):**  of reflection is incredibly important as a community of agroecology as a social movement  moving forward. And it's at the end of the day, it's about fair share. It's about all  of us thinking about how we do our fair share to work as a balanced global community to  produce enough food for ourselves and for the next generation, and the next generation  after that.  
**[0:40:36-0:40:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:40:36):**  What a great place to end. And that's all we've got time for. Thanks so much, Jyoti.  I'd like to thank my guest, Jyoti Fernandes from the Land Workers Alliance. If you've  enjoyed listening, please come back and listen to more. Tell your friends, like us, review  us and share our links. Farmgate is funded by San Calpa, and you can join the conversation  on Twitter by searching for Farmgate podcast. I've been Finn Lo-Kustain. Bye for now.  
**[0:40:58-0:41:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Regeneration--not-Regenesis-e1nr5oh#t=0:40:58):**  Somebody just sent me a tweet from the new Defra minister talking about good news for  farmers' livelihoods. We're setting up export opportunities to Mongolia so that chicken  farmers can produce for KFC in Mongolia. I'm like, oh no, what direction are we moving?  This is his first move to set up more vertically integrated poultry farms so we can export  to KFC Mongolia. I'm like this guy, where do we even start?  