### Farm Gate  (2022-37-22)
**[0:00:00-0:00:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to Farmgate. This episode is the recording of a recent webinar, Restoring  the Water Cycle, with Walter Jayner and Caroline Grindrod.  Hello, everybody. Thanks so much for taking the time to be with us this morning. My name's  Finlow Costayne. I'm the chief executive of Farmwell and founder of the Food and Global  Security Network. Now, the Food and Global Security Network is interested primarily in  
**[0:00:28-0:00:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:00:28):**  two key things. The first is how we maintain a peaceful society in the face of ecological  breakdown. And the second is, well, how do we mitigate the worst impacts of that ecological  breakdown in the first place? And for us, food and food systems are at the centre of  that. How we produce food, how we transport and consume food, how we make meals, these  are all critical to answering those key questions. And the Food and Global Security Network is  
**[0:00:56-0:01:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:00:56):**  a web of informed individuals, researchers, NGO leaders and campaigners from around the  world, from the USA to New Zealand, through Australia, Africa, Europe and, of course,  the United Kingdom. And the thing that binds us together is a passion for food systems,  for nutritional security, because food security in and of itself isn't enough. We need good  nutrient-dense food to be available affordably, for all, and we cannot have food security  
**[0:01:26-0:01:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:01:26):**  if we don't have good functioning agricultural land. Now, many of you may well have taken  part in webinars on this platform in the past. You may even have read our Soil Health, Soil  and Security report. And you'll know that we review soil health as absolutely integral  to these questions of the future. The soil health is the essential building block of  biodiversity, because biodiversity cascades from below ground up through the food web.  
**[0:01:54-0:01:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:01:54):**  But, of course, we can't have functioning soil without sunlight and without water. And  it's water that we're here to talk about today, water cycles and hydrological systems about  how it's critical to restore that hydrology if we are to rebalance the Earth's climate,  to restore biodiversity and ensure that we have secure food systems for the future. And,  of course, water is truly amazing stuff. It's an alien substance that arrived here on Earth  
**[0:02:22-0:02:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:02:22):**  hundreds of millions of years after the Earth itself was formed, and which we and the food  systems that we rely on just simply wouldn't exist without it. And so, for billions of  years, this substance has cycled and recycled through rocks and mountains, plants and animals,  through oceans and ice caps, and, of course, through the sky. And water in the way that  hydrological function changes is also key to the story of climate change. Climate change  
**[0:02:50-0:02:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:02:50):**  isn't just about carbon, it's about hydrological function, as water will explain in just a  moment. And, of course, when we're thinking about the impacts of climate change, we're  thinking about the impacts of water, storms, hurricanes, floods. These are the impacts  of climate change, and they're part of the story of water. And the converse of that,  the heat waves and the droughts that many of us have experienced across the last few  
**[0:03:16-0:03:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:03:16):**  months, the wildfires, they're part of the story of the absence of water. So, water is  at the centre of the climate change story, and we need to better understand it if we're  to mitigate and adapt to face the ecological crises that are now underway. Now, today,  I'm really pleased to say that we're joined by two truly exceptional people. Walter Jayner  is the world-renowned soil microbiologist and expert in hydrological systems. He's also  
**[0:03:46-0:03:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:03:46):**  the founder of Regenerate Earth. And Caroline Grindrod is a consultant and coach in regenerative  agriculture, and her consultancy is called Roots of Nature. So, welcome to both of you.  As I say, welcome to everybody that's joining us today and who will be joining us through  the YouTube film and through the Farmgate broadcast of this webinar in the future. Our  intention is to have a discussion for about 40 minutes and then to spend the last 15 or  
**[0:04:14-0:04:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:04:14):**  20 minutes of this session having questions from you in the audience. So, without further  ado, Walter, you said that global warming and the prevention of climate extremes isn't  just about carbon, but also hydrology. What do you mean?  Right. Well, thank you very much, Finlay, and thank you very much, everybody, for attending.  And yeah, look, to explain the situation, we actually have two different issues here,  
**[0:04:39-0:04:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:04:39):**  haven't we? We've got the issue of global warming, and then we've got the issue of climate  extremes. And in a sense, they epitomise the dilemma. There's no question that 60 years  ago, Charles Keeling gave us the evidence that CO2 was going up abnormally. And basically,  this was due to the oxidation or had been due to the oxidation of carbon from our soils,  from our landscape burning well before our profligate use of fossil fuels. So, yes, here  
**[0:05:08-0:05:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:05:08):**  was a symptom, a CO2 increase from oxidation of carbon. And yes, CO2 is a greenhouse gas.  So, yes, it has this global warming effect. No question at all about those facts. But  we've got to make sure we don't confuse symptoms with causes and certainly that we don't restrict  our responses to just cleaning up symptoms because the causes are much deeper. But the  second part of your question gets more scary, actually, because it's prevention of climate  
**[0:05:38-0:05:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:05:38):**  extremes, dangerous hydrological climate extremes. And this was brought to the fore, the Hadley  Centre in 2005. Really, what are the dangerous hydrological extremes? And as you mentioned,  the hurricanes, the floods, the droughts, the wildfires, the systemic eradication. And  these are all hydrological, right? They're not basically CO2, they're hydrological and  hydrologically impacts extremes, kill people, destroy biosystem and comes to your key issue,  
**[0:06:11-0:06:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:06:11):**  food security, because basically it's hydrology, chiefly that governs whether we can grow food.  There are seven missed meals between social stability and chaos, basically, and it's that  hydrology that governs whether there are those seven meals available. So it's really quite  fundamental. So water becomes much, much more critical. Okay, so we've got these two different  concepts we've confused, global warming and dangerous hydrological extremes, one's long-term  
**[0:06:43-0:06:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:06:43):**  and one's, of course, short-terms and impacting a society level. But they all basically all  linked together because the climate, 95% of the heat dynamics of the blue planet for the  last 4 billion years has been driven by hydrological processes, 95% of that heat dynamics. The  CO2 component of the greenhouse effect does about 4%. Okay, so we've got this sort of  the elephants in not in the room, they're far too big, you know, it's hydrology. And  
**[0:07:15-0:07:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:07:15):**  really, we are now after 60 years of talk, talk, talk, meetings, meetings, but no action.  We're now at this point of dangerous hydrological extremes impacting, destroying bio systems,  threatening communities. And we've really got to address the question, how do we actually  manage this hydrology, but also how do we safely naturally cool the climate? Because  it's way too late, decades too late to think that just emission reductions are going to  
**[0:07:47-0:07:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:07:47):**  sort of turn that 4% of the greenhouse gas effect that is driven by CO2, that that can  actually safely cool the climate in time. So we both have hydrology is critical for  essential food production, keeping bio systems alive, but it's also hydrology that's essential  for cooling the planet safely and naturally. The good news is, yes, we can do it. But we've  got to start debating and talking and acting on this new reality.  
**[0:08:17-0:08:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:08:17):**  In your view, is it possible to solve global warming without a primary focus on hydrological  cycles and in particular, the restoration of the soil carbon sponge?  Well, look, thank you. And that's really the critical thing. No, it is not possible to  solve the climate crisis without hydrology. It's, as we said, 95% of the driver through  various processes. So yes, that's where the agency is. And the other news is, yes, regenerating  
**[0:08:46-0:08:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:08:46):**  the earth's soil carbon sponge is actually the thing that nature used to create the bio  system we evolved in and depend on. And it's our point of agency, we can do that as well  as nature did. So the real simple take home message is, yes, we can still influence the  climate but by restoring natural safe hydrological cooling. And we can do that by regenerating  the earth's soil carbon sponge, because it's that oxidation degradation of the sponge,  
**[0:09:19-0:09:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:09:19):**  which has given the CO2 symptom, but is also completely compromised the hydrological capacity,  buffering and functioning of the ecosystem. Many people listening will have heard of the  concept of the soil carbon sponge, but I wonder if you could just explain that term for us.  Okay, well, the sponge is simply a matter of basically here are mineral detritus and  organic detritus mixed up together through natural pedogenesis soil forming processes.  
**[0:09:49-0:09:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:09:49):**  And by mixing these together, they create an open loose matrix, three dimensional matrix,  which can infiltrate, retain and make available water and nutrients. And that is enabled then  plants to flourish across the whole 29% of the land surface of this planet. And of course,  it's those plants through their transpiration and their hydrological function, the air conditioners  of this planet. Okay, so the sponge is really the change from mineral hard compacted mineral  
**[0:10:21-0:10:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:10:21):**  rock, impervious rock to an open loose porous matrix, which gives you agency through its  hydrological infiltration retention availability. Now that agency comes in, it's again, very  simple. If we look at global warming, we've got a planet, we're getting 342 watts per  square metre incident solar energy continually onto the surface of the troposphere. And basically  global warming, we're retaining an extra three watts per square metre abnormally. So it's  
**[0:10:51-0:10:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:10:51):**  less than 1% of the incident solar radiation. So we've got this challenge of how can we  rebalance, re-correct a 1% extra heat retention by the planet, that solar radiation that isn't  being readmitted. And so how do we manage the sponge and how do we manage vegetation  and the different hydrological processes we can go into to give us that 1% return of solar  radiation back out to space to rebalance the heat dynamics of the planet. So when we look  
**[0:11:24-0:11:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:11:24):**  at it in that context, it's a 1% rebalancing and it's totally doable safely naturally  as nature did. But we've got to face that reality, look at those processes, because  at the moment, we're still in la-la land dreaming just about carbon accounting, rather  than the actual functional role of carbon, the sponge and hydrology in the planet's  air conditioning.  
**[0:11:49-0:11:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:11:49):**  And of course, when there isn't a functioning soil carbon sponge, when the land is compacted,  and essentially just goes back to rock, the water will just run off. But when there is  a functioning soil carbon sponge, that water will be absorbed into the earth and held in  the earth and released as nature requires it.  Absolutely.  
**[0:12:07-0:12:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:12:07):**  Caroline, can you sort of take us a bit further now in terms of our understanding of hydrological  systems, our understanding of the soil carbon sponge, but what role now do regenerative  farmers play in restoring that water cycling and restoring a functioning soil carbon sponge?  Thanks, Finlow, and thanks for inviting me and for everyone that's here. So, yeah,  it's great. So Walter, obviously, if anyone's heard him talk before, he talks about all  
**[0:12:32-0:12:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:12:32):**  these different sort of global climatic functions of the water cycle, which is incredible, as  I say, rethinking the carbon thing and seeing how could these, all these different effects  from clouds to transpiration to dampening the dust down and then of course, the carbon  sponge, how does that, how do we take that from a kind of macro climate function to what  we can change on the ground? And that's kind of what I get more involved in. So perhaps  
**[0:12:57-0:13:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:12:57):**  the best way to approach this question is to go through the water cycle as we teach  it to regenerative farmers, you can see the kind of the small water cycle and how we can  genuinely impact that on the ground, because ultimately, this disruption, this climate  derangement is what's going to stop food being produced, isn't it? So we can buffer that  hugely within our farming practices on a farm by farm basis. So, so what we're really trying  
**[0:13:20-0:13:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:13:20):**  to do in regenerative agriculture is we're trying to create whole system ecological function  for the continuous primary production. So essentially, we're trying to grow more green  plants, for the benefit of cooling the planet, for the benefit of the wildlife, and for the  benefit of the farm that can then make a profit from either grazing animals or eating directly  those green plants. So really, what we need to think about is how do we slow the flow  
**[0:13:44-0:13:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:13:44):**  of rainfall to make it effective so that we are capturing every bit that falls onto the  surface, retaining it for as long as possible, recharging our rivers and our aquifers, and  then making sure that that's leading through a plant that's made use of it, essentially,  and then it can be transferred back out into the atmosphere to be made use of by these  climate functions. So in a practical sense, what we can do as farmers on the ground is  
**[0:14:06-0:14:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:14:06):**  we can look at every part of that raindrops journey. So the first most important thing  is does that raindrop fall directly onto bare soil, because if it falls onto bare soil,  really what happens is, it's a little bit like I liken it to tamping concrete, you get  all the findings come to the surface, and it creates an impervious kind of layer. And  in our part of the world in the UK, where it's moist, that tends to make a and stop  
**[0:14:30-0:14:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:14:30):**  airflow and we get a slimy surface, but then when it gets hot, and in the drylands, the  world that creates a really hard cap. And then what happens, of course, is that when  it does rain, the water runs straight off the surface and over the surface, instead  of going into the into the soil structure. So that's really important first step is we  need vegetated soil. So we need the raindrop to hit either a tree or tall plants, and not  
**[0:14:53-0:14:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:14:53):**  directly onto the soil. And the whole process of hitting a tall plant, whether that be a  tall grass plant or a hedge is that that can, you know, break the impact and it can trickle  and slow that process of the water going into the soil profile. So anything that's growing  tall as well has deep roots. So the idea is that we, we slow the raindrop and then we  help it through capillary actions that would go into the soil profile rather than across  
**[0:15:16-0:15:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:15:16):**  the surface. So that's the first part we can manage our grazing, we can manage our systems  that we never leave the soil bare. And then you've got to think right, well, then you  get down to the soil surface level. So in an ideal world, we want some sort of protection  on the soil surface so that we can once we've got the water into the soil, we keep it in  the soil, and ideally a kind of decaying mulch on the soil surface, which is fabulous because  
**[0:15:38-0:15:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:15:38):**  it feeds worms and all the biology that's going to be making holes and little crevices  in the soil to let the water infiltrate and penetrate. But also it stops the evaporation.  So that literally keeps a soggy sponge on the surface and prevents all the water that  has fallen onto the surface from just simply evaporating out, which it does on bare soil.  And then it stops the wind and on all of that process that are drying that up. So we're  
**[0:16:02-0:16:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:16:02):**  making effective use of any water that comes onto our soil. So and then we, we want to  make sure that we've got lots of diversity as well. So each plant, we want pole plants,  but we also want lots of different species of plant because each different species has  what we call different root architecture, each plant, some will have fibrous roots,  some will have long tap roots. And that means that the water has been kind of put into different  
**[0:16:23-0:16:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:16:23):**  layers in the soil right down to the depths. Diversity is also really important because  it helps to create soil aggregation. So basically having lots of species working together, all  exuding different cocktails of root exudates helps to form these little balls of soil that  are bound up by glues, biological glues, and they're like hollow balls of soil that then  help to retain the water. And it also helps the water go into deeper layers. So we do  
**[0:16:48-0:16:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:16:48):**  all of those things, then we, with diverse pastures or, you know, woodlands or whatever  we're working with, then we should get the development of mycorrhizal fungi and networks  as well. And that's sort of like, you then get really big aggregates all pulling together.  And then you also get plants that can connect up with these super roots, this mycorrhizal  fungi that allows the penetration of the water into those layers, but also the plants can  
**[0:17:10-0:17:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:17:10):**  then get into the tiny little crevices and explore the soil that we wouldn't normally  be able to access the water from under normal circumstances. So in a nutshell, in our regenerative  system, what we're looking for is not disturbing the soil, making sure we're keeping a habitat  of microorganisms that can do all of that stuff and bind up the soil aggregates, protect  the soil surface by trampling and allowing plants to grow tall, ensuring our swards are  
**[0:17:33-0:17:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:17:33):**  diverse through proper management, rest and recovery, and that sort of thing.  Thanks so much, Caroline, for that overview. And I guess the next question, especially,  you know, when we're talking about climate change and the way in which so many people  have a bad view of the role of ruminants, how integral are ruminants to this process  and these processes that you've been talking about?  
**[0:17:54-0:17:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:17:54):**  So when we're talking about grasslands in particular, and Walter mentioned the figures  on desertification, it's a huge, fast area. And, you know, a lot of our land base is grassland,  you know, naturally. And herbivores, you know, grasslands co-evolved with herbivores. So  the process, particularly in the dry lands is absolutely key, you know, having herbivores  and ruminants in that system. So how it would, you know, originally it would just that those  
**[0:18:19-0:18:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:18:19):**  animals in very large numbers would be predated by their pack hunting predators, that would  mean that they would be bunching and moving together. And in the dry lands where you've  got seasonal rainfall, you end up with a big flush of vegetation growing in the, when there's  moisture around, it gets very tall. And then because in the dry season, there isn't that  like here, we can just decay and digest plant material all year round. But in the dry lands,  
**[0:18:45-0:18:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:18:45):**  that doesn't happen because it's just too hot and too dry. So that natural decay process  doesn't happen on its own. And then what tends to happen is that it bakes the soil surface,  the soil surface becomes open and bare, because the minerals are essentially locked up in  that tall vegetation. And then because the soil is getting very hot in the sun up to,  you know, I'm not sure what temperatures Walter could tell us perhaps, but you know, very  
**[0:19:08-0:19:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:19:08):**  high temperatures where, you know, at 60 degrees, microbes die essentially. So the digestion  process from those microbes in the soil isn't available. So animals in that bunching and  moving kind of mob would go through, knock that vegetation to the floor, eat it, because  essentially their gut is full of those microbes that can digest that plant material, they  would dung it and urinate it onto the grass. Because they're in a big mob, they would then  
**[0:19:35-0:19:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:19:35):**  have to leave that area and not come back for some time. And that process is allowing  the mineral cycle to continue through the dry season. And then when it does rain, instead  of the rain falling onto hard-capped soil, and then rushing straight off the surface  into the rivers, flooding everything, and then we've lost that rainfall for that whole  season, then the sort of decaying mulch on the surface from that trampling and manure  
**[0:19:58-0:20:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:19:58):**  will allow that to be soaked up and then sort of perpetuate growth through the next season.  So in the drylands, incredibly important that we've got at least something mimicking that  process. So if we haven't got the wild herbivores in that system, we need to mob animals together  in a management system to mimic that. And of course, as soon as you start to fence animals  in and take away their predators, they no longer have to do that bunching trampling  
**[0:20:21-0:20:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:20:21):**  process. Therefore, they can just choose what they want to eat. They can nibble down the  roots, which means nibble down the plants, which means the roots get short, and that  doesn't allow the water to go in and the whole thing starts to desertify and that process  begins. So drylands incredibly important, but even in moist areas of what we call non-brittle  and holistic management in the UK, what you're seeing is, particularly on the uplands, and  
**[0:20:46-0:20:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:20:46):**  a lot of the east of the country now is starting to see these processes happen. You know, you've  got set stocking of animals that are selectively grazing the whole year round, it takes away  the litter, it keeps the plant short, and you're seeing this even on the, you know,  and again in the uplands where you've got a lot of the fertility washed out of the system  through high rainfall, and then you've got very acidic soils, you're actually getting  
**[0:21:07-0:21:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:21:07):**  a very brittle type environment where things go rank, and you've got the same sort of processes.  So yeah, very important to have herbivores as part of that system.  Jason Vale – Well, so coming back to you, perhaps you could pick up on the issue around  temperatures on arid land versus grassland. But clearly when we're thinking about the  role of ruminants in drawing carbon out of the air and managing hydrology, we can see  
**[0:21:31-0:21:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:21:31):**  that that's hugely important. But I wonder whether regenerative livestock management  is actually able to not only slow global warming and sequester carbon, but physically cool  the planet as well.  David Tingley – Yeah, okay, very important. And to picking up from what Caroline said,  yeah, we've got about 6 billion hectares, or 40% of the land surface made up with grassland.  
**[0:21:54-0:22:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:21:54):**  If it wasn't for herbivores, then those grasslands would just grow up, rank, dry, burn, and return  to desert. Okay, so this is fundamental. The herbivores are essential symbionts for those  grasslands, evolved together fairly recently, 100 million years, and really essential for  those biosystems. And as Caroline has explained that that grass growth then allows that system  to infiltrate water into the sponge, and of course, give that hydrological cycle. You  
**[0:22:26-0:22:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:22:26):**  don't have that in a mineral desert. And it's that hydrological cycle that of course gives  us our cooling potential. I mean, we won't go into it in all detail, but basically there's  five key hydrological processes that grassland vegetation foster, which wouldn't happen if  it was a desert. I mean, the first one is just simply evapotranspiration, latent heat  going from the surface back up into the atmosphere and out to space with water basically turning  
**[0:22:56-0:23:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:22:56):**  from a liquid into a gas. And that takes about 24% of the incident solar radiation from the  surface back into the atmosphere and space cooling that surface. Okay, wouldn't happen  unless you had hydrology. The same thing happens at hydrology within the air, it'll then nucleate  to form clouds. Those clouds reflect incident solar radiation directly back out to space.  And again, that does about 33% of the planet's natural cooling. So increased clouds, you  
**[0:23:28-0:23:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:23:28):**  can increase natural cooling. Also, of course, when those clouds condense, they return the  rain to the soil, but remove the water vapour from the air. The water vapour is actually  the dominant greenhouse gas, 80% of the greenhouse gas effect is water vapour. And that reopens  in nighttime radiation windows that allows heat to escape at night, where otherwise it  would be trapped by that water vapour. And that does about 20% of the cooling. But just  
**[0:23:57-0:24:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:23:57):**  very briefly, the most important and interesting and powerful point of agency we have is if  we have grassland, which is green, protected and shaded, then the soil under those grasslands,  even in tropical areas rarely gets above 20 degrees centigrade. By contrast, an open bare  exposed soil desert landscape can easily get to 70 degrees plus surface temperature. And  it's a simple rule of physics, and it's capable on anywhere in the universe, that the amount  
**[0:24:30-0:24:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:24:30):**  of reradiation from a substance is the fourth power of its temperature in degrees Kelvin.  Simple physics, right, which means that it's temperature times temperature times temperature  times temperature. So a hot, dry desert at 70 degrees centigrade reradiates massively  more heat than a cool, protected, moist grassland at 20 degrees centigrade. Now the punchline  is simply this, the greenhouse effect is governed by the amount of reradiation, factor one,  
**[0:25:05-0:25:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:25:05):**  times the percentage of that reradiation which is then absorbed by greenhouse gases, of which  CO2 is 11%, water vapours 80%, methane and other gases 9%. Okay, so the greenhouse effect  is governed by the amount of reradiation times the percentage absorbed by gases. But by keeping  land surfaces grazed, cool, protected, we can turn down the amount of reradiation through  this simple Stefan-Boltzmann physics, the reradiation physics, we can in fact turn down  
**[0:25:42-0:25:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:25:42):**  the greenhouse effect radically, instantaneously, even if we're not having to change the greenhouse  gases in the air, because greenhouse gases can't absorb heat that has been reradiated,  logically. Okay, and so we've got in a sense the stove, we can turn the stove from ultra  high to simmer by just keeping landscapes cool, moist and protected. And nature does  that through grasslands, grazing ecologies over 6 billion hectares of this planet. And  
**[0:26:15-0:26:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:26:15):**  therefore us regenerating those ecological grazing systems to maintain the sponge, to  maintain hydrology, to maintain grasslands are critically powerful in giving us a cooling  agency on this planet. The beautiful thing is we can do this over vast areas. And we  can do this within weeks, weeks, not the centuries or millennia it'll take to drop CO2 levels.  We can do it in weeks simply by not mowing our lawns, simply by giving protective soil  
**[0:26:48-0:26:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:26:48):**  cover through ecological grassland management. So it's our most powerful agency. And as I  said before, we've got 5 billion hectares of manmade desert and wasteland on this planet  that was all vegetated 8,000 years ago, the Sahara, Australia, you name it, it was all  Middle East, it was all vegetated. And if we can restore even 20% of that back to protective  cooler surfaces, we can turn down the greenhouse effect naturally, safely in time, we can cool  
**[0:27:21-0:27:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:27:21):**  this planet.  So it's not just about managing the grasslands that we currently have, but reversing a ridification  across huge portions of the land. And I'm interested when you mention places like the  Sahara, the idea that we can actually reverse desertification there through the imposition  of livestock and the restoring of ecological cycles.  
**[0:27:43-0:27:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:27:43):**  And yeah, look, it's all there in our face. If we read history, the Romans got all their  wild animals from the Colosseum from Libya. If you go to Libya now, what have we got desert?  Obviously, 2000 years ago, it was Savannah grassland, because they wouldn't have been  able to get the lions and the wild animals for the Colosseum. So in 2000 years, we've  desertified Libya. And basically, we have the capacity through grassland management,  
**[0:28:11-0:28:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:28:11):**  permanent management to regenerate that, but in that process, naturally, safely cooling  the planet in time.  I wonder if you could just spend a moment, a minute or two talking about, because your  work isn't just theoretical, is it? You're actually involved in the practical application  of this, particularly in India at the moment. And I wonder if you just talk through, you  
**[0:28:32-0:28:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:28:32):**  know, what you're doing in India, and what you're finding there.  Well, look, exactly that. I mean, because we're running out of time, we have 10 years  or less to make the effective change. We need to make change at scale, practically grassroots  on the ground. In India, it's basically now switched the whole nation, but starting from  Andhra Pradesh, natural farming, zero budget, natural farming strategies, thousands of,  
**[0:28:58-0:29:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:28:58):**  well, actually millions of farmers going into natural farming. And instead of having one  crop and then having green cover for a third of the time, and two thirds of the time that  soil was red, dry baking, natural farming is a label to extend green cover 365 days  of the year. And so it's giving you now three crops, higher yield, higher water retention,  but also having an enormous effect in dropping that hot reradiated surface 66% of the time.  
**[0:29:33-0:29:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:29:33):**  So it's a matter of, yeah, like the area times the time. And basically, it's as simple as  yet changing a cropping system, changing a grazing system, we can re-green degraded land  through right agroecology practices within a matter of months. And if we can do that  at scale, as we're doing in India, then we can turn what was otherwise in India's term,  you know, 70% red, 30% green, we can make it 90% green, and fundamentally change it.  
**[0:30:04-0:30:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:30:04):**  We've got over 1 million women farmers in Andhra Pradesh doing this natural farming  and benefiting enormously socially, ecologically, economically, from that natural farming change.  It's fascinating, and it's really exciting to hear about the work that you're doing there.  And of course, that chimes with people, you know, who are familiar with the work of Alan  Savory and Savory Institute. Now, Caroline, coming back to you, regenerative agriculture  
**[0:30:30-0:30:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:30:30):**  requires a very different approach, the type of farming, you know, that we're talking about,  where livestock are integrated, where there are rotations, you know, sort of put back  in place. And of course, Regen prioritizes biological function and values the complexity  and systems. And I wonder how farmers and others working in food systems can begin to  adopt this mindset, which for many will be very, very different to the approach that  
**[0:30:55-0:30:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:30:55):**  they've been taught in agricultural college or just, you know, growing up on a farm, because  it's very different to perhaps what their parents and grandparents have done.  Yeah, absolutely. And of course, you can just copy some of the techniques and the practices  and that'll get you so far. But if we really, really want to benefit from the kind of whole  system function that we're talking about here, we need to start to learn how to think like  
**[0:31:16-0:31:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:31:16):**  an ecosystem. And in holistic management, we think of that as holistic thinking, but  you could call it systems thinking is that nonlinear thinking where one plus one doesn't  equal two. And we have to understand how to work with that because living systems are  complex, and not complicated. So once you take a piece out, once a species goes missing,  it changes and accommodates and it's changed forever. So we need a whole different way  
**[0:31:43-0:31:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:31:43):**  of understanding how to work with those systems. Because ultimately, what we're trying to do  is mimic those ecological processes in that system, because those are the most resilient  systems in the world, they are growing the most primary production from rainfall and  sunshine. So as a farming system, that's a pretty good way to go, isn't it? So what we've  got to try and do is understand how to benefit from that whole system function instead of  
**[0:32:08-0:32:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:32:08):**  simplifying it, reducing it, separating it, studying it, and then you know, just thinking  that we can adopt the practices. So what we tend to do is we try and teach that kind of  that way of thinking, which usually involves a couple of days of intensive training, and  using lots of different examples to illustrate that. So one way of sort of trying to illustrate  why one plus one might equal four in the case of a healthy ecosystem is examples like this,  
**[0:32:36-0:32:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:32:36):**  there's a lovely story I heard, I can't remember where it came from now. But we're basically  the vineyard was using taking that linear thought process that those plants around the  bottom of the vines are going to be sucking up water, therefore, we must kill those to  allow more water to be given to the vines. Whereas in actual fact, when you under sow  the under sowed it with a diverse swathe of flowers and herbs, and actually they ended  
**[0:33:00-0:33:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:33:00):**  up reducing their water usage by about 40% or something, you know, there's lots of different  versions of that same story, it doesn't make any linear sense that more plants sucking  up water would lead to less water use. But in actual fact, what's happening in the soil  is that well, across the whole surface is that it's, yeah, the transpiration is cooling  it so you get less evaporation, the water is being able to be penetrated into the soil  
**[0:33:22-0:33:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:33:22):**  surface, the aggregate aggregates have developed so that they're holding on to the water and  not evaporating. The mycorrhizal fungi is allowing the plants to explore more of the  water, including the vines, because they're talking to each other, the whole system is  starting to need less water and be more resilient. So that's one way of sort of thinking about  how this nonlinear way of working comes about. So we kind of call this redefining productivity.  
**[0:33:47-0:33:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:33:47):**  And if you think of like a dairy system, you might, if you're thinking purely about productivity  through the lens of how much grass can I grow in every grazing, then you might think of  okay, well, let's go for ryegrass and clover in a lab or in a field trial that clearly  is the most productive, but then you've got to reseed it so many, you know, every few  years, and you've got a lot of bare soil because it's got a very low carbon to nitrogen ratios,  
**[0:34:11-0:34:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:34:11):**  it's hard to keep as much on the soil surface quite gappy, which means you've got bare soil  that's evaporating. So in if every other year and you're going into drought and losing productivity  through the main part of the season, then over a 10 year period, is it really that productive?  Because ultimately, we've you know, we've we've collapsed ourself and the use of nitrogen,  that whole system is designed around the starting point of the plants, not bred for plants that  
**[0:34:38-0:34:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:34:38):**  don't give exudates and talk to the soil microbes, because that's inefficient. Therefore, that  plant grows really well in the presence of nitrogen, but not so well under, you know,  no fertility circumstances, that then that we've bred cows that then do well on that  type of plant, they have very high digestible plants and lots of, you know, protein and  energy. And then ultimately, our whole infrastructure staffing contracts that we take up with our  
**[0:35:02-0:35:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:35:02):**  milk companies and everything is designed for that system. So we can't just change one  little piece of that. We've got to, we can't just do a paddock grazing trial and assume  that we're going to see the result being great, that's just going to fail. We need the whole  system to adapt and change. So that's what I mean when I talk about whole system function.  So the farmers need to understand that. But also the scientists, people like Walter are  
**[0:35:24-0:35:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:35:24):**  brilliant because they could they truly understand this whole system function, whereas a lot  of reductionist science is missing that, leading us to sort of chasing net zero as a kind of  the main thing that we're doing at the moment. And then the policymakers and the companies  setting up the contracts, everybody needs to understand that better.  Fantastic. Thanks so much. There's one final question that I have that I want to put to  
**[0:35:47-0:35:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:35:47):**  you Walter, if that's okay, before we go into the audience questions, which are some really  interesting stuff coming through. And the question is about ruminants. And of course,  ruminant producers have been heavily criticised because cattle, sheep and goats produce methane.  And so what I want to ask you is about how important ruminant methane is in the big scheme  of things, so far as you're concerned.  
**[0:36:09-0:36:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:36:09):**  Okay, well look, it's very much what Caroline was saying, instead of having a linear system,  a reductionist look and say, hey, yes, cattle, all herbivores, all anaerobic digesters produce  methane, us included, instead of saying here's a bad thing, methane, we've got to look at  it as a cycle, we've got to look at what happens in nature. And if we do that with methane,  it's just very, very simple, absolute, because methane naturally for the last 100 million  
**[0:36:38-0:36:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:36:38):**  years has been at a very, very low 700 parts per billion or thereabouts. And we've had  more cattle and we've had more herbivores and more wetlands producing methane. So yes,  we've been producing vast quantities of methane naturally, but also nature has got a way of  removing methane, otherwise it couldn't have been 700 parts per billion. And of course,  that process is very simple. We've known about it in science, totally verified, but we're  
**[0:37:08-0:37:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:37:08):**  ignoring it in the political debate totally. And of course, that's hydroxyl ion formation  when water vapour transpired largely from pastures is then photo oxidised by sunlight  and forms hydroxyl ions and then hydrogen, which forms bicarbonate ions, complex process,  but basically producing hydroxyl ions, which is effectively the laundry of the atmosphere.  And it's that hydroxyl ion production which cleans up the air, removes particulate carbon,  
**[0:37:40-0:37:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:37:40):**  CO2, carbon monoxide, keeps the air clean. Now, very simple thing. A cow, for example,  grazing a pasture will sustain about five acres, two hectares of pastures, depending  on the grassland. That cow will produce 100 times or more the hydroxyl ion methane cleanup  capacity compared to its own methane emissions. So this little cow, it's an ecosystem service  that's enormously benefiting the planet, removing methane naturally. So instead of trying to  
**[0:38:18-0:38:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:38:18):**  tax the methane emissions from us, we should be crediting the ecosystem services, the photo  oxidation value of that cow. This becomes extremely important, an existential importance,  right? Because we've got some 15,000 billion tonnes of carbon as methane hydrates and entendres  sitting in the Arctic regions of this planet. And if that releases in a pulse and it is  slowly releasing, hopefully not as a pulse, then that can become an extinction event,  
**[0:38:52-0:38:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:38:52):**  that vast flux of methane. The only thing that is actually stopping that danger and  the only thing that can avoid that is enough hydroxyl ion formation from healthy grasslands  maintained by healthy herbivores, which are producing some methane, one in 100. Okay,  so we've got this stupid bullshit, excuse the pun, basically, you know, that where we're  trying to penalise herbivores because they're producing methane, ignoring the 100 fold benefit  
**[0:39:24-0:39:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:39:24):**  that they are generating and cleaning up not just methane, but CO2 and carbon monoxide,  carbon particulate, polyaromatic carbons from the atmosphere. So we've just got to get real  and look at it a whole, as Caroline says, a whole systemic analysis rather than taking  a reductionist single linear factor and going la la on that.  Fantastic. Thanks so much, Walter. That was actually sort of addressing a question that  
**[0:39:51-0:39:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:39:51):**  came in prior to the webinar from Bill. So thanks very much for that, Bill, and making  sure that we covered that particular issue. Jim, you've asked a question about sharing  and linking to this webinar when it's available on YouTube. Please do. The more shares, you  know, this webinar gets, the more the messages that are contained within it can be shared  around. We've got a question here. Catherine asks, in the UK, we are in fact predominantly  
**[0:40:15-0:40:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:40:15):**  a wooded biome. We're not one of the great natural grasslands. So for the water cycle  and the carbon sponge, is it not better to majorly reforest, natively reforest our land  in association with pasture and crops if necessary? Well, look, very, very quickly, I'll let Caroline  do the most of it. But the point is that, no, it doesn't matter if it's grassland or  forest, it doesn't matter if it's a cow or if it's an insect or a bird, it's the same  
**[0:40:40-0:40:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:40:40):**  process. Nature's got diversity. It'll use trees, it'll use grasslands, it'll use wetlands.  It's all the same function of basically soils, retaining water, making nutrients available,  growing plants, transpiring and herbivores managing that biosystem. But no, there's  no favouritism here, grassland versus forest. It's horses for courses, it's diversity,  it's plurality, it's synergies. And I would say as well, just before passing  
**[0:41:10-0:41:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:41:10):**  over to Caroline, is that this idea that it was mainly covered in native woodland is not  quite right, that there was obviously a lot more woodland than there is today. But it  was actually also a lot more grassland, a lot more savannah type land as well, lots  of scrub and bushes and grasses, as well as that sort of more heavily, densely wooded  areas. Caroline? Yeah, I completely agree with both of you.  
**[0:41:34-0:41:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:41:34):**  And what I would say is, yeah, absolutely, we want diverse range of habitats. But originally,  it probably would have been that, yeah, we wouldn't have had the big plain type habitats  with huge, you know, mobs of animals together, but we would have definitely had herbivores  in our woodlands. So it would have probably been more like a savannah, as you say, with  open glades, and woodland. And that's very much what we try and encourage farmers to  
**[0:41:56-0:42:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:41:56):**  manage that type of wood pasture again, for all the amazing benefits of, you know, reducing  evaporation and reducing, you know, improving the infiltration and all of that. But ultimately,  we do still even in the woodlands, we do still need to have those things that are digesting  that plant material and improving the cycling of the nutrients. And then in the uplands,  where a lot of, you know, the UK has got a great deal of steep grounds that's not suitable  
**[0:42:20-0:42:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:42:20):**  for any other food production. And those areas where you've got a high rainfall and steep  sides, what's happened over time is you've ended up what would have been a wooded environment  or a savannah type environment, probably quite high up the sides is that the soil has washed  out, the fertility is washed out through probably a combination of deforestation and killing  predators and various other things. And now we've got a denuded landscape that doesn't,  
**[0:42:41-0:42:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:42:41):**  you know, we've got some areas that have turned to bog, and that's slowing the flow to some  degree, but that landscape goes rank and it would benefit from properly managed herbivores.  I'm not talking about the set stocking that we currently have, but if properly managed  herbivores in that system would increase and improve the water retention and in there too,  you know, something like two buckets of water per every percent of carbon increasing in  
**[0:43:03-0:43:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:43:03):**  the soil that we can hold extra up the hill, rather than it flooding down into the bottoms  with all the nutrients attached and ending up in our homes.  And actually, am I right, Caroline, that when we're talking about those Auckland areas,  perhaps, you know, particularly the lower uplands, that actually the ruminants are part  of that process, but the reintegration of bush and shrub and sort of low level trees,  
**[0:43:24-0:43:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:43:24):**  sort of more agroforestry systems are actually really important in terms of maintaining and  restoring that cycling of nutrients and water.  Yeah, absolutely.  Yeah.  Yeah.  
**[0:43:36-0:43:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:43:36):**  There's another question that I'm going to go to.  So, the question from Dorrit is, is regeneration without large herbivores possible, as the vegan  community is telling the public?  She says that she can't see how, but we could do with some solid science to back us up when  we let the cows out to stand in for the missing wildlife as habitat engineers.  
**[0:43:52-0:43:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:43:52):**  So, Walter, perhaps we can come to you first.  Yeah, well, look, very much.  You know, I don't have the UK specifics in this, but look, it's very, very clear.  We need the herbivores as biorecyclists, right?  It's absolutely critical because if we just let wilderness happen and we'll just get scrubbed,  
**[0:44:09-0:44:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:44:09):**  we'll get fire fuels, we'll get wildfires, we'll get carbon oxidation, desertification,  and we turn back to desert wasteland, right?  So, the whole point of herbivores was to avoid those fire catastrophic events and that degradation  because it's the herbivores that are taking that excess biomass, often old biomass, and  turning it back into bio fertilizer through their dung and also soil carbon.  
**[0:44:38-0:44:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:44:38):**  So, it's this biological cycling function of the herbivores that is critical.  Obviously, you don't just have to look at cattle here.  I mean, termites are herbivores, insects in the canopies are herbivores.  The biomass of these herbivores are vastly higher than just the cattle.  So yes, this bio cycling is absolutely critical because if not, we end up with the default  
**[0:45:02-0:45:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:45:02):**  wildfires and then we end up with desertification.  Caroline, I don't want to sit here and judge people for their choices, for the choices  on the food that they choose to eat.  The world has got plenty of space for vegans and vegetarians, the same as it has meat eaters.  But I guess the core of the question is, if everybody was a vegan, would we be able to  
**[0:45:23-0:45:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:45:23):**  do what we need to do?  How critical are livestock to the processes that we're talking about?  So, I think in the non-brital environments of Europe and the UK, they're probably, you  could probably, you know, on a very small scale, particularly, you could use compost  as a proxy for grazing animals as a way of sort of micromanaging that process with our  
**[0:45:43-0:45:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:45:43):**  tools physically knocking vegetation down, strimming it, using compost, that sort of  thing.  It could be done on a small scale if people choose to do that as part of the belief system.  That's totally fine.  But ultimately, you've got to realise that we're not really separating that out.  
**[0:45:58-0:46:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:45:58):**  It's not like there's no living things in that system.  Ultimately, compost is made up of just very small animals instead of big animals.  So, it's all death and decay and eating each other.  So, we're under a little bit of an illusion if we think we can actually have a truly vegan  vegetable, you know, ultimately that if it's being fed naturally through those composted  
**[0:46:16-0:46:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:46:16):**  systems and it's eating dead decaying material, it's just a slightly different size, doesn't  have a character, perhaps.  So, you know, really, it's just for me, there is no way of segregating that.  So, yes, it could be done, particularly in the moisture areas of the world.  But then when you start to get into those macro landscapes of the uplands of the UK,  
**[0:46:35-0:46:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:46:35):**  even where we're talking about thousands of acres of, you know, very low-grid grassland  in steep areas that are rocky that can't produce food in any other way, what would, you know,  okay, and again, I would totally dispute the argument that removing the animals is better  for the ecology.  In my experience, it's not actually, and actually that whole process of cycling the nutrients  
**[0:46:55-0:46:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:46:55):**  is regenerating the energy system, which means that we've got more photosynthesis and primary  production which leads to more wildlife.  You know, I see that as a plus plus, but ultimately we can maintain that kind of healthy hydrology  and mineral cycling.  And it'd be very difficult to do that in any other way.  
**[0:47:11-0:47:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:47:11):**  You know, planting trees, yes, but then, you know, trees alone without a herbivore, trampling  and manuring and proving that soil fertility are not going to do as well as, you know,  a whole system that includes the right type of browsing and grazing animals.  And as Walter says, that's tiny, you know, birds, herbivory, right through to insects,  right through to organisms in the soil, right through to the animals that would, you know,  
**[0:47:35-0:47:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:47:35):**  the deer, the, you know, what the proxies for what would have been wild at the time.  So I just think that, you know, we've got a solar power, I love Walter's way of describing  these solar powered, self-replicating biodigesters that we can eat and taste great and are really  nutritious that can go up and if we're properly managing them, can do great, you know, great  stuff on these upland, large environments in these desert regions of grassland that  
**[0:47:57-0:47:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:47:57):**  we're talking about.  Why wouldn't we do that?  And of course, you know, the thing that we haven't touched on is the economics of this  as well.  And when we're talking about managing landscape, this needs to be paid for, you know, in one  
**[0:48:09-0:48:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:48:09):**  way or another.  The best way is to integrate this functioning of nature, this managing of that landscape  so that it cycles water and sunlight and nutrients in the way that it needs to, is to have an  active farming community so that farmers are able to earn money for the food that they're  producing, as well as managing the landscape that they do.  
**[0:48:26-0:48:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:48:26):**  I've got one final question that I want to put to you both, if I may, just briefly.  And it's that, you know, I've said in the past that you can win a war with guns and  tanks, but a functioning food system is essential to maintaining the peace once you've won that  war.  And it's essential to maintaining peace so that you avoid that war in the first place.  
**[0:48:49-0:48:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:48:49):**  Now, just in your own view, how critical is soil and hydrological function to maintaining  peace?  Caroline, can I come to you first?  It's more obvious how important that is in the drylands and water could speak to that.  But even in the UK, you know, you can just start to think about, I suppose, some of what's  
**[0:49:05-0:49:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:49:05):**  happening at the moment has made me think a lot about what would happen if, you know,  if we suddenly got cut off from fertilizer, if the grain stopped being available, all  of those things, the what ifs that we do think about in regenerative and, you know, as water  says we're sort of seven meals away from anarchy, even in what we've considered to be a country  that could never happen.  
**[0:49:24-0:49:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:49:24):**  How important now do we realise that having our own, you know, energy resilience and food  resilience and food production resilience, and it's got to be so much more than just  calories or protein, we've got to think of in truly sustainable nutrient dense foods  available throughout the season, in ways that can be stored and utilised effectively.  So just relying on calories from cropping systems that might be highly productive on  
**[0:49:50-0:49:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:49:50):**  a, you know, comparing it with another system, but then it might be subject to drought and  fail and or we it doesn't work if we can't get a part for a combine or whatever else  is a very vulnerable situation to be in.  So for me, you know, if the food system breaks down, it's not going to take long for people  to start to break down to society to start to break down.  
**[0:50:10-0:50:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:50:10):**  So for me, it's really made if it wasn't already obvious to me, this year has really highlighted  the importance of this on a farm by farm basis.  We need resilient food systems for our local communities.  Thank you, Caroline.  Walter, you get the last word.  
**[0:50:22-0:50:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:50:22):**  Well, look, yeah, I fully agree.  I mean, that point seven missed meals between social stability and chaos.  And therefore, it's really imperative, isn't it, that we've got to look at resilience,  we've got to look autonomy, we've got to look at localised cycles.  And all of that is building around soil health.  
**[0:50:41-0:50:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:50:41):**  It's really the soil that gives us resilience, autonomy, cycling, it's optimising those cycles.  But it's also empowering societies, because that's where your employment, it's your eco  enterprises.  You know, this is how you build resilient, healthy, diverse societies as well.  And really, yeah, I think the building the soil, the sponge, the hydrology, those food  
**[0:51:05-0:51:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:51:05):**  systems is critical.  But of course, don't leave it to me.  That's what Jared Diamond did the thing.  He said, look, here's civilisations, over 20 civilisations across the history have collapsed.  We see them in the dust of archaeology, because they've destroyed their soils.  
**[0:51:22-0:51:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:51:22):**  And the only civilisations that have survived are civilisations that have sustained, regenerate  and enhance their soils.  President Roosevelt made the statement a nation that destroys its soil, destroys itself.  And we're very close to that imperative.  But we're not going to escape history, if we don't actually take heed of those warnings.  
**[0:51:44-0:51:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:51:44):**  Thank you very much to both of you on the panel.  Thanks very much to the audience for the questions and for being here and taking part.  I mean, what a fantastic opportunity it's been to listen to, you know, the wisdom of  both Walter and Caroline and to hear that conversation.  So that's it.  
**[0:52:02-0:52:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Restoring-water--with-Walter-Jehne--Caroline-Grindrod-e1o6rqt#t=0:52:02):**  Thank you very much indeed, everybody, for joining us.  Thank you to Walter Jayner from Regenerate Earth and Caroline Grindrod from Roots of  Nature.  And hopefully, we'll see you next time.  Thank you.  