### Farm Gate  (2021-49-31)
**[0:00:00-0:00:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to Farmgate, I'm Finnlow Costayne. Our current mini-series about ocean  food is responding to sea-spiracy. The Netflix film concluded that there's no such thing  as sustainable fishing. Well, that's a pretty blunt statement and one that fails to recognise  the enormous efforts that are being made by so many people. In previous programmes we've  discussed the challenges of overfishing, taken a critical look at aquaculture, spoken to  
**[0:00:29-0:00:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:00:29):**  the Marine Stewardship Council about their blue eco-label supply chain, and learned about  how the Isle of Man brought its shellfish fisheries back from the brink of collapse.  In this programme we visit Sierra Leone and look at how this West African country has  worked with international stakeholders to address overfishing and to assert its marine  authority, particularly in the waters inside its six-mile wide inshore exclusion zone.  
**[0:00:55-0:01:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:00:55):**  Salu Sanko is the coordinator of the World Bank-funded West African Regional Fisheries  Programme in Sierra Leone. Phil Gorn is an advisor to the fisheries programme and a former  fisheries minister for Isle of Man Government, which has made substantial contributions through  its international aid budget. Hello both. Hi Finnlow. Hi Finnlow. Salu, what's the purpose  of the West African Regional Fisheries Programme? What's the problem that it's seeking to address?  
**[0:01:22-0:01:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:01:22):**  Thank you Finnlow. The West African Regional Fisheries Programme was not a project like  the traditional project that the ministry used to benefit from. This was a programme  of support that was structured to be delivered in three phases. Phase one was to look at  governance structures and reform these governance structures towards achieving sustainable fisheries.  Once that is achieved, then the next step was looking at investments through private  
**[0:01:52-0:01:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:01:52):**  sector involvement to see how the fisheries can better benefit Sierra Leone and the West  Africa region as a whole. So the first consideration was to look at what are the existing governance  structures, how can this be made more efficient? And then the next thing was we had a challenge  of illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, both from within the country and from outsiders  who were dominating the industrial fisheries sector. And at the time, we were estimating  
**[0:02:25-0:02:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:02:25):**  that illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing is causing the country to lose about $29 million  annually. And so this was a big challenge for the fisheries sector. So the project had  set up to actually address illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, to look at the governance  structures and bring about reforms that would ensure efficiency in the management of the  fisheries.  
**[0:02:51-0:02:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:02:51):**  Thank you, Sally. That's a fantastic overview. Phil, if I could just come to you. The Isle  of Man, how and why did you and the Isle of Man get involved?  Well, it was a very lucky series of circumstances, really. I was fisheries minister at the time.  My fisheries director was getting itchy feet and he noticed a secondment that had been  suggested with the World Bank in Sierra Leone for this very project, the fisheries project.  
**[0:03:16-0:03:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:03:16):**  So he asked me, would I be willing to let him go for a few months? And I said, yes.  And of course, he returned very enthusiastic and said, there's so much more that we could  do here. The Isle of Man could help quite significantly. And really, from that point  on, I was hooked. We had a redundant patrol vessel and we thought, well, we can certainly  help with that. So it was arranged for the redundant patrol vessel to be shipped out  
**[0:03:45-0:03:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:03:45):**  to Freetown. I made a visit and during that visit, I was able to assist with the World  Bank team and Sally with a few ideas. Came back to the Isle of Man and said, look, we  could fund a vessel monitoring system. We could provide some support by way of capacity  building. And really, for the next four or five years, we put a load of support in.  Thanks, Phil. We're going to get more into the detail of that as we go forward. Sally,  
**[0:04:14-0:04:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:04:14):**  coming back to you, when you started in 2010, that's over a decade ago now, how were you  able to assess the state that the fishery was in? And not just the state of the fishery  in terms of the economics, but also the state of the marine environment itself?  It was a difficult thing to do to assess the fishes as a whole at the time because there  were very few studies that had been conducted before and there were very few information  
**[0:04:42-0:04:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:04:42):**  in terms of the data available to us. Data that was collected had not been analysed at  the time and we really had to start from a very uncertain situation. So this was where  we actually had to hire a lot of expertise. For instance, we hired the then director of  fishes in the Isle of Man to develop for us a sustainable fishes MCS system, monitoring  control and surveillance system. And then we hired the marine resource MRAG, marine  
**[0:05:15-0:05:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:05:15):**  resource assessment group in the UK to do a stock assessment for us so that we see exactly  how much are we currently taking from our waters and how much can we take on a sustainable  basis. So we do fish stock assessment with the sustainable fishes management. We also  hired another German guy to do for us a strategy for community fishes management system. So  we had relied mostly on international experts to actually do some studies for us.  
**[0:05:48-0:05:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:05:48):**  Just thinking for a moment about that stock assessment, in broad terms, what did it discover?  Well, the stock assessment had indicated that already there were some species that are now  currently fully exploited. There are a few other species that are already being over  exploited and there were a few species, particularly the pelagic stocks that are still very healthy  at the time. So we were then now going to look at the options of what to manage, where  
**[0:06:19-0:06:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:06:19):**  to manage and things like that. And so the idea of the marine protected areas, the idea  of community surveillance, the idea of strengthening the surveillance capacity of the ministry  and the monitoring capacity of the ministry came on very strongly. And this is where we  were very happy when the Isle of Man came in to help us with the patrol boat. At the  time we were still developing technical specs to procure our own boats. We didn't have any  
**[0:06:49-0:06:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:06:49):**  boats. So the Isle of Man came in handy and gave us a boat. They also came in and gifted  us 60 units of transponders that we were now using to monitor vessels and be able to tell  where they are at any particular time.  It's interesting to hear that, you know, that there were some species that were underexploited  as well as species that were overexploited. Now, if I look down from Google Earth onto  
**[0:07:13-0:07:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:07:13):**  Sierra Leone and its coastline, I see blue. I don't get any sense of what the underwater  landscape is like. And I wonder if you could just sort of help to draw us a picture in  terms of how varied that marine landscape is.  Interestingly, in the northern flank of the coastal waters of Sierra Leone are very shallow  we have a region in the oceans we call the continental shelf, which is an area that is  
**[0:07:36-0:07:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:07:36):**  below 200 metres deep. And in the northern part of Sierra Leone, that is from Freetown  going towards Guinea, the continental shelf is very wide, about 80 kilometres. And that  is a very rich area for fisheries because a lot of the nutrients that are washed on  land from rivers are brought into this area. And because of that rich nutrients, you have  a lot of productivity, primary productivity, photosynthesis is taking place. And so phytoplankton,  
**[0:08:07-0:08:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:08:07):**  zooplankton are in abundance. Therefore, the fish are drifted towards that for feeding.  In the southern end of the country towards the border with Liberia, the continental shelf  is very narrow. It's only about 13 kilometres compared to 80 kilometres in the north. And  so there the species composition is different because although there are rivers bringing  a lot of nutrients as well, the sea gets very deep very quickly. And therefore, artisanal  
**[0:08:37-0:08:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:08:37):**  fishers for instance, are not able to venture too far out at sea because of the danger of  drowning and things like that. So this is the kind of bathymetry.  That's so interesting. And Phil, Sierra Leone's fishing industry is essentially an artisanal  industry as Sally just commented. So that's, you know, it's a lot of wooden boats from  Sierra Leone's own fishers. If it wasn't for the really big boats and the industrial scale  
**[0:09:02-0:09:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:09:02):**  approach to fishing that's coming in towards Sierra Leone from China, Russia, Korea, France  and Spain, etc. Do you think there would ever have been a sustainability problem for Sierra  Leone's fishery? Well, obviously, I mean, you rightly identified  the industrial fishery is a significant problem for Sierra Leone in that inevitably it takes  a lot more fish. But there is I mean, there's some good elements the industrial fishery  
**[0:09:28-0:09:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:09:28):**  you know, the further out off the continental shelf out to the 200 mile limit, there's some  fishing taking place out there which the artisanal fishery couldn't actually engage with. But  there has been a significant problem with the industrial fishery fishing too close to  the shore. And that has caused problems. It's arguable that actually because of the significant  growth in population in Sierra Leone that there would have been an increasing pressure  
**[0:09:58-0:10:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:09:58):**  anyway in relation to the artisanal fishery because the more people there are to feed,  the more fishermen will want to go out to catch fish added to which of course, there's  considerable poverty in the country. And if fishing, the artisanal fishery is seen as  a successful industry actually get a reasonable living, then people are going to want to get  into that industry. So, I think there was an inevitability to that. But when you add  
**[0:10:23-0:10:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:10:23):**  onto that the fact that external markets are buying fish from the artisanal fishery, which  means that the people of Sierra Leone is not the only market, but there's also this external  and lucrative markets as well that has led to significant pressures on the artisanal  fishery as well.  So, let's split that into two, I suppose. Let's look at the industrial aspect first,  
**[0:10:48-0:10:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:10:48):**  how to deal with those boats coming into Sierra Leone's waters. And then perhaps a bit later,  we can come back to the population growth and the success of the artisanal fishing industry  sector and look at the potential impacts of that. So, for now, Salut, clearly one of the  biggest challenges that Phil mentioned there was that taking back control of the inshore  exclusion zone. I mean, you talked about this a little bit before, but I wonder if you could  
**[0:11:14-0:11:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:11:14):**  go into a bit more detail about how you went about doing this.  Firstly, the control of the industrial sector was largely managed by the introduction of  the vessel monitoring system. Because as you already pointed out earlier that if we had  left the artisanal fishery to fish within the continental shelf area and all the industrial  vessels going far out at sea, probably would not be too worried about sustainability in  
**[0:11:42-0:11:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:11:42):**  the sector. But then these artisanal industrial fleets started coming inshore, particularly  towards the south to actually fish for themselves fish species, which are very expensive, high  value species. And so, there was this conflict between the industrial and the artisanal.  And this was illegal, the big ships coming in at that point, that was illegal, was it?  It was illegal because our law says they cannot fish within six miles offshore. And so, they  
**[0:12:11-0:12:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:12:11):**  should have stayed out of the inshore exclusion zone where they were exploiting at the time  our incapacity to monitor and the incapacity to actually arrest them if they do come there.  But with the introduction of the vessel monitoring system, we were not able to actually see them  live in real time if they move into the IPZ with a monitoring system sitting in front  of a computer screen. And then of course, we had the Isle of Man vessel that we can  
**[0:12:42-0:12:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:12:42):**  use actually to launch a quick patrol and arrest them.  How big is this vessel?  Around 16 metres long.  Okay, so it's a sizeable boat.  Yes, it's fairly big boat relative to all the other craft that we had at the time. It  
**[0:12:58-0:13:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:12:58):**  was a very successful operation. We had also intelligence reports, people telling us that  boats are within the IEZ and so we can launch quick surveillance patrol and actually apprehend  them within the act.  So tell me what happens when you go out with the fisheries vessel and you arrest them in  the act, what happens to them then?  
**[0:13:20-0:13:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:13:20):**  We had to find a lot of them. Within 2010 to 2012, we were able to raise more than $3  million in fines from these operations. And this sent a very clear message to a lot of  industrial operators that Sierra Leone is no longer the place to go and take fish freely.  So when we started arresting and fining some of them, we had a rush for acquiring a fishing  licence in Sierra Leone at the time. And then revenue from the fisheries sector started  
**[0:13:51-0:13:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:13:51):**  climbing up, jumping up. Before this programme, for instance, the revenue from the fisheries  was around $600,000 a year, which was around 4 billion lunes. And then later on, it started  growing until we went up to over 100 billion.  Can you give us that as a percentage of GDP, Salil?  It's about 12% now.  
**[0:14:13-0:14:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:14:13):**  And that's climbed from where?  From 9% to 12% now.  So very successful. And I'm just, I don't want to obsess about this, but I'm very interested  in what happens to these boats that get arrested out there. So what I'm imagining is that  you're somehow managing to persuade or pull a Chinese or a Russian boat back to shore  
**[0:14:33-0:14:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:14:33):**  in Freetown and that they're then stranded there. They're not allowed to leave until  the fine's been paid. Is that right?  Yes, correct. That was what we used to do. And interestingly, at the time, they were  so caught on the axe that they didn't argue at all. So we had what we call administrative  fines. We were caught doing this. Is that correct? Yes, I did that. Can you pay this  
**[0:14:54-0:14:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:14:54):**  fine and then they pay? And at the time, of course, the fines were really very reasonable.  So they didn't have much trouble paying the fines.  So Salil, the programme's been running for 10 years now. You've talked about some of  the successes there, but in general terms, do you think that it's been worth the investment,  it's been worth the time that's been put into it, it's been successful?  
**[0:15:14-0:15:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:15:14):**  Very much so. Firstly, this programme has introduced a lot of transparency into the  sector. It has improved the lives of the additional fishermen in some respects. And it has thrown  light into the fact that there is money in fishing. Before now, we didn't know that there  is money in fishing. But now the government and people of Syria are benefiting much more  from this sector.  
**[0:15:36-0:15:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:15:36):**  Phil, I'm curious because Salil's already talked about, you know, the way that the Isle  of Man helped with fisheries vessel, with transponders and that sort of thing. I'm wondering  in terms of the governance of the fishery, what your experience was going over to Freetown,  to Sierra Leone, what you thought about the governance there and how, whether you were  able to make suggestions about how to streamline the way that Sierra Leone and its government  
**[0:16:02-0:16:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:16:02):**  were approaching these challenges?  Yes, certainly, obviously, the technology was really very important. But we were also  able to give advice on how we do things in the Isle of Man. I mean, the Isle of Man is  not that similar to Sierra Leone in that some of the bigger models of how to control fisheries  don't work because Isle of Man is relatively small. Sierra Leone's administration is relatively  
**[0:16:25-0:16:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:16:25):**  small and very sort of threadbare. I think it's fair to say, you know, the officers are  not paid a very significant amount of money. They struggle with equipment and the technology.  So the fact that we were able to help them with that, and also perhaps to advise a little  bit on how you would go about administering your fishery with a much more constrained  budget and constrained resource, I think that was, well, I hope it was helpful anyway.  
**[0:16:51-0:16:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:16:51):**  You were suggesting when we spoke before the podcast that there were some mechanisms that  had been set up in Sierra Leone which actually compounded the problems that existed.  Well, certainly, in my view, the World Bank approach had been very much based on the,  in an ideal world where resource was no object, how would you go about managing this fishery?  And there didn't seem to be an awful lot of experience or understanding of the intense  
**[0:17:20-0:17:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:17:20):**  pressures that come on both in terms of the general administration and in terms of the  politics. You know, the minister may have signed up entirely to everything the World  Bank was saying, but the minister then had to translate the policies into something that  would be understandable to the people of Sierra Leone. And that in itself is quite a difficult  thing to do, but added to which, you know, the demands that for separation of powers  
**[0:17:47-0:17:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:17:47):**  in a number of different areas, whilst in theory works exceptionally well, in practice  in a relatively small jurisdiction with very limited resource, you have to be a little  bit pragmatic about how you go about managing these things. I think I was able to give a  little bit of advice on that from our practical experience in the Isle of Man.  I think one of the examples you were using was about license holders.  
**[0:18:11-0:18:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:18:11):**  So each vessel in Sierra Leone has to, by law, have an agent if they aren't Sierra  Leone National owned. And I don't think any of the industrial fisheries, or at least  if there are any, there are very few in number, are actually any of the vessels owned by Sierra  Leone National. So they all have agents. Also, there's an observer on each vessel as well.  The idea of the agent is so that the vessel owner can deal through the agent with the  
**[0:18:37-0:18:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:18:37):**  Sierra Leone authorities, which is really very important for the people in Sierra Leone.  Unfortunately, what that does, though, is create another layer of bureaucracy and cost  to the whole system, which means that perhaps the money that could be going to ensure good  government can be afforded ends up going into to fund the expenses of the agents.  And presumably this agent, it could be the same agent for every vessel?  
**[0:19:08-0:19:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:19:08):**  Potentially, yes.  And what about the observers that you were talking about on board?  Well, I think the people in Sierra Leone aren't paid a huge amount of money. The catches that  they were monitoring are very significant. So you can see if you are several miles out  to sea and you note discrepancies in the way things are being reported, it's very difficult  
**[0:19:31-0:19:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:19:31):**  for you as the only person on that vessel who isn't part of the crew, but you're there  as a separate agent to monitor things. It must be very difficult, indeed, I know it  is very difficult for some of these people to be able to provide accurate reports when  effectively the vessel owner is putting, or the captain is putting pressure on you to  perhaps give a lower tally than what's actually been caught.  
**[0:19:58-0:20:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:19:58):**  And presumably with the sort of money that's involved in some of these bigger catches,  that could have been quite a dangerous position for an observer to be in.  Yes, it is potentially dangerous. It was always something that we were concerned about in  any of the discussions we were having. And I think indeed the ministry officials recognised  that this could be a problem.  
**[0:20:19-0:20:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:20:19):**  Sallio, do you think that over the last few years, some of these challenges, some of these  problems that have arisen that you've been able to deal with or recommend that the government  deal with in different ways?  Yes, to some level. For instance, the filaments on the problems or challenges of the observers  on board the vessel. In the past, there are instances when observers are thrown out of  
**[0:20:42-0:20:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:20:42):**  boats and they would have to swim to safety for themselves. We've had reports of beatings  of observers on board vessels. But what made it worse, in fact, was that these observers  were actually paid by the companies through the agents. And so they really had some kind  of obligation towards the companies rather than the government that they were representing  on board the vessels. That has now changed. The government still requires the companies  
**[0:21:12-0:21:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:21:12):**  or the operators to pay for the observer services or they are not paying the observers directly.  They are paying each aspect of the licence fee and then the government pays the observers.  And of course, their pay package has now improved to an extent that, in fact, some of the observers  are now earning more than the fisheries officer, which is another challenge that we're trying  to look at. We tried several times to convince the bank, as Phil actually mentioned earlier,  
**[0:21:42-0:21:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:21:42):**  the bank was looking at their own policies. You cannot pay extra amount of money to fisheries  officers because they already have a contract with government. And of course, this contract  with government is not really paying them an awful lot. And many of them are really  basically surviving. And so if you are asking somebody to manage a resource that is worth  millions of dollars and you are paying that individual maybe 100 or 200 dollars at most  
**[0:22:11-0:22:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:22:11):**  a month, certainly you have a challenge there that everybody would know is a very big one.  And this may be naive, but I mean, is it possible for observers to, you know, wear body cams  or something like that so that they themselves are monitored and their safety is checked?  Yes, it is possible. Of course, when you have laws that are enforced and the operators know  that if they do anything to the observers, they would face the full force of the law.  
**[0:22:40-0:22:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:22:40):**  They would never do that. They would never try it. That's one important thing. And in  the past, they used to do that and they go scotfully. Nothing happened to them. These  days, it's different, completely different. If you mistakenly touch any observer on body  or vessel, you will be grounded for life. You will never have a deficiency of unity.  I just wonder, Salih, if you could talk to me about your experience of working with the  
**[0:23:02-0:23:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:23:02):**  World Bank, how you found that.  Well, I think the World Bank's conditionalities or policies seem to be applied as if the whole  world or all the nations of the world are like the same. Different countries have different  cultures, traditions and different economic developments in terms of levels of development.  And so if you try to implement policies that are one size fits all, we would really struggle  
**[0:23:30-0:23:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:23:30):**  to succeed in some countries where other countries are making progress. For instance, some countries  are already, the governments are paying people very well. Therefore, if you bring your projects  there, the project officers and the government officials will not have any problems because  they are almost at the same level. Their take home pay is almost at the same level. When  Sierra Leone, for instance, where a project officer is paid very well, maybe 20 times  
**[0:23:57-0:24:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:23:57):**  what the officials officer is getting. I mean, for those two people to work amicably and  try to bring progress following the rules equally is a big challenge. And sometimes  you find it very difficult as a project officer paid by World Bank to really get the full  support of the ministry staff that are paid by governments because they would think, oh,  he's behaving that way because he's well paid compared to us.  
**[0:24:26-0:24:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:24:26):**  World Bank would actually be looking at which country they're dealing with and which policies  would help successfully implement their programme.  It's really interesting to hear about it from Sierra Leone's perspective. And Phil,  you've said that you felt that there was a tendency for international institutions not  always to value local knowledge and experience as much as perhaps they should have done.  
**[0:24:50-0:24:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:24:50):**  I wonder, looking at it from the outside, what was your experience of the whole thing?  It was absolutely clear to me that the World Bank team didn't really appreciate the difficulties  of the people they were trying to work with. There didn't seem to be anywhere near the  amount of empathy that I would have expected. The expectation was that if World Bank sent  out an email with documents in on the Friday, that the officers would spend their weekend  
**[0:25:19-0:25:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:25:19):**  working on this and have a response ready for Monday morning, assuming, of course, that  these officers were well paid and were prepared to do overtime and prepared to give up a lot  of their time. The reality was that the officers were not getting paid anywhere near the amount  of money they should be getting paid. Now, some of that is an issue, an internal issue  with the government, because as Salut mentioned, the return to government from the fisheries  
**[0:25:44-0:25:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:25:44):**  is now significant and it could afford to pay its staff a reasonable salary. But when  you have all the other commitments of government or issues to try and deal with, healthcare  systems, education systems, what have you, when a large amount of revenue starts coming  in, you're probably not going to be inclined to spend it on fisheries enforcement officers.  And you're probably more inclined to want to spend it on new schools and hospitals.  
**[0:26:12-0:26:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:26:12):**  So I get the politics of it. And I think sometimes this was absent from the World Bank thinking  that in some way, because the revenue was coming in, well, that's obvious then, you  just need to pay your officers properly. Well, that works if the fisheries ministry existed  on its own without any of the other competing pressures of government. But quite clearly  that's not the case. The obvious reason why the World Bank didn't make as much progress  
**[0:26:39-0:26:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:26:39):**  perhaps as it should have done was the issue that Salut has raised there. As the World  Bank paid officer, he was getting paid substantially more than the people he needed to work with  him in the ministry. Now, even with the most understanding people in the world, they're  going to have a difficulty with that. And indeed, the officers working in the ministry  in very senior positions were working with very old and outdated equipment. They weren't  
**[0:27:06-0:27:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:27:06):**  getting paid a reasonable salary. So it's not going to motivate them. However, the World  Bank rule says you can't provide the support to those officers that they need.  Jason Vale,  and perhaps you're in a better position because you're not in Sierra Leone, to sort  of be quite straight about this. You'd expect that the World Bank would be used to handling  
**[0:27:28-0:27:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:27:28):**  these kinds of relationships. And the fact that it isn't doing it in Sierra Leone implies  that it possibly isn't doing that elsewhere as well. And I wonder, is it a sort of a white  saviour mentality that's there that says we know better than this country that's relatively  poor in comparison with other bigger countries that are funding the work that we do? Is it  that? Or is it that there is just institutional pressure within the World Bank itself that  
**[0:27:56-0:28:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:27:56):**  leads to a kind of institutional ignorance when people in the UK or the USA, for example,  that are based there are dealing with people in poorer countries in smaller administrations?  Well, I think there's two elements. I think there is a certain amount of where from the  West, where the whites faces and we know best. There's a certain amount of that. I don't  think it's quite as overt as that, but it is there. I think the bigger issue, though,  
**[0:28:22-0:28:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:28:22):**  for me, and you know, I think we've picked a bit on the World Bank here, because obviously  it's a World Bank programme. But in my experience, the same could be said of any of the major  international donors. The issue is more about they have rules that they have to apply, because  they have donors themselves, you know, various nations of the world fund these projects,  so they have to be accountable to their donors. So they create a one size fits all approach  
**[0:28:49-0:28:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:28:49):**  to how they manage the money. They have to, to a certain extent, because, you know, Sierra  Leone, there's no secret, is quite high up on the lead table of corrupt countries, as  indeed are most of the countries I think that international donors are trying to help. So  there has to be some control over the finance. I totally get that. But there doesn't seem  to be any flexibility to allow for the obvious situation on the ground in the case of this  
**[0:29:17-0:29:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:29:17):**  project, which was the Ministry can't pay its officers enough, and you're not able to  pay them anything. And as a result of that, most of the rest of the objectives of the  project struggled. So I think I can understand where the pressures come from. I can understand  that the whole need for transparency and integrity of the financial process needs to be properly  done. But the total lack of flexibility meant that this project was almost doomed not to  
**[0:29:45-0:29:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:29:45):**  succeed.  And yet, despite all that, Salu, it clearly has succeeded. I mean, you gave me the statistic  earlier on of the fishery and the amount that it's making in terms of GDP has gone up from  nine percent to 12 percent. So that's obviously an economic boon in terms of Sierra Leone's  fishery. What about the fish themselves? What's the impact on sustainability of the fishery?  
**[0:30:07-0:30:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:30:07):**  Have those stocks that were over-exploited been able to bounce back over the last 10  years?  Well, I tell people that when you manage the fisheries, you're looking at sustainability.  You're not really managing the fish in the water because they will not even listen to  you. You're actually managing the people that depend on the fish, that are harvesting the  
**[0:30:28-0:30:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:30:28):**  fish, that are exploiting the resource. And so if you are able to put the people that  depend on the fisheries under control, including the managers themselves, then you would go  a long way to succeed. And what we have done over the years is to, first of all, improve  the capacity of the managers in terms of knowledge, the tools that they're using. For instance,  now they can sit in an air-conditioned room and monitor the vessels 24-7. That's never  
**[0:30:59-0:31:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:30:59):**  happened before. And so that's a huge success. So without going to sea, you would actually  be able to see. Even if you decide that I cannot monitor for 24-7, you go and sleep.  In the morning, you are able to track back all the vessels overnight or one week or one  month earlier to see where they have been before. So that's a very huge success. We  also now have fairly accurate data of what the industrial fishing fleet are taking and  
**[0:31:27-0:31:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:31:27):**  what the artisanal fishermen are taking. Without that information, you will not be able to  tell whether they are taking within the sustainable maximum yield or not. And so these are the  first few steps that we have succeeded in establishing. And therefore, we hope with  additional support and continued sustained support, we'll be able to achieve others.  For instance, there was a plan to actually look at increasing the contribution of fisheries  
**[0:31:54-0:32:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:31:54):**  into the local economy by actually adding value to the fish that is caught instead of  just catching the fish like they're doing now out at sea, tranship it and it goes. And  sometimes we don't even know how much has been transhipped accurately. We now are thinking  of actually getting a fish harbor where all vessels will be required to come and actually  declare their catch and decide what to land in the local market, what to go out as export  
**[0:32:22-0:32:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:32:22):**  and what can be processed into some other value added products.  Let me come back on to that in just a second, because there's a whole big issue in itself  that I want to talk to you about. But just before we do, I want to talk about the way  that your fishery is managed on the ground. And my understanding is that the Sierra Leone  fishery isn't just one big management association, that it's actually broken up into 37 community  
**[0:32:45-0:32:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:32:45):**  management associations. Why so many and how does that work?  We have noted as a ministry that managing the fisheries or managing the people, as I  said, it is not the fish in the water that we are managing. Rather, we are managing the  people that depend on the fisheries and managing people at Sulima or at Yolimu where we are  from, Freetown, would be very difficult. So what we have done is to set up small, small  
**[0:33:07-0:33:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:33:07):**  management committees that would manage the people in their local communities. So how  to access the resource and how to manage the fishes access in those local communities.  And then we'll coordinate with all the other communities to see how to move forward and  we'll share experiences from the different communities. This is what we decided to do  so that you are managed by your own people in your own local area. We are moving towards  
**[0:33:37-0:33:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:33:37):**  what we call territorial use right fishery. So you manage what is within your territory,  your adjacent water body or water space and the people that are dependent on that. We  have a very complex fisheries, which is a multi-species fisheries and all the people  in a particular community are targeting different species based on the gear they are using.  And so management of our role objective is to ensure that we don't deplete the stocks.  
**[0:34:06-0:34:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:34:06):**  You may have situations where some of the stocks are actually over-pressured, whilst  others are less so because of the preferences of the fishermen in those local communities.  But the important thing here is that within those communities, we have what you call MCS  committees. We have the environment committees. We have the bylaws development and enforcement  committees. These small, small committees are actually responsible for some aspects  
**[0:34:36-0:34:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:34:36):**  of management. And of course, you have a structure they call an executive of the CMA that will  look at other issues and they will be representing their community in management trainings and  meetings that are conducted either in Freetown or at the district level.  Now, Salu, you mentioned a moment ago your kind of priorities for the future of Sierra  Leone's fishery. And you were talking there about wanting to increase the value of the  
**[0:35:05-0:35:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:35:05):**  contribution of the fisheries to the Sierra Leone economy rather than Sierra Leone contributing  to the Chinese economy or the Russian economy or the French economy by having the fish taken  away. And the need to add value. And you talked about the need for a new harbour. Now, you'll  know that recent press reports have expressed some concern about a new harbour project that's  being funded by the Chinese. I wonder if you could just briefly tell me what the project  
**[0:35:33-0:35:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:35:33):**  is and why you think it's important to Sierra Leone.  The project is not a new initiative of government, as you may have seen in the press recently.  How  support Sierra Leone for a harbour construction at Kiseido  here. Just by the time this program was going to take off,  
**[0:36:27-0:36:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:36:27):**  we had a rebel war which lasted for like 10 or 11 years.  So that one never came back.  And then we had the World Bank coming in to help for a fish  harbour again in 2010.  And we tried a level that we identified more return for this  
**[0:36:44-0:36:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:36:44):**  harbour.  We are going to do some land reclamation and the like.  For some reason, again, we lost that opportunity because of  some mis-procurement issues.  And we lost that opportunity.  
**[0:36:54-0:36:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:36:54):**  Again, we started preparing a phase two of the World Bank  program where we wanted to include a fish harbour,  a landing site at Tumbu, which is a very important fishing  community, a landing site at Konark 3D,  and fixing the road from Konark 3D to the airport to facilitate  
**[0:37:12-0:37:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:37:12):**  fish export through Europe, through air and things like that.  And so, again, something happened which we cannot  clearly say what happened, but I think it may be connected  with Donald Trump having a different foreign policy  during his administration.  
**[0:37:28-0:37:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:37:28):**  And now we have another opportunity of the Chinese giving  us a grant for the construction of a platform.  $55 million is seen as a lot of money,  but the work involved in that will tell you that that money  is only to do a platform where a private sector can then come in  
**[0:37:47-0:37:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:37:47):**  and actually participate in building factories,  maybe a dock side where they can be building better boats  instead of cutting all our trees to construct local boats.  Maybe we would have a place there to do fibreglass boats  for fishing.  
**[0:38:03-0:38:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:38:03):**  We can have a place to repair trawlers for fishing.  We can have probably a canning factory and other fish  processing facilities within that.  But these would all come from private sector involvement,  not by the grants that is given to the government  
**[0:38:19-0:38:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:38:19):**  by the Chinese.  And the Chinese involvement isn't new.  I think that it's been funding in part the data collection  that's been used to monitor the fisheries.  Is that correct?  
**[0:38:28-0:38:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:38:28):**  Yeah, correct.  They have also signed an agreement  with the government of Sierra Leone,  and they are conducting fish stock assessment  at the moment.  
**[0:38:37-0:38:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:38:37):**  We are yet to see the report of that activity.  But that's also a very good support.  They have brought their vessels, they've brought their scientists,  and they are working with our own scientists  to actually assess the stocks level,  
**[0:38:50-0:38:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:38:50):**  so which is another very good support that we appreciate.  So the reporting in the UK, at least of, well,  from The Guardian, which is, I guess,  an international newspaper, has been very much focused  on the felling of 100 hectares of rainforest  
**[0:39:04-0:39:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:39:04):**  and the environmental impact there.  You've been talking about both the economic impact  and the impact on the fishery overall.  It sounds to me as if you think that the felling  of this rainforest is justified in this instance.  
**[0:39:18-0:39:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:39:18):**  Well, my surprise, I visited Black Johnson recently,  and I noted that the place identified  as a site for the harbour has already  been plundered by private investors  with massive development going on there.  
**[0:39:32-0:39:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:39:32):**  And nobody ever talked about environmental concerns.  They are already doing a massive construction work there,  building walls and cutting down trees and things like that.  Nobody ever talked about environmental concerns.  The government says, we want to do a harbour there.  
**[0:39:49-0:39:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:39:49):**  Everybody shouts.  I think that shouting of environmental concerns  is mostly coming to seek sympathy by landowners  who have already bought land there  and are seeing the potential that they are going to use  
**[0:40:01-0:40:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:40:01):**  their property to government for the harbour.  So they wanted sympathy.  But actually, it is not much of the environmental concern  because I've seen people having massive floss of land  up to the size of 35, 32 acres, 19 acres,  
**[0:40:16-0:40:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:40:16):**  and they've not done environmental impact assessment.  If government is going to do the environmental impact  assessment and they discover that it's not feasible  to do a harbour there, then they're going to look  for another alternative site.  
**[0:40:29-0:40:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:40:29):**  These are the people who are developing the place now,  calling themselves landowners, who are shouting  about environmental impact.  Have they told us what they intend to do  in that plot of land?  
**[0:40:38-0:40:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:40:38):**  No, they have not.  And when we see the reporting in the UK and elsewhere  around the world about the environmental impact,  it feels to me, Phil, like there's a bit of double standards  going on.  
**[0:40:49-0:40:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:40:49):**  If we think about the UK specifically, HS2,  which is a big train infrastructure project,  is potentially damaging thousands of hectares  of UK landscape and wildlife habitat,  just so that people can get from London to Manchester  
**[0:41:02-0:41:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:41:02):**  a little bit faster.  So it seems a bit rich for us to get too excited.  About 100 hectares of rainforest, which as Salut says,  is already semi-developed anyway,  which is going to allow Sierra Leone to reap  
**[0:41:13-0:41:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:41:13):**  more of the benefits of its own fishing industry, add value,  and it's clearly such a key component  of Sierra Leone's economy.  I think what it demonstrates is that unfortunately  for headline writers, things are rarely as simple  
**[0:41:27-0:41:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:41:27):**  as the headline.  There is a significant problem of deforestation  in Sierra Leone, a significant environmental problem.  Of course, that significant environmental problem  is being caused by a significant increase in population.  
**[0:41:41-0:41:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:41:41):**  And that is something again, which the government  of Sierra Leone probably should be doing something about.  But as we've already discovered, the resources available  to the government of Sierra Leone are not significant.  So being able to control some of these issues  
**[0:41:59-0:42:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:41:59):**  is not necessarily within the gifts of the government.  It can pass laws, but if it can't afford to pay  for people to go out and enforce laws,  or indeed if the people who are to go out  and enforce the laws can be paid more by the landowners  
**[0:42:12-0:42:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:42:12):**  to turn a blind eye, then quite frankly, you have a problem.  So there are problems, yes.  And I think it would be really useful perhaps  for the international community to look at  how it can help Sierra Leone in terms of mitigating  
**[0:42:26-0:42:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:42:26):**  against some of the worst impact of deforestation,  but to highlight it just over this one specific issue  is possibly being a little unfair.  Sal, just coming back to you, do you have any concerns  that the Sierra Leone fishery may get too big  
**[0:42:41-0:42:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:42:41):**  and that its sustainability will then come under threat again,  but this time from Sierra Leone's own fishermen?  Fine. This is what I think is the concentration  that we should actually look at.  All along past or recent history in fishing in Sierra Leone,  
**[0:42:58-0:43:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:42:58):**  we have been concentrating on exploiting the resource,  harvesting, harvesting, harvesting.  And I think the more the population  or fishing population increase,  the greater the danger of our fishing.  
**[0:43:09-0:43:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:43:09):**  But if we try to diversify a bit and say,  okay, let's have some people actually doing  the value addition component.  I mean, we break down the value chain on fishing  and see how we can distribute the pressure  
**[0:43:23-0:43:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:43:23):**  along this value chain so that we can still have  a few people fishing and employing more people processing  and adding value to the products that is caught  and still be gainfully employed  than having everybody going into fishing.  
**[0:43:38-0:43:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:43:38):**  If you go to a fishing village in the country now,  you'll find out some villages,  a fisherman having 10, 15 children.  None of them are going to school.  They are all learning how to fish.  
**[0:43:50-0:43:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:43:50):**  So it means when they grow up,  they would also try to acquire their own small fishing books  and they would all go into fishing.  And that is dangerous.  But if we can get a diversified fisheries  
**[0:44:02-0:44:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:44:02):**  where some people are catching the fish,  some people are processing it,  some people are selling it,  then you can still have a whole lot of people  being absorbed into the sector  
**[0:44:12-0:44:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:44:12):**  without a danger to overfishing.  And this is where I think at this point in time,  it's very important to really try  and see how we can diversify.  Saliou, your insights have just been fascinating  
**[0:44:24-0:44:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:44:24):**  and Phil, thanks so much for your contributions.  That's all we have time for.  I'd like to thank my guests,  Saliou Sanko,  coordinator of the West African Regional Fisheries Program  
**[0:44:33-0:44:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:44:33):**  in Sierra Leone,  and Phil Gorn, an advisor to the program  and a former fisheries minister for Isle of Man government.  Phil Gorn is on Twitter as at Phil Gorn  and Saliou Sanko can be found on LinkedIn.  
**[0:44:45-0:44:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:44:45):**  If you've enjoyed listening,  please come back and listen to more.  Tell your friends, like us,  review us and share our links.  Farmgate is a partnership project  
**[0:44:53-0:44:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:44:53):**  for Farmwell and FAI Farms.  We're funded by San Calpa  and you can join the conversation on Twitter  by searching for Farmgate podcast.  I've been Finn low, Christine.  
**[0:45:03-0:45:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Saving-Sierra-Leones-fish-e11tope#t=0:45:03):**  Bye for now.  