### Farm Gate  (2020-49-22)
**[0:00:00-0:00:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to Farmgate, the Regenerative Agriculture podcast. I'm Finnlow Costayne.  Forum for the Future's report, Growing Our Future, concentrates on scaling regenerative  agriculture in the United States. It does a really good job of describing the threats  and opportunities surrounding regen and makes a series of recommendations for successful  regenerative transformation. While the report is centred on the USA, its findings and recommendations  
**[0:00:31-0:00:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:00:31):**  are just as relevant for farmers, investors and policy makers in other nations. In this  podcast I'm talking to one of the report authors, Lesley Mitchell, Forum for the Future's  Associate Director for Sustainable Nutrition. I started by asking her to explain what Forum  for the Future is and what it does.  Forum for the Future does three different key things. We work one to one with businesses  
**[0:00:54-0:00:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:00:54):**  in a much wider range of organisations now around key sustainability challenges of which  sustainable nutrition is one. We also build or support collaborations and try and take  a system lens to unlocking and accelerating the scale of ambition and action towards transforming  towards a sustainable future. We also work to help equip others who are acting in the  space to look at that transformation through a systems lens. And we work around three different  
**[0:01:23-0:01:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:01:23):**  key themes at the moment in terms of priorities. We have the 1.5 degree challenge, sustainable  nutrition and sustainable value chains and livelihoods. And those all interlink. But  we do work across a whole range of other things, whether it be housing, cities, energy, communities,  we work on those things. But here I'm very much focused, my role is to lead our global  work on sustainable nutrition.  
**[0:01:43-0:01:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:01:43):**  Okay, so let's get into that. And that's a great description, really interesting about  Forum for the Future more broadly. I haven't traditionally associated Forum necessarily  with a regenerative approach to agriculture. In the past, say five years or so ago, Forum  seemed to be sort of quite emissions focused, very focused on that sort of climate change  element, whereas regenerative agriculture is something rather different. What is it  
**[0:02:06-0:02:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:02:06):**  that Forum likes about regen agriculture?  I would say Forum loves regenerative agriculture. It's clearly going to be the big game changer  of the future in terms of looking at not just carbon sequestration, but really building  out a future fit food system, but it could also be apparel, a whole range of different  things. So you know, very, very relevant if you're looking at cotton manmade cellulosic  
**[0:02:27-0:02:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:02:27):**  fibres as well as food. Forum has very much, I think, historically, it was an environmental  organisation primarily, but it has always focused on what are just sustainable solutions  from a social and economic point of view as well. And so we see sustainability very much  in that round. But I think the key thing is that doing less harm, making things more efficient,  minimising your impacts are all incredibly important, but they still lock you in to the  
**[0:02:51-0:02:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:02:51):**  way things were done in the past. And I think we've recognised as a society now that the  scale of shift and the new thinking that's required, some of that new thinking, be very  old thinking about soil management, for example, but the new thinking that's required is very  different to build out that regenerative future. And the difference, I think, between seeing  sustainability as being how can you be more efficient? How can you do less damage? How  
**[0:03:15-0:03:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:03:15):**  can you get perhaps to a point of no harm is not going to deliver the scale of change  in terms of using soils as carbon sinks and getting moving towards carbon positive, but  more importantly, looking at those key issues of rebuilding soil health, for example, or  in a wider picture, building the business models that are going to support those shifts  to happen and having food systems that do deliver good quality food for all in a way  
**[0:03:42-0:03:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:03:42):**  that builds value distribution down the supply chain. That means that farmers can afford  to both manage the risk and costs and skills of that transition, but also are rewarded  for, for example, the ecosystem services that they provide. And so this is the big thing  for me within regenerative agriculture is if you look at it in terms of win-wins, the  first question is what are the goals of the system? So moving from an extractive to a  
**[0:04:06-0:04:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:04:06):**  regenerative system and regeneration really means baking them.  Let's just dip into that and then come back to where you were going, because I think that  that description of agriculture as it is now is really interesting and also very accurate.  It is essentially about inputs and extraction. And I think that's the same whether you're  looking at kind of intensive commodity agriculture in the US or whether you're looking at a brand  
**[0:04:36-0:04:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:04:36):**  like organic, it's still about rules. And to me, it seems that regen isn't about rules.  It's a philosophical change as much as it is a biological change and a systems change.  And that really requires a level of interest and intelligence and excitement about that  change. It's a real mindset change. So to you, what is regenerative agriculture? How  do you define it as a different sort of approach? That's a really good point. And I think you've  
**[0:05:03-0:05:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:05:03):**  hit the nail on the head that it's a different mindset about the goals of what that agriculture  system is delivering. So moving from an extractive view that looks at prioritising yield, productivity,  profit income in the short term, maybe very good at minimising and being very precise  about its inputs, but is reliant on external inputs to a point where the goals of the system  are more around the quality of soil, its ability to produce and be resilient over time, its  
**[0:05:33-0:05:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:05:33):**  ability to support its productivity into the future, but also that it sees itself in a  wider environment of this is about producing high quality, safe, productive food systems  that are available to everyone, but it does so in a way that is renewing. But it goes  beyond restoring. I think the key point about regenerative farming is it is forward looking  rather than looking at what can we get out of this now. And that's not to dismiss anyone  
**[0:05:59-0:06:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:05:59):**  who's working in a current context of farming. The entire farming model has been built around  yield, productivity and reward for volume effectively.  Well it's about the priorities of society, isn't it? And our priorities, since the Second  World War have all been about volume, about making sure that nobody goes hungry. And now  as we move forward and we face a different challenge, the modern existential threats  
**[0:06:23-0:06:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:06:23):**  of climate change and biodiversity loss and other things which are sort of colliding there,  we need to have different goals and we need to change those goals. And that's where it  strikes me that this Work By forum, Growing Our Future, the report that you've just put  out is central to that sort of systems change. And it's a really important contribution.  And at the heart of what you're talking about here is moving from where you've got some  
**[0:06:46-0:06:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:06:46):**  people who, you know, very small proportion globally, who are already regenerative agriculturalists,  and how we get from there, from these really enthusiastic and hugely successful people  in their own right, how we take that, create a movement and replace, displace modern extractive  agriculture. So scaling it is the term that's used. What do we mean by scaling it? And what's  the model of scaling that you have in mind? Because it's a huge change we're talking about.  
**[0:07:18-0:07:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:07:18):**  So just to give you a concept for Growing Our Future, forum acts as a catalyst. We don't  come up with a solution. It's not our job as a sustainability, you know, great thinker  to come up with a solution and then impose it upon people. So we work with the system  to co-create those solutions, to look at it, to help those different actors, whether they  be indigenous farmers groups through to massive multinationals, policymakers, investors, to  
**[0:07:42-0:07:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:07:42):**  look at what their role is in the system and how they can reshape it towards that new vision  and what needs to shift. So where are the levers you can pull to create that change  and how do they need to be pulled together? And that might be something as simple as understanding  different systems for adding cover crops, for example, but it probably goes beyond that.  So looking at where that knowledge is in those incredible experts who might be sitting in  
**[0:08:07-0:08:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:08:07):**  the niche you understand, but have embedded in decades of expertise on regenerative agriculture  and linking them together with others across the sector who can really pull that out and  who could benefit from that knowledge, but maybe have the resources and their hands on  the supply chains, but don't know how to shift. It has to be a genuine and again, not extractive  arrangement in the sense that this isn't about parasitizing the knowledge of those who sit  
**[0:08:34-0:08:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:08:34):**  at the core of regenerative agriculture, but really understanding where there is consensus  to move forward. And I think the biggest thing about these pre-competitive collaborations  is understanding that the challenge is bigger than any one of us.  And it strikes me that there are two, I mean, broadly two different models of scaling, the  polar opposites. There's one which is, you know, big companies investing, making decisions  
**[0:08:58-0:09:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:08:58):**  about changing their supply chains and essentially dictating the terms of the people, the farmers  who are contracted to them. And in that way you can scale and deliver quite rapid change  across the markets. But the other is perhaps more attached to society where you have smaller  cooperatives, independent farmers working perhaps to sell more directly to the public.  And it's about helping those groups, those smaller groups to replicate so that you have  
**[0:09:26-0:09:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:09:26):**  perhaps 10 farmers working together, 50 farmers working together, but you have another 10,  another 50 and replicating in that way. And I wonder if you believe that it's one or the  other or whether it's a combination or whether there are different forms of scaling that  I've kind of missed out there. Yeah, I think there's a diversity of routes  to scale and just to go down a level, probably some of those are going to be around more  
**[0:09:48-0:09:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:09:48):**  innovative business models. Can they deal with the diversity of crops that come from  maybe that 50 farmer cooperative that can access then or be incorporated into a supply  chain of a big multinational? Does the infrastructure support that? Who's going to change that infrastructure?  Do the contracting arrangements support that and provide a viable livelihood for a farmer  either to adjust practices or to produce those new products?  
**[0:10:12-0:10:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:10:12):**  I think one of the big, I hate to think of positives of a pandemic, but one of the big  changes that has happened is a focus on, for example, new routes to market. So direct to  consumer, which has in some ways really democratized the linkages between the producer and the  consumer themselves using internet platforms, for example. So I think what we have now is  a much more diverse set of products available of routes to scale. And so there's a kind  
**[0:10:40-0:10:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:10:40):**  of, there's a range of different ways to look at that. And one of the things that Forum  is hoping to do over the next year or so is bring together people in the UK across the  regenerative agriculture system. So whether they be retailers or producers or might be  fishermen even, and all those in between, as well as consumers to look at what are the  new business models that are emerging that will support that transformation. That's what  
**[0:11:05-0:11:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:11:05):**  we're doing in the US right now, but we want to adapt that kind of methodology, bring it  to the UK and bring people together. The thing I notice in it is that often you get dichotomous  routes to scaling because people don't trust each other. The big businesses and the small  niche operators actually have very different views of what a future food system should  look like and therefore won't necessarily connect for very good reasons in certain instances.  
**[0:11:31-0:11:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:11:31):**  But I do think that this problem is so much bigger than all of us and that diversity of  routes to scale means that there is a space to explore how we really grow out and accelerate  out of this. If we're sitting in the supposedly the decade of delivery for the SDGs and we're  talking about climate emergency that we've got 10 years to solve, we can't afford to  be worrying about being protectionist. We have a much bigger challenge to face between  
**[0:11:56-0:12:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:11:56):**  us. And if we're going to put regenerative agriculture at the heart of that, the amount  of time it needs to transform, we really have to across the policy landscape and business  landscape incentivise that shift to happen.  You mentioned diversity there and diversity is a word that we come across an awful lot  in this podcast. And I think one of the things that comes out of your report, the growing  
**[0:12:16-0:12:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:12:16):**  our future report, is that there is a need because of the rapidity that we require, you  know, in terms of change, there is a need for a lot of stakeholders to move at once  and therefore just waiting for one or just trying to leverage government, just trying  to leverage citizens, it's not going to work. There's a need somehow to mobilise and motivate  a whole range of stakeholders right across the board and get them to work together, if  
**[0:12:46-0:12:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:12:46):**  not towards the same goals, towards the same broad goals.  So you had a beautiful way of putting it, Finlow, of mindset shifts. And so one of the  ways we look at this is through what we call an iceberg model. You have these events that  are happening outside, so that might be consumers choosing something different or a new product  on the shelves. But what are the structures that sit below that and the patterns of behaviour?  
**[0:13:09-0:13:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:13:09):**  But at the bottom of it, it's what are those mindset shifts that are required? And so in  each kind of niche sector, whether you're an investor or a policymaker, you'll have  a role to play in terms of looking at that challenge and what does it mean for you? But  we need to create that, or we need to enable that mindset shift across those different  sectors and then look at how they fit together, because that will be the unlock. If we have  
**[0:13:34-0:13:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:13:34):**  perverse economic incentives that mean that a small, brilliant dairy farmer with a really  good robust herd cannot make a viable living and is going to have to leave the land. If  we have economic incentives that make that happen, then we are guaranteed to fail. So  we need to look at how do we incentivise that if you're a policymaker? How do we deliver  different forms of capital into that change that can feel confident of their own risk,  
**[0:14:02-0:14:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:14:02):**  but will be patient enough to allow a transformation? And how can we reframe, for example, agricultural  education and expertise and continuing professional development that will enable farmers to have  access to knowledge and skills that will manage that complexity that comes with regenerative  agriculture without making it complicated? How do we build it into the next generation?  But also how do you build the roots to market that are going to reward that, but also give  
**[0:14:27-0:14:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:14:27):**  consumers access and help consumers understand the difference in these products that are  about building that sustainable future, but in a way that will address some of our deep,  deep challenges around, for example, food poverty, food access.  We've started moving into challenges there. And what I'd like to ask you to do, Lesley,  is just because I think, you know, again, we're talking about a report, not everybody  
**[0:14:50-0:14:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:14:50):**  can see it in front of them while they're listening. And one of the things you've got  in there, I'm a sucker for infographics and you have some really nice infographics in  there about some of the challenges that we face, some of the challenges to scaling regenerative  agriculture. And I wonder if you can talk through one or two of those, because I don't  think anybody listening would doubt that there is a remarkable opportunity from regenerative  
**[0:15:14-0:15:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:15:14):**  agriculture. If we can get it right, if we can manage to scale this up, there is the  huge potential to solve some of the enormous challenges that humanity faces and that the  world as a whole faces. But what are those key challenges to you? If you could sort of  pick your top handful, top three.  So people always look at me weirdly when I use this word, but perversity, frankly, across  
**[0:15:35-0:15:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:15:35):**  most of the enabling factors that will support regenerative agriculture. So we look at those  barriers across the system and some of the big ones. So this is taken from the United  States, which is a particular example, but many of these will be relevant to people in  the UK and Europe, will be around, for example, what is rewarded, how a system supports routes  to market that are around monocultures, are around volume and are around margins and short  
**[0:16:03-0:16:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:16:03):**  term profitability, which are not going to incentivise a transformation to a different  system that is more diverse, may require more different infrastructure in terms of the supply  chain, literally where you keep stuff, more diverse crops and how you market that in your  big retail store. One of the big shifts is around investment. One of the big challenges  for farmers, for example, will be the cost and risk of a transition. So if you are heavily  
**[0:16:32-0:16:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:16:32):**  indebted because you've bought some pretty hefty kit to run your farm in the way you  do now, you're paying off your loans on your tractors and you're ploughing equipment, your  system is built around that. Your opportunity to transition is incredibly narrow and that's  inevitably going to make people risk averse. So finding new ways of sharing the goal and  the risk around that transition, supporting farmers to make that transition financially,  
**[0:16:58-0:17:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:16:58):**  that might be around building longer term contracts or premiumising or rewarding particular  new behaviours. We're looking with a retailer in the UK at the moment how they can shift  their supply chain and some of it might be around supporting knowledge development in  new practices, for example. So I think some of the key barriers are really going to be  around finance, they're going to be around business models, but they're also going to  
**[0:17:21-0:17:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:17:21):**  be around policy. And if policy and fiscal incentives do not reward the public payment  for public goods in terms of ecosystem services, for example, then they will effectively be  absent from the economic model. So really recognising, and I think one of the biggest  things we'll need to move in the next 10 years is around rewarding farmers for carbon sequestration,  be part of RegenAg, but also rewarding farmers for stewardship of biodiversity. We always  
**[0:17:47-0:17:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:17:47):**  focus on the fact that there's a big climate process that's had very real alarms flashing  for a long time now, but there's also a UN process on biodiversity that is just agreeing  its targets for the next 10 years. And it's been a bit of a Cinderella, but will be a  key part of that future in the UK is building policy incentives around biodiversity now.  So you've got to pull those levers at once, but it will be the big ones that build the  
**[0:18:10-0:18:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:18:10):**  system now need to build the system of the future.  And it's interesting, I mean, the word you use, perversity, I think it's a really good  description. And, you know, if we're talking about, you know, just using a climate change  lens, then we can drive some really perverse outcomes. For example, shifting animals indoors,  just focusing on emissions, and actually exacerbating many of the problems that we see outside,  
**[0:18:31-0:18:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:18:31):**  whether those are social in terms of, you know, the quality of jobs that people have,  or the quality of food that's actually being produced from these more intensive systems,  to the impact on biodiversity and soil health, and of course, the impact on farm animal health  and welfare. And, you know, we talk about policy drivers, and those are going to vary  considerably aren't they from different territories. So within the European Union, each government,  
**[0:18:55-0:18:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:18:55):**  and I'm, you know, I'm including, you know, the UK, we're leaving, but we're still within  that process of government subsidising agriculture. Traditionally, and in the UK, we're moving  from subsidy to payment for public goods. In America, it's very different. There are  other levers that the state can use. But there isn't this kind of, you know, tradition of  acreage payments and that sort of thing. But somehow it's finding a way of making it clear  
**[0:19:19-0:19:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:19:19):**  that policy values many things, rather than a single thing.  I wouldn't underestimate the scale and difficulty of that transformation, because effectively  you are resetting the goals and the the incentives across a whole range of different areas. I  think the one big learning that we have had as we look at things for and for the future  through a systems lens is that you have to look at climate, health, environment and economics  
**[0:19:44-0:19:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:19:44):**  together. You can't look at them in a single silo. If we want a good food system, we need  to set up the conditions for it to work. And that means that farmers need to be able to  grow the right things in the right place for the right purpose and be rewarded for it.  I love the idea of incentivising payments for ecosystem services, for example, but they  need to be within a business model that is viable, resilient, robust for the longer term.  
**[0:20:09-0:20:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:20:09):**  And I do think that one of the things around the new various bills that we have and Brexit  means that we do have the opportunity, whatever you think about Brexit, we have the opportunity  for a fresh look. Some of these things are a given and we have the chance to rethink  again. But one thing you have mentioned there, which I think is really key, which is about  the unintended consequences of single focus lenses. And Finlay, you and I have both worked  
**[0:20:33-0:20:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:20:33):**  in the animal welfare sector for a good long time around sustainable livestock. And I think  looking at the change in the narrative from being red meat bad, white meat good to understanding,  for example, at Forum for the Future, we have a project called Feed Compass, which is a  multi-stakeholder collaboration around animal feed because 80% nion of the GHG impact of  a chicken comes from the feed that it has. And that is often imported feed, often with  
**[0:20:59-0:21:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:20:59):**  other challenges around and I know it's broad definition, but around deforestation, might  be around worker livelihoods and so on, but also is very input led. I think now we're  seeing a change and a nuance and understanding that is allowed or enabled by the regenerative  agriculture lens, which says actually maintaining carbon in soils in permanent pasture or the  role of livestock in rotations becomes increasingly important. So we start to look at livestock  
**[0:21:24-0:21:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:21:24):**  in a different way. And rather than it being, can we be most efficient in terms of GHGs  through all these inputs into monogastrics and saying, actually, you know, ruminants  might have a real role here in supporting carbon staying in the ground, in providing  incredible access and efficiency for micronutrients in dairy, for example, or in beef that's pasture  reared that some of the work from Rothamsted has shown is much more efficient, starts looking  
**[0:21:49-0:21:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:21:49):**  at those win-wins in a different way. And we're able to do that because we've started  to look at the goals of the system differently. So it might be about less and better meat  and dairy, for example, but it certainly might also be about different meat and dairy. And  that actually, you know, our embattled cattle farmers of the UK, where we have so much pasture  available might actually be part of the solution rather than part of the problem. So we need  
**[0:22:13-0:22:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:22:13):**  to keep that thinking upfront about what are we trying to achieve here and what are the  routes to action rather than demonising different sectors.  I notice as we go through the report that there is a real nutrition lens. You know,  your work is around sustainable nutrition. And in the same way in the UK, the Food Farming  and Countryside Commission, they're very nutrition focused. The work that they've been doing  
**[0:22:35-0:22:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:22:35):**  has put nutrition front and centre. Why is it for you that we talk about nutrition? Why  is that focus on that? Is that something that you think has historically been missing?  So we sit in this debate all the time. Are we talking about food or are we talking about  nutrition? I think the key thing is seeing nutrition from the point of view of production  as well as consumption. And the reason we started talking about nutrition was to get  
**[0:22:55-0:23:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:22:55):**  out of the lens of how much food, but rather than it being, you know, what is the productivity  of a piece of land, to how much nutrition does that land produce per acre per hectare?  And from that point of view, looking differently at what is produced and how it is produced.  So it's really trying to get a lens of understanding where the role of regenerative practices in  delivering that nutrition, but also looking at it through the lens of it not just being  
**[0:23:22-0:23:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:23:22):**  about producing more meat or looking at it through the point of view of efficiency, but  how are we getting nutrition to people? So trying to keep that systems lens. I colloquialise  it and talk about food because we are talking about food and we're talking about farming  systems, but we need to look at everyone who is creating that. And the fact that, you know,  we might have been looking at agriculture and the food that we provide in the UK or  
**[0:23:46-0:23:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:23:46):**  in Europe through a lens of greenhouse gases or the environment. But the public health  component of this is such a huge part of the picture, whether it be from, you know, looking  at things not necessarily through a pandemic lens, but looking at it round in providing  healthy nutritious diets that will deal with some of the massive challenges of non-communicable  diseases that we have that also massively disproportionately affect poorer people because  
**[0:24:12-0:24:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:24:12):**  of the lack of quality nutrition.  And you mentioned the advantages of pandemic. And one of the other good things in the UK,  at least that's come out of the pandemic, is the government's sudden, I could say, attention  on obesity. And if there is going to be a serious look at obesity, then we need to have  a serious look at the type of foods that are being produced and the type of foods that  
**[0:24:33-0:24:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:24:33):**  are available for people to buy. And obviously this whole conversation can take place within  that arena. It's yet another lens, isn't it, to help government better understand the issues  that we're talking about.  We've talked across the programme about agriculture broadly. And, you know, just now you brought  up chicken farming and you mentioned the way that grass is a key component of agriculture  
**[0:24:58-0:25:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:24:58):**  in the UK. I wonder if the barriers and levers are the same in terms of scaling regenerative  agriculture across agriculture, or whether we need to look at different commodity areas  in different ways, whether the challenges are roughly the same or whether one commodity  area really lends itself to a regenerative transition.  Certainly, I think we'd have to look at dairy again, in terms of the route that dairy has  
**[0:25:22-0:25:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:25:22):**  been going down, maximising productivity, bringing animals indoors, for example. And  I think there is a, dairy is ripe for review. I always throughout my career have found it  astounding that we cannot build models that support brilliant small-scale dairy herds  in the UK when it's, you know, in many cases, Wales being a perfect example, you have all  the right environments for this.  
**[0:25:43-0:25:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:25:43):**  I think many of the challenges we recognise in regenerative agriculture are context specific  and place specific. So there is nuance around that, but there is no reason why we can't  look at those challenges together across a sector. But also I think in revisiting the  kinds of farming systems we have, we'll probably be looking at more diverse rotations and therefore  there being a really strong focus on landowners, for example, and their role in this in supporting  
**[0:26:09-0:26:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:26:09):**  and enabling much more diverse rotations on their land. And therefore those farmers working  together with a longer term view to enabling that.  Interestingly, through Forum for the Future's base camp at School on System Change, I was  involved with a project on water in East Anglia. And that was incredible because it really  didn't pick up the role of agriculture in supporting a regenerative approach to the  
**[0:26:33-0:26:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:26:33):**  future of water and abundance in East Anglia. So I think it's not just going to be a question  of which sectors, which commodities work together. It's going to be potentially a landscape level  view of who's got an interest in this, who contributes to this, how do we work together  in new ways to go beyond our own interests to build that shared goal.  Bottom line is we need to look at it as a system. We need to look at all the players  
**[0:26:56-0:27:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:26:56):**  that are going to influence it. This thing is bigger than any one of us and we need to  build an enabling environment that's going to support those actors to create that shift.  That's all we have time for. Thank you to Leslie Mitchell, Forum for the Future's  Associate Director for Sustainable Nutrition. Forum's report, Growing Our Future, can be  found on their website at forumforthefuture.org. If you've enjoyed listening, please come  
**[0:27:19-0:27:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-agriculture-ek0it6#t=0:27:19):**  back and listen to more. Tell your friends, like us, review us and share our links.  Farmgate is a partnership project for Farmwell and FAI Farms. We're funded by San Calpa  and you can join the conversation on Twitter by searching for Farmgate Podcast. I've  been Finn low Kastain. Bye for now.  