### Farm Gate  (2022-05-04)
**[0:00:00-0:00:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to Farmgate. I'm Finlow Kastain, the Chief Executive of Farmwell and founder  of the Food and Global Security Network. This programme is the first in a series in which  I'll be talking to regenerative dairy producers from around the world as part of the Regen  Dairy Project set up by FAI Farms and Farmwell in collaboration with Unilever, Barry Callebaut,  Walla Foods, Woolworths South Africa and Ben & Jerry's. Through the project, we aim to  
**[0:00:29-0:00:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:00:29):**  define what regenerative dairy looks like from the bottom up and throughout dairy supply  chains and to engage dairy farmers and food businesses around a practical vision for a  productive and profitable global dairy sector that also restores its relationship with nature.  Today, I'm talking to two fantastic farmers, both delivering regenerative dairy but in  very different environments and at very different scales. Blake Alexander is a fourth generation  
**[0:00:56-0:01:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:00:56):**  dairy farmer from Alexander Family Farm near Crescent City, California, USA. And Bryce  Cunningham is a third generation farmer from Mossgill Farm in Ayrshire in Scotland. Welcome  both.  BLAKE ALEXANDER Thank you. Great to be here.  MATT WILKES Thank you.  
**[0:01:09-0:01:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:01:09):**  I think because you're both from such different parts of the world, it'd be really useful  just to get a sense of the climate and the landscape in which you farm. Blake, am I right  that you have reasonably similar conditions to farming throughout the year?  BLAKE ALEXANDER Yes, absolutely. We live right on the edge  of a rainforest almost where the great redwood trees grow and right on the coast. And so  
**[0:01:28-0:01:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:01:28):**  we're buffered in temperature by the ocean. So our average summer and winter temperatures  are only 11 degrees apart, very cool and comfortable for cows.  MATT WILKES And that's 11 degrees in centigrade or Fahrenheit?  BLAKE ALEXANDER Fahrenheit, actually.  MATT WILKES And are the conditions fairly flat or mountainous  
**[0:01:43-0:01:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:01:43):**  where you are?  BLAKE ALEXANDER Yeah, we're only a mile or two from the  Windfall Mountains but they're covered with trees and we're right on these flat bottom  lands that are adjacent to rivers and ocean.  MATT WILKES So we've got a fairly flat landscape next  
**[0:01:57-0:02:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:01:57):**  to the coast, in the lee of the hills. Not much change between summer and winter. Is  that the same for you, Bryce? Nice gentle winters and warm summers?  BRYAN DUNN We've kind of got pretty sort of mild summers.  Where we are in Scotland, the best weather's always rain. So you're always a day or two  away from rain. We're farming quite heavy clay type soils. It doesn't quite cold in  
**[0:02:15-0:02:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:02:15):**  very wet, you occasionally get snow. The warmest it will be in the summer is actually this week  believe it or not, so this week we're hitting temperatures of about 28-29 degrees. In the  middle of winter we'll get about minus 10. We're generally able to graze the cows from about early  April until generally mid-October, the rest of the time they're housed and mainly because of  ground conditions and weather and the grass just stops growing. But basically to put it in short,  
**[0:02:38-0:02:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:02:38):**  in the summer there's plenty of rain and sunshine to grow the grass, in the winter it's warm enough  not to have to run about in big, really hot, hot stuff. So that's the climate that you're both  operating in, but the scale of your farm businesses is different as well isn't it? And Blake,  I wonder if you could briefly talk us through the Alexander family farm in terms of the size  farm locations and what you actually produce. We in total manage about 9,000 acres and so  
**[0:03:05-0:03:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:03:05):**  quite large, spread over three counties which is the dairies are about two hours apart from  north to south on the coast. Our oldest son and his wife are on the south end of that with about  a third of our cows on a couple of farms there. We actually milk a total of 5,000 mature cows,  just a little over 5,000 with maybe 42-4300 of those milking at any one time and the rest are  dry. And we do that in five different locations. And is it just dairy that you're producing or  
**[0:03:34-0:03:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:03:34):**  you're producing beef or anything else as well? We actually years ago we had five children and  our two oldest boys started a chicken operation where we sell eggs. And so we have laying hens  that are out on grass grazing, mobile coops. We actually have about 35 to 40,000 hens at any one  time. And so we're selling eggs and then we also do some grass fed beef. We've at times raised all  of our bull calves up. Now we're raising a lot fewer. We're trying to make more A2 females.  
**[0:04:03-0:04:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:04:03):**  So 9,000 acres, 5,000 dairy cows that you're milking at any given time. So Bryce,  your farm is much smaller, but you started almost from scratch after a hugely challenging period  in 2015 and you've built up a really exciting dairy business in that time. Could you talk us  through what happened in 2015, just briefly, and the decisions you've taken since then and the  scale of your operation today? So compared to Blake, it's not very substantial. So basically,  
**[0:04:33-0:04:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:04:33):**  in 2015 we had 150 milking cows. They were high producing air shea hosting cows and they were  housed 365 days of the year on a four times per day milking rotation. Now what happened then was  my father and grandfather and my grandmother all died within two years of each other. So that was  three business partners who had died and obviously the business was thrown into turmoil. That also  happened at the same time as the international milk price crashed. So we went from being paid  
**[0:05:00-0:05:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:05:00):**  27 pence per litre to 9.7 pence per litre. So what happened from there was the bank had pulled out,  we weren't able to finance anything, so we effectively just had to sell up. So we sold up  about 100 cows, we sold all the farm machinery and we were tenant farmers, so we couldn't sell  the land. So we were left with not many cows and this big rent to pay and a bit of an opportunity.  And that opportunity was that we could not have to work to the decisions and the ways of big dairy.  
**[0:05:29-0:05:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:05:29):**  And we were able to go back directly to the consumer and sort of have this idea of really  natural grass-based pasture-based farming and do something really different that hadn't really  been taken on in Scotland at the time. So we went back to 28 milking cattle, we pasteurised the milk  which is a legal requirement in Scotland and we started selling to our local community. Luckily  for us, the local community were very passionate about it. They remembered the old fashioned milk  
**[0:05:57-0:06:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:05:57):**  from the sort of 60s and 70s at the time, but we also fell upon the fact that because of the way  we brewed the milk and the low and slow method of pasteurisation, it worked very well in speciality  coffee shops. And we started moving into Glasgow, which is our closest city, about 25 miles away.  And once we sort of found out that that worked very well and the speciality coffee shops found  it worked very well, we started growing the business. So if we go on seven years today,  
**[0:06:23-0:06:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:06:23):**  we're working with four other organic farms in the South West of Scotland and we're delivering  barista milk to Glasgow, Edinburgh, Aberdeen and Inverness, as well as doorsteps right across the  central belt of Scotland as well. And we're sort of, our whole sort of purpose going forward today  as a sustainable future for Scottish dairy. What happened to us, I believe was very unfair. We had  no say in how our milk was sold. We were basically selling a white commodity to a big business that  
**[0:06:49-0:06:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:06:49):**  was selling it for a market price that they had no interest in enlarging. So that's what we believe  today, that we can take this as both farmers and milk processors and push this story and really  show that things can be done differently. So effectively you're a hub for those four  organic dairy farms and you do the distribution with that. And you've also got your own brand,  which is the kind of the fully regenerative brand that you sell. And I don't think you've mentioned  
**[0:07:13-0:07:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:07:13):**  the connection to the poet Robbie Burns, who many people will be familiar with, with the New Year's  poem, Old Lang Syne. Of course, so Robbie Burns, more than having just been Scottish is the reason  we use him as our ambassador. So Robbie himself, he lived in this very farm where I'm sat today,  Mossgill. And he came here during a time of family turmoil. His father had just died. He had died a  bankrupt. They were not able to then borrow money because the family had been associated with a  
**[0:07:42-0:07:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:07:42):**  bankrupt. They'd changed the family name from Burness to Burns. And Miss Gill was going to be  their chance at life to be able to turn the new leaf and move on. So Robbie was here when his  first book of poems was published. And one of his greatest love poems, Tearmose, was written here.  And Tearmose was written all about the change that humankind was bringing to nature, about how we  were fighting nature and changing it in such a way that we were causing destruction. When we were  
**[0:08:07-0:08:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:08:07):**  going through the turmoil and the more and more I was reading about Burns's story and his legacy at  Mossgill, I felt we really struck a chord with it. We were sitting there going, we're milking cows  four times a day, house 365 days of the year. But actually 100 years ago, that would have been  something that had been possible to do. So we started going down the route of cow with  calves day-raving. So we only have 40 cows now at Mossgill. But leaving the calves with them,  
**[0:08:33-0:08:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:08:33):**  we're farming regeneratively and we don't feed any cereals either.  Fantastic. And just finally, Bryce, I just want to check how many acres you have.  We farm 200 acres here at Mossgill.  I want to come back to scale later in the program. And we're going to talk about some of those other  issues in the cow with calf element as well. But before we get there, let's talk about regenerative  
**[0:08:50-0:08:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:08:50):**  dairy itself as a distinct way of farming. And Blake, your website claims that Alexander  Family Farm is America's first certified regenerative dairy. What does that mean?  What is regenerative farming to you?  I think before I answer that, I'd like to make, maybe make a connection back. I grew up on a farm  milking 150 cows on a rented facility. For me, in my mind, that was just a few, you know, a few  
**[0:09:15-0:09:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:09:15):**  minutes ago, but it was 40, 50 years ago. We've just been really aggressive in that regard to get  to what the size and scale we're at now. Regenerative kind of came along. I think  regenerative for me is a word that came along to describe something we were already doing.  When we first bought our first facility, my wife and I moved to the northern area where we're at  now. It was 500 acres or so at the time. And within a few years, we were milking three times  
**[0:09:42-0:09:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:09:42):**  a day back then, kind of a more high yield production agriculture approach. And, you know,  harvesting feed across the road and hauling it over, storing it and feeding it, you know,  a few months later, and that feed was all permanent grass or haylage. A few years into that,  we had a big devastating fire and changed our outlook a lot. And so that's when we really got  into organic. There was a group out here in the west looking for organic milk. And so we decided  
**[0:10:10-0:10:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:10:10):**  to pursue that. And so first it was organic. So this is maybe 22 years ago or so. What I learned  about was organic matter and just monitoring organic matter in the soil and paying attention  to that. And so that was our focus. And when you focus on organic matter, and maybe you do a little  composting and you start doing soil amendments and paying attention to biology, wow, all of a  sudden you are a farmer in a sense and your focus is correct. And so we've seen our original organic  
**[0:10:39-0:10:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:10:39):**  matters on the ranch go from two and 3% all the way up to 15%. So we're probably averaging 10  easily on the land that we've managed for quite a while. And that's just phenomenal. I'm really  proud of that. And we've been able to source a lot of inputs to come into the farm to add to our  compost pile on local waste resources, fish and wood chips and different things like that.  Being the first regenerative farm kind of came in that we were launching some milk nationwide in  
**[0:11:08-0:11:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:11:08):**  tartans. It was ESL extended shelf life milk. And so that was going to be going across the country.  And we're working with a big company, Whole Foods. We're explaining to them that we're regenerative.  And we had been working with two different regenerative groups for about three years as  one of their pilot farms around the world. And Whole Foods had asked, well, do you have a  certificate that we can hang on the wall or talk about? And it's like the answer is no, we don't.  
**[0:11:31-0:11:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:11:31):**  So that was in October about two years ago. And so I went back to both programs and said,  you know, we're launching here in January, February of 21. We'd sure like to have something  to talk about. And so both groups got a certificate for us. And it was the first ones that they had  done. They'd been talking about it, talking about it, working with farmers all around the world.  And so just because we asked, because we were launching nationally, boom, we get a  
**[0:11:55-0:11:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:11:55):**  certificate that made the news. And so that's how that happened.  And who's that certified by?  So the first one would be Regenerative Organic Alliance. And that's called the  ROC certification, which is the Regenerative Organic Certificate. The second one is the  Savory Institute's group, EOV, which is Ecological Outcome Verify, where they're  
**[0:12:17-0:12:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:12:17):**  actually verifying the numbers and the stats of the soil and monitoring every year.  Brilliant. Thanks so much. Now, Bryce, I wonder what regenerative dairy means for you. You run  a cow with calf system, as you mentioned, so animal welfare is clearly part of your regenerative  farming approach. Could you talk to us a bit about that and how fundamental that is to your  own definition of regenerative farming?  
**[0:12:39-0:12:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:12:39):**  Yes, of course, the cow with calf aspect of the system they operate,  that's sort of leaving the dairy calves with the cows for four months. And then instead of  separating them at that point, we actually use special quiet weaned tags to allow the calves  to stay with the mothers. And that's all the way through to housing. At that point, we sell the  dairy bull calves away for deal production. We work with a butcher for that, which ends up in  
**[0:13:02-0:13:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:13:02):**  Edinburgh in London. And dairy heifers stay in as replacements and to ultimately grow the herd  over time. The time with regenerative, I spent about three years trying to work out  in my head what regenerative meant to most people. I sat down doing the savoury course,  the people in the UK that do savoury is the BLM. And through the course started the ecological  outcome verification, I actually stopped at one point because my neighbour made a different route.  
**[0:13:27-0:13:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:13:27):**  But the sort of the definition I ended up getting was when we started using multi species herbal  lays in the farm, we stopped ploughing, we started using herbal lays and the sort of idea that I had  was could we sustain food production on farm with zero inputs? The reason being when we were  conventional, we were bringing genetically modified soy, I was thinking about the carbon emissions  that are happening on farm, the inputs we're buying, I thought, right, we've got 200 acres,  
**[0:13:52-0:13:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:13:52):**  we don't have many cows, could we grow 100% of the food that we feed those cows to produce a  human edible food and then regenerate the land so it actually better the land over time, as opposed  to having to mine somewhere else to bring into the farm to improve it. So we've now been doing that  for three years now. The change we're seeing in the farm is radical and we're seeing that the herbal  lays are working, we're growing a phenomenal amount of dry matter in those herbal lays and we  
**[0:14:17-0:14:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:14:17):**  are sustaining milk production at this level. In fact, this year in particular, we could probably  double the herd and we're looking to triple the herd in the next 10 years on the same amount of  land. So that's what we believe regenerative is, not just sustainable, but regenerative.  When we look wider into the platform that we have for other farms to sell into, we're also looking  at how we power that plant. So that's where we're looking at becoming net zero through using  
**[0:14:40-0:14:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:14:40):**  renewable technology, battery electric vehicles powered by the solar panels that we have,  putting up wind turbines, we have biomass and biogas technology coming as well. We're just  looking to basically have a hub that is completely self-sufficient and not reliant on outside sources.  So just coming back to the Cowlewood Calf, it's not that Cowlewood Calf is necessarily  something that has to be part of Regen in your own way of thinking, but it's something that you think  
**[0:15:06-0:15:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:15:06):**  works really well on your land. Yes, it does work very well on this land. The very initial reason  that we became Cowlewood Calf was, as I mentioned earlier, a week and a half, five to seven months  long winter. When we were bucket feeding calves, even with our mother's milk, when we became  pasture for life, certified, not buying grain, we've seen a massive drop off in the daily  calf weight gain. We just couldn't grow the calves and they were getting to two years old,  
**[0:15:29-0:15:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:15:29):**  they were tiny calves and we weren't calving right. And then we thought, you know, this isn't  how nature works. Nature doesn't take a calf away and bucket feed it, nature suckles a cow.  So we tried doing that and then we found out the next problem was the calves were growing like  mad to four months and then during separation, that's when they were taking that check and  losing the daily weight gain. So that was when we put the tags on them and keep them with their  
**[0:15:51-0:15:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:15:51):**  mothers until sort of seven, eight months back. And then, you know, we're now getting these really  strong heifer calves over time and it's working really well for the system.  But look, Bryce, those calves are taking a third anyway, of the milk that you're producing.  Can you still make a profit?  Yes, we can. So because we have such little input costs, you know, we're basically not  
**[0:16:12-0:16:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:16:12):**  buying anything. The biggest cost we have on the farm itself is the farming contractors coming in  to do the grass silage for us and the field work. And one day that bill will go as well once we get  a better handling of things and a bit more capital behind us. But yes, the reason that we can make it  turn over a profit is because we have zero transport miles between the cows and the processing  plant. We have got some very dedicated supporters who buy the milk. So yes, we're selling the milk  
**[0:16:35-0:16:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:16:35):**  for about 30% more than the other milk that we sell organically. But at the end of the day,  the people that want to buy this product are buying the product. And because we've got low  cost of production, we don't have this complete issue. We have to dilute costs everywhere through  milk production.  Fantastic. Now, Blake, you produce liquid or fluid milk for national sale, but you also have your own  
**[0:16:54-0:16:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:16:54):**  branded products. And on one of your farms in particular, your cattle are 100% pasture fed.  Why is it that that's just on one farm and why that farm in particular?  It happens to be our smallest farm where we have the most control. We started there with that 100%  grass fed model about 11 years ago when the large national co-op here in the United States called  Organic Valley was looking to launch a grass fed milk product, a fluid product. And so we were,  
**[0:17:23-0:17:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:17:23):**  back then, we started with 500 cows out of the 700 that they started with on three farms in  our region. And so we helped them launch that. We committed to that program for three years. And  at the end of three years, we chose to take our milk in a different direction for a lot more  money basically. The cost of that production was so much higher. There was an incredible learning  curve. Cows were really starving for nutrition and carbohydrates primarily. And so our solids  
**[0:17:52-0:17:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:17:52):**  and components had went way down on the production, not to mention that the production had gone way  down. And here we are about a dozen years later, we've switched breeds of cattle using the Fleck  V breed from Germany primarily that we just absolutely love. And so they're dual purpose.  We've got a better life cycle, I'd say, for the male calves as well as the mama cows.  And we're really happy with that farm now and the yields and production. We now market some of that  
**[0:18:19-0:18:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:18:19):**  milk ourselves as another yogurt company that has been using that milk nationally for about six,  seven years. And we have set the wheels in motion to convert another one of our dairies. And so  we'll have two dairies by this time next year on 100% grass fed. So we are moving more in that  direction now that we've got the genetics correct. Fantastic. It's really interesting always when  I'm talking to regenerative dairy farmers or regenerative farmers in general, there has been  
**[0:18:47-0:18:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:18:47):**  this need to experiment to kind of work through challenges and problems and come out the other  side. And of course, you know, we're now in the situation where we have people like yourselves  who've gone through these experiences. And so there's a degree to which your experience  de-risks the challenge for other farmers going into regenerative production in the future,  which is just fantastic. I'm just wondering, Blake, how your farms that aren't 100% pasture  
**[0:19:13-0:19:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:19:13):**  fed compare with the ones that are, and I mean, presumably you're using quite a lot less  concentrate than the mainstream dairy producers would in the rest of the USA.  Blake  Yeah. We've learned a lot, particularly this winter, we've invested a lot in our brand.  So we've kind of bet the farm on our brand working and we've been marketing our own milk for a  
**[0:19:34-0:19:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:19:34):**  little less than five years. We had a long dry winter in a sense, there's been a drought up here  in the western United States for multiple years. And so forages are hard to come by, cash flow is  hard to come by. And so we've really fed a lot less purchased feeds to our cattle this winter.  And so I'll just tell you this last month, the month of June, our 100% grass fed cows out milked  the other four hertz. And so we're really excited about that. Not only that, but as we started  
**[0:20:03-0:20:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:20:03):**  testing throughout the winter, we test milk urea nitrogen in the herds randomly. And we clearly saw  that the 100% grass fed cattle were healthier. And so they could handle the down cycle here  financially on the farm better than the rest. And so that was very, very encouraging compared to say  10 years ago with the wrong cattle out there. And they're just kind of thin and not performing and  not breeding back. And you know, it just wasn't a healthy situation. When we launched our brand,  
**[0:20:33-0:20:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:20:33):**  say six years ago, thinking that through, we decided, well, we're going to do it with grain,  because we didn't want to not have those tools in the toolbox to take better care of our cattle.  So we've learned now that, you know, maybe we could rethink that and have a little of both. And  so we do not feed very much grain to the cattle that we do feed grain to. One of the things that  concerned a lot of farmers that we've spoken to through the Regenerative Dairy Project is Green  
**[0:20:59-0:21:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:20:59):**  Wash. The idea that farmers and in particular big companies could jump on the Regen bandwagon  and misuse the word regenerative. Your claim is right out there. It's very bold. You're  fully certified. How do you demonstrate your regenerative credentials to customers, Blake?  I always make the statement that I've been saying this to my kids and to our employees for years.  We got to do the right thing at every turn. And then, you know, ultimately God is watching us  
**[0:21:24-0:21:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:21:24):**  kind of how we look at it. We didn't invent regenerative. We didn't. We're just looking at  a system that was created by somebody more powerful than us. And we're paying attention  to it. We're understanding the biology and the soil and the relationship between everything.  And we're cycling carbon back into the soil and we're doing our share to somewhat heal the planet,  if you will. So your regenerative claim is robust and it's certified and you can be loud and proud  
**[0:21:49-0:21:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:21:49):**  when you talk about it, whether that's on a carton or on your website or just talking to customers,  you know, when they come onto the farm. But are you concerned that regenerative agriculture as a  farmer led movement could be undermined by an expansion of corporate interest in this area?  Sure. I absolutely understand the question and I get bothered by that, right? I've watched the  organic industry now for 25 years and I've seen the dilution of the integrity of a lot of programs.  
**[0:22:16-0:22:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:22:16):**  100% grass fed is one that, you know, the term grass fed is thrown around all the time  and regenerative is going to be quite similar. And so now I know that retailers are willing to,  you know, put regenerative on a package, whether it's on the front panel or the back panel.  And it doesn't say certified regenerative, it just says regenerative. And you know,  what does that mean? Well, like everything else, eventually it doesn't really mean anything.  
**[0:22:39-0:22:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:22:39):**  I fight that or work on that or lean in that direction all the time to try to correct that.  And that's why we go out of our way to kind of be an example of somewhat large scale that can  have the ability to attempt to do things right and to prove that it can be done at scale.  You know, that's kind of our personal mission. That's what drives me.  I just want to do the right thing at every turn one more time.  
**[0:23:04-0:23:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:23:04):**  On your website, Bryce, you say that you farm regeneratively and organically. So thinking back  to your definition of regen dairy, how do you measure and demonstrate that regeneration to  your customers? First of all, can I just say that everything Blake has said, I would probably just  say myself, on a much smaller scale. The difference for us is, I suppose, we are probably  20 years behind you, Blake. It's our passion to grow, to get the message out there that dairy can  
**[0:23:28-0:23:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:23:28):**  be done differently. It can be done in a sort of unique way that can work with nature and, you know,  just really basically go against the rhetoric that the big dairies have had there for the past 30 or  40 years, but also show that there's power in having farmers around the place. It's our vision  to have small farmers up and down the place and we offer a platform for them to sell to the market.  The thing for us recently has been, you know, we've got a very close connection with our customers.  
**[0:23:51-0:23:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:23:51):**  The furthest our milk goes is about 100 miles. So for us, it's always been, we've never hit the  market and budget. We've had a social media page, however, so I would go out and stand in a field  and I would talk about, you know, this is what I believe regenerative agriculture is. Here's where  Hebel lays, here's where cows and calves. We invite people down to the farm, any new customers  we take on, we invite them down, you know, let's go and walk in the fields, you know, let's go and  
**[0:24:14-0:24:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:24:14):**  see the good, the bad and the ugly. Just totally honest marketing as well, you know, just telling  the truth, as you say. If everything's going wrong and it's raining and, you know, we can't get cows  out to the grass, we have to tell our customers that. If the milk tastes changes, we have to tell  our customers that. We just have to be open and honest and say, you know, this is what we get  right, this is what we get wrong and this is what we believe in. And I believe that that's where  
**[0:24:34-0:24:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:24:34):**  we've got the uniqueness in the industry and what's going on.  And of course you're organic certified, so there'll be sort of key metrics in there that you'll be  able to demonstrate in terms of regeneration. And you were talking about the EOV, the Alan Savory  process that you were training in as well. So you clearly have an understanding of the sorts of  things that you're trying to regenerate. Are you measuring any of those specifically or are you  
**[0:24:56-0:24:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:24:56):**  just sort of seeing it take place before your eyes?  We're sort of seeing it as we take place. As I mentioned earlier, we've had such a tight budget  for the past six years. We were effectively bankrupted. There was no fund that was willing  to work with us. So it's been a case of go out there with a smartphone and a clipboard  with a bit of paper. We would take a picture, we would write down what we see, do the same again  
**[0:25:15-0:25:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:25:15):**  six months or a year later. And yes, it's very basic measurements and we're not getting into  nitty-gritty of these things. We're seeing worm counts have quadrupled in the farm in three years.  We're taking pictures of areas that were really heavily poached with the cows because of the wet  weather. But we've changed that whole way of grazing onto the holistic management,  plant grazing sort of idea, which has totally changed the farm. Yes, we're seeing negatives  
**[0:25:39-0:25:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:25:39):**  as well. So we've got a lot of rush problem in the farm, which goes right back to Bunz's time,  which we need to manage better. But you know, every year I feel we're getting better yields  out the grass, better yields out the cows, and the whole farm is looking healthier. So the next  stage for us is to start measuring on Mowinsley. And you talk about things like the worm count  there. So there are things that you are measuring and you're taking those photographs. And in  
**[0:25:59-0:26:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:25:59):**  fact, actually that's quite a powerful narrative when you get into a conversation with customers  to be able to sort of explain that regeneration that's physically happening. Do you think there's  a danger that larger companies will try and water down what it means to be regenerative? And if that  is a danger, how do you think we can guard against it? I do see it as a danger. However, as Blake  touched on, every single buzzword, every single new thing is always a new thing that's going to  
**[0:26:23-0:26:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:26:23):**  get watered down. So let's take artisan, for example. 15 years ago in the UK, artisan bread  was artisan bread. It was made by one person making a similar dough bread, or one person  making a beer in a particular way. Nowadays you can go to an airport and a massive airport chain  can sell you a toasty that's made of artisan bread. And you don't find well it has nothing  to do with artisan. And it all goes back to this book. Now it's fascinating because I finished  
**[0:26:45-0:26:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:26:45):**  reading this book today, believe it or not. It's called The Purple Cow. And it's nothing to do  with cows and agriculture. It's all about marketing. And what the writer talks about is  how you have to find your purple cows. If you're driving past a herd of cows, those herd of cows  become boring after you see 10 or 12 of them. But if you saw a purple one, that would be outstanding.  Now everyone's looking for the purple cow in their industry. So regenerative agriculture seems  
**[0:27:07-0:27:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:27:07):**  to be the purple cow right now. And everyone's going to latch onto that and they're going to  water it down. So what we have to do, if we believe that regenerative is this thing that is  important, that is a way of life that we have to go forward with, we have to make sure that that's  our purple cow and hold onto that and make sure it's understood right from the family that's up  a high rise block in the middle of Glasgow to someone that's living in between five different  
**[0:27:27-0:27:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:27:27):**  dairy farms in the middle of the countryside. We have to make sure we get that message across using marketing.  I had no idea that you were breeding purple cows up in Scotland. I must come and see those at  some point. Blake, one of the challenges it seems to me is how best to scale regenerative dairy.  Now you've got one of the largest regenerative dairy farms that we've found in the world, with  your business being delivered across a number of sites, well five sites, over a large geographical  
**[0:27:53-0:27:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:27:53):**  area. How have you managed to achieve that scale while maintaining the regenerative ethic and  keeping control over standards? It's a great question. It perplexes me sometimes. Again, I think it's that  motto of trying to do things right at every turn and we literally are teaching our employees and  our managers, which is now three of our oldest children, to just keep going in this direction  and make it work. I'm a bit of a dictator in that sense that we don't let things happen.  
**[0:28:24-0:28:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:28:24):**  I don't allow an employee to say, I couldn't pull that cow out of the group. She didn't want to come.  I was like, no, no, we have dominion over the cows. We make the rules, go get her. And so I've had that  attitude for 40 years. I don't know where it came from. It's what I've got. I love the way  Bryce was talking about raising eggs calves. And we certainly looked at that because, wow, that's  the right way. We've done that when I was younger. Calves ended up a little wild because we weren't  
**[0:28:49-0:28:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:28:49):**  doing, we were putting them on nurse cows, kind of in the outback, if you will. And then we tried a  little different. And then, you know, it's just too complex in our winters that are extremely wet.  It just scares the heck out of me and how we would do that with so many animals. So we're  raising our calves. We're feeding them milk three times a day. We feed a lot of our milk to the calves.  And I mean a lot. Three times a day, probably a couple of gallons, you know, in terms of liters,  
**[0:29:15-0:29:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:29:15):**  they're probably getting three, almost three liters each feeding. You know, we feed eggs,  a lot of eggs to our calves for protein and other immune reasons. And we also feed kefir. So we're  culturing kefir with kefir grains in an old fashioned style, feeding that to baby chicks,  as well as our calves on a daily basis. And so we are absolutely going out of our way to do what we  do. It's extremely expensive. So now I'm happy to do things like this because we need to tell the  
**[0:29:45-0:29:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:29:45):**  consumer, the retailers and the world that, you know, they've got to be willing to pay for extra.  How many staff do you have?  All together right now, probably 160. I mentioned we're in three counties. We grow hay in eastern  California, the other upper corner of California, where we've got about 2000 acres of irrigated  alfalfa. And so right now in the summertime, we've probably got about 10 to 12 people over  
**[0:30:09-0:30:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:30:09):**  there full time. We also process our milk in the San Francisco Bay area in California. So that's  down the road quite a ways, about almost 380 miles from the farm. And we have 25 employees there as  well.  And each of your farms, am I right that each of your farms is run by a different member of your  family? That it's a family run business at each farm level?  
**[0:30:33-0:30:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:30:33):**  Yeah, totally. And I our family includes Santos and Adan and Pancho and Chabon and all these  people that have been with us as employees for a long time. And so yeah, we own and operate all  five farms. At this point, we also have a logo where we're now launching some, well, we have some  regenerative cheese aging, but we've been working on a powder project to bring a two powders to the  world. And so we had to partner with other farmers to do that. So we have a logo called Eco Berry,  
**[0:31:07-0:31:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:31:07):**  that is now on some infant formula cans. That means that we've basically endorsed other farms  to make milk at our standard, if you will. And it's not regenerative yet. It's not A2 always,  sometimes it is, but sometimes it isn't. There's a crisis, infant formula crisis here in the United  States right now. And so we are actually just becoming a really, I guess, significant producer  of whole milk powders for one of those companies. And we're really excited about that.  
**[0:31:38-0:31:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:31:38):**  You talk about the way in which, you know, you're still very much the boss. Do you feel that you're  running stuff from the center on those five farms? Or is it that there is, you know, a kind of a set  of principles and an ideology that's been established by you, a way of working that's  then delegated out to those different units and the different members of the family that are  running those different units? Great question. And I invite people to come see our Monday morning  
**[0:32:05-0:32:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:32:05):**  management meeting. So we start Monday morning about six o'clock, six thirty. We're a formal  meeting in our office with about 10 to 12 key players. And, you know, three of those are  our Joseph, Christian and Vanessa, our three oldest married children who work for us full time.  And then there's other folks in there, longtime employees and trusted employees. And one fellow  from the A branch. So we kind of coordinate our to do list. Everybody's got three or four pages  
**[0:32:39-0:32:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:32:39):**  of things to do short term, long term. And we're finding out what the construction guys are doing.  We do all our own maintenance and what they're doing with the feed, irrigation. Right now we  irrigate and we're harvesting a haylage. And, you know, how many truckloads of grain did we get  hauled last week? We run about 10 trucks. Our son Christian manages that. And then we're hauling  milk all over the rest of the United States. And that's a complex equation. Both Joseph and  
**[0:33:08-0:33:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:33:08):**  Christian manage that. So everybody knows what everyone else is doing. And so then after that,  we go have breakfast at our house and an A branch meeting usually at 11. And then really in a lot of  ways I'm done for the week by then. And that's crazy. That's a crazy thought. Now I can go drive  around my little old pickup with a Thistle hoe and go cut weeds and answer the phone.  So of course you've got the certification, which is underpinning all of this stuff, but really it's  
**[0:33:34-0:33:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:33:34):**  the success of this really very large business, certainly by UK standards, is because there is  this sense of responsibility, this sense of working together, of shared ownership that  seems to permeate through your business. Right, exactly.  Bryce, you're at the point where your own farm is a success and now you two want to scale.  Why do you want to grow and what are the barriers to making that step change for you?  
**[0:33:58-0:34:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:33:58):**  Yes, you're absolutely right. We do have a passion to grow. The reason we want to grow goes back to,  you know, that time that basically the farm had collapsed. You know, I'd lost my father and my two  grandparents. The business was upside down and the bank had pulled out. But we weren't the only  small family farming through that in the area at the time. So pretty much all of my father's  closest friends who are dairy farmers are now no longer dairy farmers. About 20 years ago,  
**[0:34:23-0:34:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:34:23):**  I think it was, there was around about 8,000 dairy farms in Scotland. There's now about 800.  And I think that's a crying shame. I think that the international audience of Scotland think that,  you know, dairy in Scotland should be sort of smaller scale, regenerative. I think that's the  view that Scotland puts out there, I think is that of a grass fed nation, you know, of the highlands,  of things like that. And I think that we really are in danger of losing that as a nation. And so  
**[0:34:49-0:34:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:34:49):**  I believe that for us, because we have been able to grow to the scale we are today, although it's  still very small in the industry, I think that we've, you know, we are putting a challenge up.  And I felt that we had two options. We could either stay the size we were in 2018 with 40 or  50 cows and sell to our local community. And that was that. Or we could take our consumers and the  farmers on a journey and show that the farmers didn't just have to sell to a commodity market,  
**[0:35:14-0:35:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:35:14):**  and the consumers didn't just have to buy a plastic bottle of milk and a supermarket shelf,  we could do something very different, have this connection. We quite often say we want fairness  from grass to glass. And that's absolutely true. We want fairness in our economy, fairness in our  environment and fairness in the social aspects of everything that we do. And that's why we want to  grow. Now growth for us looks like what we have done in the past. So we've recently been able to  
**[0:35:38-0:35:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:35:38):**  supply a local authority contract with milk that has zero plastic packaging. So we basically have  put small vending machines in 50 schools locally around the farm. We're delivering that with  battery electric vehicles and we're using local people to deliver that as well. So that's part  of our vision. And that's what we're looking to grow. Now the challenge for us is the fact that,  you know, as I keep mentioning five, six years ago we were bust. What we're doing is so different to  
**[0:36:06-0:36:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:36:06):**  the industry norm that financiers are quite often turned off by it. And because we've not been able  to borrow money, it's been a case of, you know, let's sell that and let's use that money to buy  something else and then buy something else. So we've never shown incredibly strong profits.  That kind of changed for us in 2021, where we were able to show a good, not strong,  particularly strong profits, but we were able to show that we could be profitable  
**[0:36:28-0:36:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:36:28):**  and that our outlook was far better. And we were able to show that through the use of  renewable technology. So our scale went against us in the fact that we couldn't deliver costs.  So we had to look differently. We had to look at renewable technology, lowering the temperature,  we pasteurised the milk to allow us to use biomass technology and just using different  efficiency models that other dairies weren't looking at. And that allowed us to grow to where  
**[0:36:51-0:36:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:36:51):**  we are today and give us the sort of outlook that we're looking for. Now fortunately, there are some  financier out there that are willing to look at it for us, but we're certainly not getting mainstream  banks looking to bite our hand off to support a tenant farm that's pretty small in the industry.  So yes, we're having some very exciting conversations with some investors,  but no one has bitten yet. But I do believe that the future of what we are trying to do in Scotland  
**[0:37:16-0:37:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:37:16):**  is quite significant. And I do see a growing trend of people looking to support this way of agriculture.  And of course, the way that you're doing things is climate friendly, it's restoring biodiversity,  it's helping to improve food security and resilience. And so the likelihood is that,  you know, these financial institutions, they will catch up with you at some point, even if  it isn't tomorrow. And I just wonder in terms of the way that you're thinking of expanding Bryce,  
**[0:37:43-0:37:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:37:43):**  whether you see this as an expansion of Bryce Cunningham's enterprise at Moscow with control  from the centre, or whether it's more expansion by replication, more of a cooperative model where  you're, as you have done with those four organic farms where you're managing the distribution,  where you're sort of, you're finding more farms that are working with you to achieve  expansion of the brand. Absolutely. We do see the future as a cooperative. So right now,  
**[0:38:11-0:38:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:38:11):**  the four farms we buy from, they're actually part of a cooperative called Omsco. You know,  we've had opportunities to go direct to farm, buy milk from them and do this, that and the next  thing, but we didn't want to, we wanted to remain part of the cooperative. And the reason for that  is I believe firmly and so I could walk out that door tomorrow and have a heart attack, I could be  hit by a bus, I could be run over by a bull, you know, that's happened before I've been in hospital  
**[0:38:33-0:38:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:38:33):**  because of a bull hit me. So anything could happen to me, but it's not me that's going to take this  business forward. It's going to be the community, it's going to be the consumer, it's going to be  the farmers. I just believe that the vision of Omsco, you know, it can grow and grow and grow  and I believe that the way the future's coming and the way that people are talking nowadays,  I believe it's one of the only options out there to grow sustainably.  
**[0:38:53-0:38:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:38:53):**  Thank you both. This has been so interesting, but Blake, just before we finish, I want to come back  to something that you implied earlier, started talking about in terms of your motivation for  being regenerative. Now you're a Christian and this is an important part of your personal and  family heritage. And I wonder how does your Christianity affect the decisions that you've  taken on your farm from the way that you manage your soil to the way that you manage your people?  
**[0:39:18-0:39:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:39:18):**  When our children were little, we sent them to a Christian church again, you know, five kids that  were born in a nine-year period. And I remember there was little rubber bracelets that they used  to wear coming home from school and church and said, you know, what would Jesus do? And so I  think that's really where I got this philosophy about do the right thing at every turn. I think  that's what Jesus would do. And so that along with this motivation to get into organics and  
**[0:39:47-0:39:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:39:47):**  understand it and then how do we make it work because everybody knows that when you, you know,  kind of leave the industrial conventional model of farming, your yields are going to go down.  And, you know, that happens generally when you have a broken system, I think, or a not sustainable  method and system. And so as we learn that, wow, it doesn't have to happen, and it doesn't take  10 years to recover land, you can do it in two or three when you understand the system. And the  
**[0:40:16-0:40:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:40:16):**  system is all there and God gave us dominion over the animals and the birds, the fish, you know,  everything, all the creepy crawlers and the earth, the earth, Mother Earth is, it's biblical to take  care of it. And it's the earth's job, the soil's job to be the womb of whatever we plant and  harvest. And that's there for mankind to take advantage of, in a sense, not in a corrupt way,  but to feed each other and to work. And so it really hurts me to see neighbors and neighbors  
**[0:40:51-0:40:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:40:51):**  are in other states or on the other side of the fence, harming their soil in a way that it's  harming their checkbook, and it's harming the people that are trying to live and eat off that  farm. And so, you know, this is a way for us to get back to the Garden of Eden, in a sense, where  plants grew to the maximum potential and the earth wasn't corrupted or possessed in a negative way.  And so just really trying to bring everything back in harmony, and harmony is when nature and  
**[0:41:21-0:41:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:41:21):**  the environment, you know, we're sequestering carbon and we're breathing clean air. That's,  and that's, for me, that's all biblically based and it just makes sense. And so it feels good.  I think that's how that plays into our Christian roots, in a sense.  Jason Vale,  Thanks so much, Blake. That's clearly such a big motivator for you. And Bryce,  
**[0:41:39-0:41:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:41:39):**  I'm going to put you on the spot here because, you know, you have gone through such an upheaval  in terms of, you know, where the farm was seven years ago and where you've got it to now,  the decisions that you've taken. And you must have been through some really low points as well as,  you know, the higher points that you're at now. What is it that's driven you? What's the thing  that's made you want to do what you do now? Blake  
**[0:42:29-0:42:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:42:29):**  You know, I had all these things ringing true in my head and I thought, you know what, no,  that doesn't feel right. What felt right was how my grandfather farmed in 1948 when it came to  Miskiil. It had no chemical fertilisers, the tractor was a new invention, you know,  they didn't have the massive compaction, the massive issues, the massive single crops that  we have today. And I thought, you know, let's just do it. It feels right. We're going to do it.  
**[0:42:49-0:42:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:42:49):**  And thankfully for us, we've been supported by an incredible amount of customers for that. And  we're going to grow the business off the back of that as well. So, yeah, that's one for me.  Jason Vale,  thanks so much, both of you. That's bringing us to the end of the program with that really  sort of personal take on regenerative farming and on your own motivations.  
**[0:43:05-0:43:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:43:05):**  That's all we have time for. It's been absolutely fascinating to talk to you both. I'd like to thank  my guests, Bryce Cunningham from Miskiilfarm.co.uk and Blake Alexander from alexanderfamilyfarm.com.  Regen Dairy is a partnership project of Farmwell and FAI Farms. You can find out more at regendairy.org  and you can join the conversation on Twitter by searching for Farm Gate Podcast. If you've enjoyed  listening, please come back and listen to more. Tell your friends, like us, review us and share  
**[0:43:34-0:43:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Scaling-regenerative-dairy-e1m36t3#t=0:43:34):**  our links. I've been Finn LoKusteyn. Bye for now.  