### Farm Gate  (2022-09-30)
**[0:00:00-0:00:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to Farmgate. I'm Finnlow Kustein, the Chief Executive of Farmwell and founder  of the Food and Global Security Network. Small abattoirs are essential infrastructure. Whether  you're an agro-ecological farmer bringing your livestock to market, a customer wanting  locally produced higher-welfare meat and dairy, or an environmentalist searching for solutions  to the ecological crises we all face. Sadly, small abattoirs are in serious decline, seen  
**[0:00:30-0:00:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:00:30):**  by government as a nice-to-have that serves the middle classes, rather than a must-have  to help deliver good climate, biodiversity and soil security outcomes and to support  rural economies and farming communities. Another nail was recently hammered into the small  abattoir coffin as Metric's abattoir in Glossop closed for business. In this programme, I  talk to John Metric, Master Butcher and Chairman of the Abattoir Sector Group, Simon Docherty,  
**[0:00:55-0:01:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:00:55):**  a former President of the British Veterinary Association, and Hannah Thorogood, an agro-ecological  livestock farmer based in Lincolnshire. Welcome all. John, what happened? Why have you had  to close Metric's abattoir? I think the basic reason is staff shortages, in that we lost  a main slaughterman and two butchers within a very short period of time, which didn't  really give us a choice because if we moved a butcher into the abattoir, then we're shorter  
**[0:01:22-0:01:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:01:22):**  butchers. And if we kept going like with the abattoir, then we didn't have the butchers  to butcher the meat. So that's what's happened. It was caused, well, the initial catalyst  for this was that we had an inexperienced OB, a official veterinarian in the abattoir,  who unfortunately made some errors with their interpretation of regulation and overstretched  their authority in the plant. And this caused the slaughterman to walk out. And although  
**[0:01:50-0:01:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:01:50):**  I had apologies from both the Evil and Jones, who were the contractors for the Food Standards  Agency and also from the Food Standards Agency themselves, this particular employee decided  that he didn't want the scrutiny that he was under anymore with inexperienced people overseeing  what his work. And also the fact that he obviously had things like CCTV, measuring the stuns  and the cloud, which is all fair enough for due diligence. Well, add to that an inexperienced  
**[0:02:19-0:02:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:02:19):**  OB over his shoulder while he's doing his work, he just decided he no longer wanted  to carry on in the trade. And unfortunately, two butchers followed him. So a sad situation,  but something that's really been forced on us and something that we've been highlighting  to the Food Standards Agency for a long time. We'd rather have an experienced OB in there  than inexperienced, but I'm afraid COVID and Brexit have meant that 70% of the OVs that  
**[0:02:47-0:02:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:02:47):**  are employed by Evil and Jones are apparently new employees. We ended up with full veterinary  attendance because we upped the numbers that we were doing through COVID and we fell into  a bracket, which meant that they wanted full OB presence and full OB inexperienced presence  has tipped us over the edge.  John, we're going to come on to the OB issue a bit later in a bit more detail, because  
**[0:03:11-0:03:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:03:11):**  we've got Simon here to sort of talk around the role of an official veterinarian and you  know what they do. But within both elements of your answer there, there was the issue  over staff, whether it's trying to recruit good OVs or trying to recruit slaughtermen.  Now, we've heard this a lot that it's difficult to get staff for slaughterhouses, whether  large or small. Has that always been your experience?  
**[0:03:33-0:03:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:03:33):**  We've been very fortunate in that we've actually managed to train local people up, you know,  to be our slaughtermen. And the young lad who's left was an apprentice, you know, who  we trained up from scratch. So we haven't really been dependent on overseas labour.  And it's tended to be farmers' sons who perhaps didn't have quite enough income on the farm,  who would work in the abattoir part of the time, and then actually go back to work on  
**[0:03:56-0:04:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:03:56):**  the farm. So it's not something, and certainly in our history, we've never encountered three  main cogs leaving at the same time. But it is something that's there in the industry.  We know there's a great shortage of both abattoir workers and OVs.  Now, when we're talking about abattoirs, there's, you know, there is a great variance. And if  I think of a large industrial scale slaughterhouse, like for example, the one at Merthyr Tydfil,  
**[0:04:20-0:04:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:04:20):**  then perhaps I'm thinking of something which at least in my mind is open kind of 24-7.  Small abattoirs, very different. What do we mean by a small abattoir? How is it defined?  And how many hours a week are you open?  Yeah, there are different definitions, Finn Lohan, that the basis of a small abattoir  is that they slaughter animals at the beginning of the week, and at the end of the week, they'll  
**[0:04:40-0:04:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:04:40):**  have the meat prepared either for a retail operation or to supply them to farmers. So  the definition in the regulations is discontinuous slaughter. So they'll slaughter one, two,  or three days a week. The rest of the week will be in preparation of products to add  value to the farmers' meat. So that's how they work. Now, the definition at the moment  that the UK government is using is a thousand livestock units. And to explain a livestock  
**[0:05:06-0:05:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:05:06):**  unit would be one beast, six pigs, and 20 lambs, approximately. So that's the limit  at which they recognize small abattoirs. There have been other definitions. The 5% rule,  which is used by some EU states, means that a small abattoir can be defined as a sector  that does less than 5% of national production. And that's something the abattoir sector  group has been trying to get the government to actually recognize. And that would have  
**[0:05:33-0:05:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:05:33):**  put our units up to 2,000 units, and we would have probably been able to have part-time  veterinary supervision, and we might have avoided what's happened. But that's gone  now. And this thousand unit limit is what was brought in during COVID. The FSA did actually  average the units out over three years, you know, to try and take account of the COVID  effect. But unfortunately, we were still 10% over. And at the time, we talked to the FSA  
**[0:05:59-0:06:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:05:59):**  about this, saying that obviously the COVID effect had lessened, and we thought we'd  be under 1,000 units. We were told that we'd have to have full OV supervision for a year  before it would be reviewed. And that has changed now, and the FSA actually would review  it. And they're even saying to us, obviously now, because you closed, if you reopened after  Christmas, you'd definitely be under 1,000 units. Unfortunately, in business, it's not  
**[0:06:19-0:06:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:06:19):**  that easy to pick up and put down customers.  That was my next question. Yeah. Are you able to reopen?  We're not at the moment. We haven't got the staff to do it. We're busy training up butchers  at the moment. We've got four apprentices who are undergoing intensive training. We've  got to look after the butcher aspect. First, I think the problem is that what we need is  
**[0:06:38-0:06:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:06:38):**  this risk-based proportional regulation to create an environment where we can see succession  in the small-habitoire sector, where we can be confident that we can train young people  up again, and they're not going to be faced with the same problems that there is at the  moment in the sector.  If you were over that limit, and that was part of the problem, and therefore became  
**[0:06:58-0:07:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:06:58):**  defined as what? A large abattoir at that point, what was the impediment to just carrying  on, but as a larger abattoir?  The problem is that because of the way the small abattoirs work, they work very differently  than large abattoirs. Large abattoirs are based on throughputs, where you've basically  got a line system and everybody's operating on that line. The idea is obviously to get  
**[0:07:21-0:07:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:07:21):**  the job done as efficiently and as quickly as possible. The small abattoirs don't work  like that. I think the main problem for us is the fact that we've got a situation where  we've got OVs coming into a small, compliant plant that was doing 1,300 units on cold inspection  in the middle of COVID, was doing approximately just over 1,000 units now, and yet we've got  double the amount of veterinary supervision. That is really the crux of this, is that we  
**[0:07:49-0:07:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:07:49):**  haven't got this risk-based proportional system. You've got OVs who are extremely qualified  people doing menial tasks sometimes, tasks that if the regulation allowed could be delegated  to either the food business operator or a meat hygiene operative. That is not something  that's able to be done at the moment. The consequence of that is sometimes you can get  OVs who aren't experienced or who are over picky over the regulations, who don't understand  
**[0:08:16-0:08:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:08:16):**  them or just downright bored because it's not a line system where the carcasses are  rattling through. They're basically twiddling their thumbs waiting for the next one. That's  not a good use of such an experienced resource. That's something we've been arguing for a  while.  Clearly this has had an impact on you and on your business and an emotional toll because  
**[0:08:36-0:08:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:08:36):**  the abattoir has been in your family for five generations. But what's the impact on the  local community?  I think the impact, I mean the first impact we've had to make sure is that obviously we're  still running as a business. We have a busy retail book to shop and bakery and online  and we just have to reassure our customers that we're still dealing with the same local  
**[0:08:54-0:08:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:08:54):**  farmers. We still have a cutting room that's open but we're having to take carcass meat  in now. The farmers are taking to other small abattoirs to be processed and brought back  to us. So that's the first thing. So for the safety of our own business, we've really been  stressing that locally. Same meat, same farms, same process of butchering, same hanging,  everything like that. Having said that, I can't say that we haven't lost an element  
**[0:09:18-0:09:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:09:18):**  of control because we have. But the main effect of the Closurist Abattoir is on the 200 small  livestock farmers who use that as a facility in order to get their meat from the farm to  the local customers. And they're the people who it's extremely difficult to deal with  because they're asking where they can go, you know, who will take my stock, who will  butcher them to the standard that you butcher to, who will add value to them and make them  
**[0:09:43-0:09:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:09:43):**  into four kinds of sausages, three kinds of bacon, you know, to mean that kind of thing,  which is what the farmers want. You know, they don't want something that's cut into  three pieces anymore. They want the actual value added product so that they can maximise  their returns. And obviously when the market turns down, you know, and prices are poor,  you know, then obviously the small Abattoir is a good option for farmers and that they  
**[0:10:05-0:10:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:10:05):**  don't have to take the ridiculous Sicily price that might be offered on the market, you know,  for all their hard work. They can actually take it to an Abattoir and realise some of  the margin that would ordinarily have been realised just by the retailer.  Well, we're joined by a farmer, Hannah Thoregood. And Hannah, you farm in a different part of  the country, but obviously you use small Abattoirs. Why are they so important for farmers like  
**[0:10:29-0:10:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:10:29):**  yourself who sell direct to the public? What do they offer that larger Abattoirs don't?  Yeah, it's a completely different experience. I think, as John was just saying there about  his 200 small farm customers, my heart really goes out to them because it could completely  ruin your business, your farm business to lose your Abattoir. I think one of the primary  things for me as a farmer is, and for so many farmers that use the small Abattoir, is that  
**[0:10:54-0:10:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:10:54):**  we can really have confidence in a higher welfare for the animals. When you've got that  contact with the killman, you've got the contact with the person who's going to be doing the  work, you really know that you're taking them to something smaller, calmer, you know, it's  a much more positive experience, I believe. Another major part of it, I think, is the  fact that smaller Abattoirs are of course going to be closer to the farmers. So there's  
**[0:11:17-0:11:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:11:17):**  a lower carbon emissions for the transportation of the animals to get there and back, lower  costs in transport. Of course, it comes back down to the stress on the animals as well  when you can make that journey into the minute. It's a completely different experience for  that animal than sometimes having to go hours to a nearby Abattoir or a good Abattoir. The  thing a small Abattoir can really provide is flexibility and farmers, that's invaluable  
**[0:11:43-0:11:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:11:43):**  to farmers that we, you know, we have to move and sway with the climate, with the weather,  with the trends of the market. I can WhatsApp message my Abattoir, you know, one day and  get animals in just a couple of days later if I need to. That's a fantastic contact to  be able to have. It also allows us flexibility around what our customers want. You know,  a lot of us small farmers are doing direct sales and so we can really work with the Abattoir.  
**[0:12:09-0:12:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:12:09):**  Our customers can be quite picky about what they want at the end of the day and small  Abattoirs have that flexibility that they can do that, make those different cuts, produce  at different times. You know, there's a lot of flexibility to be had.  So that relationship between the farmer and the small Abattoir is a relationship that's  actually passed on down the chain, you know, through to the wholesalers that you may be  
**[0:12:33-0:12:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:12:33):**  selling to, you know, for shops or to individual customers themselves. And when you talk about,  you know, taking your stock to market at a couple of days notice, taking them to the  Abattoir, those are unlikely to be full trailers, are they? They might just be one or two animals.  Yeah, it can completely vary. We, you know, sometimes it's just one cow, one pig, you  know, a few lambs. Working with small Abattoirs, you can really work with the quantities that  
**[0:12:56-0:13:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:12:56):**  you need and we can fit around each other as well. You know, there's a, it's a two way  streak because obviously Abattoirs have their very, very busy periods and we can communicate  with each other back and forth about when it's going to be best to work for both sides  of it. I think the other side of it brings in that  kind of direct contact between the Abattoir and the farmer is that human connection. You  
**[0:13:16-0:13:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:13:16):**  know, it can be a really isolating job being a farmer out in the field, struggling with  the weather on different times and up against it in many, many different ways. And when  you go to your Abattoir and you know the person that you're dealing with, you know the person  at the end of the phone, you know, you know, it makes a massive difference I think to the  welfare of the farmer as well as the welfare of the animals to have that direct human contact.  
**[0:13:38-0:13:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:13:38):**  What you're describing there Hannah seems a world away from the sort of industrialised  food processes that so many of us are aware of. And clearly the government feels that  small Abattoirs and local food are just an obsession of the middle classes, that your  customers are middle class customers and therefore if they want to pay a bit more for their  meat they can pay a bit more and that will pay for the cost of the Abattoir. Where most  
**[0:14:02-0:14:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:14:02):**  people get their sausages and steaks from supermarkets linked to those big industrialised  slaughter units. Isn't there a degree to which that's true?  I think there is a degree to which that's true, but I think there's also something to  look at what do we mean by the middle classes. And I think often when we're talking about  then that demographic, we hear about more of them because they're often the empowered,  
**[0:14:23-0:14:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:14:23):**  educated, a little bit of disposable income so they can actually make a louder noise about  what they believe in and how they want to be eating, how they want to be consuming.  I think those folks who are slightly more aware of their food and have that slightly  more disposable income to be able to make those choices, of course they're going to  be the ones that are going to be going for the local food. However it's not representative  
**[0:14:47-0:14:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:14:47):**  of all the customers at all. I think the thing that we really need to be very realistic about  is a local food network is the only way there is a future of food. The industrialised food  system is entirely dependent on low cost available fossil fuels. It's the only way we can have  an industrial system and as those fossil fuels get more and more expensive, as we start looking  at the energy crisis, the price of fuels going up. The only resilience that we have is on  
**[0:15:12-0:15:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:15:12):**  small scale food networks and that's not just for the middle class, that's for everybody  to be able to access food.  It seems to me that the government position is a very short term position. It's about  supplying the existing market rather than thinking about what that market will be or  should be in the future and therefore helping the infrastructure that we have now to remain  
**[0:15:32-0:15:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:15:32):**  and growing new infrastructure so that we're building that more localised, that more secure  market in the future Hannah.  Yeah absolutely and I think what's happening now is a much better awareness of food with  our youngsters. There's many more people asking questions. It's being taught in schools about  food choices and where food comes from so those are our consumers for tomorrow. We need  
**[0:15:54-0:15:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:15:54):**  to make sure the infrastructure is in place so that when they're the ones that are going  to be buying the food, everything is there ready for them.  Simon you used to be the chairman of the Abattoir Sector Group before Jon and as a vet, I'm  just wondering if you could riff a little bit on some of the issues that we've been  covering. So Jon was starting to talk about a risk based system and the need for a risk  
**[0:16:14-0:16:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:16:14):**  based system. He was talking about the role of the OV and I just wonder if you have any  immediate thoughts about things that Jon's been saying so far.  Yeah so you're absolutely right. The Abattoir Sector Group was established what two and  a half years ago now and it was very much on the back of a number of reports that had  been written about the sector. I had the privilege I suppose during my time as an officer of  
**[0:16:39-0:16:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:16:39):**  the British Veterinary Association to be involved with the All Party Parliamentary Group for  Animal Welfare report on the provision of small abattoirs and going into the future  and how they played a very important part as part of shortening supply chains and dealing  with some of the issues that you've heard about already in terms of reducing the distance  maybe animals are having to travel to local abattoirs, particularly in remote areas. Offering  
**[0:17:08-0:17:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:17:08):**  that choice as part of a sustainable network going forwards was something we felt was very  important. Let's be clear, some of the regulation that we've been talking about I think everyone  is content that we need some regulation in the system. Regulation in itself will give  retailers and consumers an element of confidence in the product, in the domestic market and  certainly when we're looking at export trade arrangements and looking at export markets  
**[0:17:40-0:17:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:17:40):**  they're providing a degree of confidence there as well.  And Simon, I'm sorry to cut you off but at the same time I just want to go into that  regulation thing in slightly more detail because I think actually there's a historical context  there which is quite important because looking back to the 1980s there was clearly a wide  variance in terms of abattoir standards. For example in terms of environmental health and  
**[0:18:00-0:18:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:18:00):**  welfare outcomes. So before we think about how the regulation might change in the future  could you give us a bit of a context why that regulation was changed and tightened in the  first place and what impact that had?  Yeah, so certainly I mean I think you know we're now in 2022 so in that intervening sort  of 40 year period we've known, we understand an awful lot more and I'll give you a couple  
**[0:18:24-0:18:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:18:24):**  of examples. We now know much more about the physiology of that conversion of muscle into  meat and we know that reducing stress on the animals during transport, coming into the  leverage, allowing them to settle, good handling in the slaughter line right up to the point  of stunning and then kill means that you will end up with a better product at the end of  the day. An animal that's really stressed coming in you'll tend to end up with meat  
**[0:18:54-0:18:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:18:54):**  that's quite tough and you know certainly in terms of beef you know there's a likelihood,  a higher likelihood of ending up with what's called dark firm dry meat and then in terms  then of you know in terms of pork you can end up with something that's called pale soft  and exudative and where animals are sort of highly stressed. So we now know there is a  direct link between welfare and the quality of the product. Taking that a step further  
**[0:19:22-0:19:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:19:22):**  and you know and that's why you know you've heard from from John and from Hannah as to  why the small abattoir can offer a really good solution around you know improved welfare  of being able to bring that small group of animals in, settle them quite quickly and  get them get them onto the line. There's also then elements related to food safety and there's  no doubt again going back to the 1980s into the 1990s you know mid 1980s was when we were  
**[0:19:50-0:19:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:19:50):**  first discovering BSE. Although it is likely that there were probably cases of BSE that  went back into the late 70s and then going through into the 1990s or some very high profile  cases around things like E.coli O157 and Compilobacter and so on. So look in that intervening period  I think there has been a fantastic shift within the abattoir and a lot of that was achieved  quite rightly by vets working with abattoir operators and working with meat hygiene inspectors  
**[0:20:21-0:20:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:20:21):**  meeting, working with other abattoir staff through appropriate levels of education and  training and improvement to look at hygiene, to look at animal welfare, look at animal  health and there is to meet that expectation of the big retailers, the smaller retailers,  all of the supply chains and ultimately the consumer that we have been improving animal  health and welfare in our meat production but also then improving hygiene and food safety  
**[0:20:52-0:20:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:20:52):**  along the way as well.  So if we were to start thinking about some of the issues that John raised earlier on  around there not being enough of a risk-based approach, around the role of OVs and the way  in which OVs can provide a really good experience for the people working in that small abattoir  if they are working with them or can just be pains in the backside. So I just wonder  
**[0:21:13-0:21:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:21:13):**  how we address some of those issues in the future.  Yeah, and look any regulation, I think one of the sort of buzz words at the minute is  proportionate and dynamic. So it is taking the rule book and applying it appropriately.  It needs to be fair, it needs to be equitable, it does need to be dynamic, it needs to be  proportionate, it needs to be risk-based. And I think that is where you end up making  
**[0:21:38-0:21:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:21:38):**  the best use of the expertise that is available. So as John said, rather than just having this  kind of arbitrary cut off that whenever you go over a certain number of animals you have  to fill out full-time OV provision. That means that in effect you have a qualified vet at  a time when we have a shortage of vets across the country, you have a qualified vet spending  a lot of time in the abattoir that they don't really need to be there. It is important certainly  
**[0:22:05-0:22:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:22:05):**  that they are there to do the anti-mortem inspection, to see the animals coming in,  to see if there is any signs, look at the cleanliness of the animals coming into the  abattoir, look at the welfare, make sure there is no injuries. That is a really critical  part. The role of the OV goes right through to supporting the meat hygiene operation as  well. So looking for aspects and supporting the function of the meat hygiene inspectors  
**[0:22:31-0:22:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:22:31):**  in that. But again, technology has moved on. We have all sorts of sensor technology now  available to support the work of the vet and the meat hygiene inspector. We have the ability  to do, as John mentioned, we have the ability to do cold inspections. So where we can do  some of that inspection, maybe the following day or two days later, that is also possible.  So it is making the best use of that.  
**[0:22:56-0:23:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:22:56):**  So you are suggesting that the OV may not need to be there at all at the point of slaughter.  That actually they could be there a couple of days afterwards inspecting the meat?  Yeah, I mean certainly in terms of being there at the point of slaughter, I think there is  general agreement again that from the point of view of having a degree of oversight of  that. John mentioned the fact that, you know, that abattoirs have CCTV now. I mean the CCTV  
**[0:23:19-0:23:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:23:19):**  was installed very much as an adjunct alongside the vet and re-presence. And certainly I don't  think what we are talking about here is completely removing vets from abattoirs at the point  of slaughter. But do they need to watch every single animal? I mean certainly there are  other ways now of monitoring the effectiveness of stunning and monitoring the time to kill  and ensuring that welfare outcomes are met in that respect.  
**[0:23:44-0:23:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:23:44):**  And so for example, could technology do that? I mean if you've got a vet, for example, that's  behind a bank of monitors where they're working with a number of small slaughterhouses rather  than simply one where there are algorithms that pick up changes in sound levels, for  example, that can monitor the amount of time taken for an individual animal to get from  the point of stunning to the point where they're hanging. Is that a possibility or are we still  
**[0:24:13-0:24:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:24:13):**  a step away from that?  Yeah, I think we're still a step back from that, okay. You know, I think that technology  can be developed, but there needs to be an incentive for that innovation. And that's  something that the Abattoir Sector Group has been calling for. And we've been looking at  where there can be more research carried out in that. And as I say, it's not all about  
**[0:24:36-0:24:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:24:36):**  replacing vets and abattoirs at this point in time. And I think there's general agreement  on that.  Certainly vets will always require a bit of time to catch up on a bit of paperwork in  their office, but where there is just a need to have a vet there, you know, just arbitrarily,  there's no real fulfillment for the vet. You know, we don't spend five years in vet school,  
**[0:24:56-0:25:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:24:56):**  plus X amount of time doing extra training to become an official veterinarian, to then  set about, as John said, you know, sometimes it is twiddling their thumbs. Vets, yeah,  I mean, absolutely. Antimortem inspection, point of slaughter, post-mortem, potentially  cold inspection at a different time. But that will generate a bit of flexibility in the  system that they don't necessarily need to be there for the full time. And I think that's  
**[0:25:25-0:25:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:25:25):**  what we want to be working towards, rather than just having these kind of arbitrary situations  where yes, you know, once you go over a certain number, you're obliged to have a vet there  full time. As John said, the workflow is very different. I mean, having a vet there all  the time in a high throughput abattoir makes absolute sense because there are constantly  animals coming in, there are constantly animals being killed, there's constantly meat inspection  
**[0:25:50-0:25:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:25:50):**  to be done, you know, as part of that high throughput. But in that situation that John  was describing, where maybe the, you know, the animals are coming in Monday, Tuesday,  they're maybe killed Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, do we have to then have a vet there on Friday  or Saturday or whatever, you know, there are other ways of kind of doing that workflow  that will actually fit the needs of a small abattoir. We want vets doing veterinary work.  
**[0:26:17-0:26:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:26:17):**  We don't necessarily want vets hanging about because that's not, as I say, it's not fulfilling  for the vet in terms of their career structure, career progression, satisfaction in the workplace.  BVI, you know, the British Veterinary Association has been doing a huge amount of work about,  you know, satisfaction of in the workplace, having a good workplace, what a good workplace  means. And it's not necessarily good for anybody to have a vet hanging about twiddling their  
**[0:26:41-0:26:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:26:41):**  limbs, you know.  John, when you were talking earlier, the OV seemed to be very much at the centre of the  story that you were telling about the closure of your abattoir. Do you like what you're  hearing from Simon there? Does that start to address some of the problems that you were  raising?  
**[0:26:56-0:27:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:26:56):**  Obviously, I've worked with Simon a while, you know, to me, and I agree with what he  said, and he knows, you know, to me, what the situations and Simon's been given lots  of practical examples of things when they do go awry, as of the FSA and DEFRA. Yeah.  So, you know, the vet has a crucial role in abattoirs. It's getting the right level of  role for, you know, the risk and getting the proportionality of that attendance correct.  
**[0:27:22-0:27:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:27:22):**  But I think at the moment, one of the things that's worrying me more than anything is the  fact of the inexperience of vets that are coming in at the moment, who basically are  there because the regulation says we need a vet there, not necessarily that they have  the right experience. They're coming from countries all over the world, have different  systems. We're that short of them because of COVID and Brexit that their actual induction  
**[0:27:47-0:27:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:27:47):**  has got shorter and shorter and shorter, and they're basically thrust straight into that  environment. And it's not very fair to them either. It would be much better to actually  amend the regulation and get some primary legislation in there so that we can determine  for our, as a country, you know, what the level of veterinary attendance needs to be  and how we measure that and how we safeguard animal welfare and food safety at the same  
**[0:28:11-0:28:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:28:11):**  time. But we don't go over the top and we don't bring people in. I mean, at the moment,  because of the shortage of vets, obviously there is a language requirement, you know,  that's been set, you know, and they can get a temporary permit, I think for six months,  you know, in which they've got to be able to pass this language exam. And if they don't  pass that language exam, then basically they have to leave. Well, this is like a, it's  
**[0:28:34-0:28:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:28:34):**  like a conveyor belt, you know what I mean? So you basically got people who don't pass  the language requirement and then the next lot of vets come in. Now, my question to that  is how does that work for consistency? How does that work, you know what I mean, for  OVs to get the respect, you know, that they deserve because of the qualifications that  they've worked so hard to get? And the FSA know that, and they say that the one size  
**[0:28:58-0:29:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:28:58):**  fits all regulation does not work, particularly for small abattoirs. They recognise that themselves.  We're not, we're not saying stuff that the FSA doesn't, doesn't actually recognise, but  what we are saying is that we've pointed out the problems. We've actually unfortunately  got an example of what can happen, you know, where one of these problems isn't addressed  with my own business, but what's actually happening on the ground? What is actually  
**[0:29:22-0:29:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:29:22):**  going to change here that's going to make small abattoirs viable for the future?  So if the FSA, the Food Standards Agency, understands the problem to a large extent,  it appreciates and accepts that, that, that, that there's something that needs to happen.  What, what is the blocker? What's stopping this? Is it parliament? Is it Defra that's  blocking, or is there something at some stage in the FSA?  
**[0:29:43-0:29:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:29:43):**  I think there's this, there's several blocks. Obviously we've come out of the EU, we're  on this one size fits all and that's, you know, that's, that's, that's where we are  at the moment. Now, if we were to defer from that and to have like domestic regulation  and export regulation, then naturally the EU commission and other trade partners would  want to see a robust traceability system that could actually demonstrate that the, the,  
**[0:30:09-0:30:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:30:09):**  the domestic production is not entering exports. Yeah. And that is something I don't believe  that we've actually got at the moment. And that's something that's really essential.  And if we are going to diverge into domestic regulation, the domestic production, and we're  going to have export, then we need to be able to have a traceability system that will stand  up to scrutiny from those people. So that, that's one of the blocks. The other block  
**[0:30:33-0:30:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:30:33):**  would be from industry itself, because obviously we've got some big players who are involved,  you know, in a, in a, you know, a valuable export market and anything that rocks that  boat, you know, to mean by bringing other legislation, they obviously wouldn't support.  And even like the medium, some of the medium sized abattoirs who are into export are nervous  of that. So I think it's really having the gumption really to, to get a traceability  
**[0:30:58-0:31:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:30:58):**  system that stands up to scrutiny. I think that's the first thing, right the way through  from the animals themselves, right through to the animal byproducts at the end of production.  We need that desperately. We need, I think, I think really we're, we're really calling  on the small livestock farmers who depend on small abattoirs for all of their living  or some of their living, you know, on their farms to actually put pressure on different  
**[0:31:22-0:31:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:31:22):**  governments and say to them, look, we need these businesses here in the future. We need  to be able to have a domestic system. We need local supply chains. Farmer, butcher, customer,  you know, is a, is a good, short, traceable supply chain. And you should, and you should  be supporting that because I think both industry and government at a policy level in Defra  are nervous about changing anything. And obviously the point to the fact that, oh, it's a small  
**[0:31:47-0:31:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:31:47):**  sector. I think small abattoirs in 2021 did 1% of beef, you know, as a production, which  is obviously very low. But if you actually included the abattoirs between 1000 and 5000  units, which is still very small, then you're talking about 6%, you know, if you add the  two together. I mean, don't forget some pig abattoirs are doing between 25 and 30,000  pigs a week, you know what I mean? So, you know, something that's doing 5000 units a  
**[0:32:15-0:32:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:32:15):**  year to me is still a small abattoir, even, even if the definition's not there.  Jason Vale,  It's interesting because a lot of that seems to come down to prioritisation, that there's  a general acceptance that things could be improved for small abattoirs, but there's  a competition in terms of policy development and the time that civil servants have. And  
**[0:32:36-0:32:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:32:36):**  at the end of the day, the government seems pretty happy with the direction of travel.  It believes that larger abattoirs deliver greater efficiency, cheaper killing, better  environmental and welfare quality, which comes back to that, you know, issue that we were  talking about earlier. Why is it that you think they're wrong and they should prioritise  this?  
**[0:32:56-0:33:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:32:56):**  I think what we've seen is through various crises, whether they be an animal disease  or diseases like COVID, you know what I mean? We've seen the small abattoirs actually  step up to the plate and increase production. We've seen them actually try and fill that  void, you know what I mean? And once they're there, they won't be able to do that. They  won't be able to support farmers, you know, when prices are low, you know, that they can  
**[0:33:16-0:33:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:33:16):**  actually market their own meat. They're not going to be there anymore to do that. So this  is really to do with the resilience of the system that we've got. And really, do we  want to be just a lot of very, very big abattoirs with no local meat and with animals travelling  further to slaughter? I mean, you know, I don't for a minute, you know, say that these  animals aren't transported, you know, to high animal welfare standards. They are. But, you  
**[0:33:41-0:33:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:33:41):**  know, there's nothing, I think the small abattoirs when we did a survey of 10 all over the country,  they were travelling less than 35 miles to slaughter, 95% or above of their animals.  Surely if we're talking about the environment, you know what I mean, and the transport of  animals and the carbon footprint of that small abattoirs are valuable from that point of  view. They're also valuable in that quite a few small abattoirs are processing animals  
**[0:34:05-0:34:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:34:05):**  that are byproducts of environmental schemes as well. You know, it's land that's managed  for the environment and these are byproducts that are then turned into meat.  So this comes back to not reacting to the now but actually planning and developing the  infrastructure that we're going to need in the future. And you mentioned resilience there.  I mean, and resilience to me, often it's about environmental resilience, climate resilience.  
**[0:34:29-0:34:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:34:29):**  But if we go back to the pandemic and we look across to the United States where they have,  you know, very, very large slaughterhouses, when there were outbreaks of COVID and those  slaughterhouses had to all but shut down, that created enormous problems for farmers  and whole food chains on the ground. It's very much putting all your eggs in one  basket isn't it? And you'd think that these situations that we've come across like would  
**[0:34:51-0:34:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:34:51):**  make us wary of actually doing that. But it doesn't seem to be that way at the moment.  Simon, just thinking about the OV issue in particular and anything else, I guess, that  the BVA would have a policy on. What is the BVA's position on this at the moment? Because  clearly it's a change in the role of the vet. Are they broadly supportive?  I think probably a good starting point is, you know, is recognition that animal health,  
**[0:35:16-0:35:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:35:16):**  animal welfare, food safety and even some of the human health and safety aspects in  the abattoir are all public goods. You know, that's the starting point when you're thinking  about the role of a professional having some oversight of that. The other thing to remember  is that the official veterinarian, by very nature of the title, is representing government  and is representing the Food Standards Agency at that point of work.  
**[0:35:45-0:35:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:35:45):**  BVA's position is like, you know, over the last few years, we've put a huge amount of  resource into developing our position around local sustainable food production. At times,  you know, we've called on less and better to look at sort of higher quality, higher  welfare systems and how the UK veterinary profession can support that. We've developed  a position, a policy position around welfare at Slaughter. We have quite an extensive policy  
**[0:36:13-0:36:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:36:13):**  position on sustainable animal agriculture, which includes things around the provision  of transport to local abattoirs and shortening supply chains. But I think the important part  here is that when we're talking about changing the role of the OV, we're not talking about  completely reinventing the proverbial wheel. What we are trying to do is stop the proverbial  wheels coming off the cart, you know, because that's the point that we're getting to. We  
**[0:36:39-0:36:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:36:39):**  have such a shortage of vets at the minute that there are times that the profession is  in a bit of a flat spin. And as John's talked about, you know, we're then relying on bringing  in inexperienced staff into those situations, which is not good for them or indeed the abattoir  operators or the owners. So I think what we're looking at doing then is sort of tweaking  the design and making sure that the wheels are turning effectively. And that's really  
**[0:37:04-0:37:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:37:04):**  the point that we want to be getting to in terms of changing the role of the OV and the  abattoir. So as I touched on earlier on, BVA very much kind of wants to be part of that  conversation. We want to maximise, you know, from the point of anti-mortem inspection right  through to the point of meat inspection, we want to maximise the effectiveness of the  role of the vet and all of the moving parts, you know, along that way. It is about, you  
**[0:37:31-0:37:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:37:31):**  know, having that proportionate risk-based dynamic regulation that we were talking about.  And I think there is an appetite for BVA to be part of that conversation because ultimately  that's going to increase the fulfilment of working in veterinary public health, working  in the meat hygiene sector, which traditionally hasn't been a particularly popular job for  UK graduates. But if you look at countries like New Zealand that have really professionalised  
**[0:37:59-0:38:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:37:59):**  the role of the official veterinarian and created a fulfilling career structure in veterinary  public health, I think that is absolutely something we want to look to and it's absolutely  something that BVA has an appetite to be involved in.  Thanks so much. And Hannah, coming back to you, we touched on this a little earlier,  but many environmentalists now see small abattoirs as essential infrastructure in the race to  
**[0:38:24-0:38:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:38:24):**  combat global warming and biodiversity loss, this sort of broader crisis in nature. Why  do you think that is? How are small abattoirs linked to nature restoration?  I think it's quite an interesting perspective on it. And I think we've been through kind  of a dark few generations where people lost their connection to their food. You know,  not everybody, but an awful lot of people just got used to buying stuff from the supermarket  
**[0:38:46-0:38:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:38:46):**  and not really asking questions. And I think we're coming out of that now, that through  a number of different experiences, and I think COVID also has a good thing to answer to this,  that people realise when they were in lockdown, they really missed that connection to the  outside world, to greenery, to nature. And more and more people are really wanting to  make that connection to nature. And it's not many steps from when you're making that connection  
**[0:39:08-0:39:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:39:08):**  to nature that you start to think about the food, how we interact with an ecosystem, that  we're not these separate humans from nature over there. But we're entirely dependent and  part of a larger system, an ecosystem. And so then we start to think about our food and  we start to think where does our food come from? Once we start to look at that, and we  look at the supermarkets and some of the kind of greenwash that we see on supermarket packaging  
**[0:39:31-0:39:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:39:31):**  things, it's not long before people think, well, I don't really want to eat like that  anymore. I want to know where my food's coming from. I want to know the story of the food.  I want to know the connection to the growers and the farmers. An awful lot of people have  started to grow a bit of their own food and think, wow, nothing tastes as good as a tomato  that's fresh from the garden that you've grown from seed. And once you start to have those  
**[0:39:53-0:39:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:39:53):**  realisations, you realise it kind of opens up your mind to all these different connections,  where your food's coming from, what kind of life is that animal having if you're choosing  to eat anything animal based, what kind of life is the plant having, what's the farm  like that it's growing on, what's the life of the farmer, what's the life of the grower?  And I think there's more and more questions that are being asked. And once we start to  
**[0:40:15-0:40:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:40:15):**  open our minds to all of that, the connections just keep on coming. And part of that so much  is the idea of we don't want if we're people are eating an animal based diet, they don't  want to be part of some big, scary looking industrialised process. They want to know  that that animal has been looked after from its conception through to its birth, through  its life and through to its death at every single stage. And for me as a farmer, I take  
**[0:40:42-0:40:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:40:42):**  that responsibility very seriously. I'm responsible for those animals from their conception, through  their gestation, through their life and right to their very last day, to their last minutes.  And consumers are starting to realise that they want to have that connection to their  local abattoirs as well, to know that it's as happy an ending as it can be.  Thanks for that. And I think it's not even just about greater awareness within that sort  
**[0:41:06-0:41:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:41:06):**  of customer base, but it's a recognition even amongst people who are vegetarian and vegan,  but who care about the environment, that we need livestock in a rotation on a farm, no  matter what that farm is producing, because livestock are able to produce and to service  nutrients to cycle nutrients in a way that just wouldn't happen any other way without  using chemicals. And so those stock obviously need to be part of a food chain in order to  
**[0:41:34-0:41:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:41:34):**  be affordable for the farmer to keep them and for that system to be sustainable.  Yeah, absolutely. When we look at regenerative agricultural practices and we're looking at  the time-controlled grazing systems where the animals are moved on every day, as they  do here on our farm at the ink pot, then those animals are really responsible for sequestering  huge amounts of carbon. There's no grain input through there. It really makes a difference.  
**[0:41:58-0:42:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:41:58):**  And there's a lot of people really realising what a positive impact that animals can have  on the environment, not this kind of worst case scenario that we hear from these large  industrialised processes.  And following on from that, I wonder how important you think that the small abattoir infrastructure  is to the future success or failure of Britain's food security overall. Looking forward a decade.  
**[0:42:18-0:42:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:42:18):**  Yeah, I think again, we only just have to look at Covid where we saw those empty shelves  to realise how very, very vulnerable our food system is. And it's not just been Covid, it's  been many other things since Brexit's not done us any favours with this. All sorts of  systems have started to kind of fall to pieces to show that these big last minute food supply  chain systems just really aren't working. They're not showing us any signs of resilience.  
**[0:42:44-0:42:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:42:44):**  So I think in order to have any sort of resilience in terms of a food system in the future, it  really does have to come down to local connections, small abattoirs, small growers, and working  directly with your community. I think an awful lot of people are waking up to the fact that  food is coming from huge, vast distances across the planet. And we just can't do that. There's  no future in a food like that. We really need to be looking at eating local, eating seasonal,  
**[0:43:11-0:43:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:43:11):**  eating small scale and having that direct contact with your farmer who can then have  direct contact with the abattoir and the butchers. John, we're coming to the end of the programme.  Clearly you're despondent following the closure of your abattoir. But just finally, can you  see a future where small abattoirs once again become recognised as the essential resources  that they are? We can see a future in it, but we need to  
**[0:43:34-0:43:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:43:34):**  actually grasp the nettle and actually look at the regulation and create the environment  in which those small abattoirs can survive. We've had great lists there of all the advantages  to the environment, to local supply chains, you know, that having a small abattoir brings.  But we've got to actually grasp that nettle, get some primary regulation in there to deliver  a risk-based and proportionate system. We're not asking for handouts. We're asking for  
**[0:44:00-0:44:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:44:00):**  a risk-based fair system, which even the actual regulator actually says we've not got. So  if the regulator's saying we haven't got it, we're all saying we haven't got it, why isn't  the government actually getting on and doing something about it? Because we stand to lose  too much. You know, obviously upsetting for my business, having done this for 100 years,  you know, and seeing a family, elderly family, extremely upset because they always, they  
**[0:44:26-0:44:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:44:26):**  value so much as I do, this farmer direct farmer link that we can provide all that information  that the customer wants. We know the farms, we know the farmer, we know how he looks after  them. We know how far he brings them. We know the kind of cattle or the kind of pigs he's  producing. We know what time of the year they're going to be at the best. We know how to hang  the meat. Is this really something that we want to lose? I mean, we've seen with the  
**[0:44:50-0:44:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:44:50):**  poor pig farmers, you know what I mean? What's happened to them? You know what I mean when  they've actually put all their eggs in the basket supplying the supermarkets, yeah? We've  seen what's happened to them, you know, heartbreaking for those farmers. You know, we don't want  that situation for any animals or farmers. We've really got to get the government to  actually get this primary legislation in and help us produce a system that's fair so that  
**[0:45:14-0:45:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:45:14):**  the Abattoir network can consist of a range of businesses, large and small. I think the  small livestock farmers need to actually get in touch with Defra and get in touch with  the ministers and say to them, look, we're businesses that are dependent on these small  Abattoirs. In themselves, it might be only very small businesses, but the number of businesses  that they actually serve and like with those with 200, how much are they contributing to  
**[0:45:39-0:45:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:45:39):**  the local economy? How many jobs are they providing? How many restaurants and shops  and cafes and that, are they supplying with local meat that's actually got a very low  environmental impact? You look at the small Abattoir sector and say it's only small. Nobody  seems to look at the number of farmers that are actually, you know, using those. And obviously  with the changes in the agriculture bill, it looks very much that farmers are even more  
**[0:46:04-0:46:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:46:04):**  dependent, you know what I mean, on that sector. The NFU talks about farmers having choice.  Well, farmers won't have a choice if there's no small Abattoirs because the big guys are  based on throughput. They're not based on adding value for farmers. They're not going  to be able to identify one animal, get all its offal and everything with it, you know,  from whatever method of production, whether it's organic, you know, whether it's a rare  
**[0:46:26-0:46:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:46:26):**  breed or whatever, you know, and then butcher it to a spec that's required by that farmer.  The model just doesn't fit that at all. So what you're saying is it's a small industry,  but it's about more than just money. It's the jobs, it's the environmental and social  impact. It's the provision of value added products for other businesses and retails.  It's about delivering food and infrastructural security. And we haven't even talked about  
**[0:46:52-0:46:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:46:52):**  the processing of secondary products, you know, like leather skins and that sort of  thing as well. I'd like to thank my guests, Hannah Farragood, Simon Doherty and John Metrick.  If you've enjoyed listening, please come back and listen to more. Tell your friends, like  us, review us and share our links. Farmgate is funded by Sancalpa and you can join the  conversation on Twitter by searching for Farmgate podcast. I've been Finnlow Kastain. Bye for  
**[0:47:17-0:47:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Small-abattoirs-e1oje6k#t=0:47:17):**  now.  