### Farm Gate  (2022-50-08)
**[0:00:00-0:00:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to Farmgate. I'm Finnlow Kustain, the Chief Executive of Farmwell and  the founder of the Food and Global Security Network.  In the last programme, I spoke to Charlie Davis from Savills about carbon farming and  about the way that carbon, and more broadly, the market for natural capital goods and services,  is starting to shape the countryside. Today, I'm talking to two people with very different  
**[0:00:26-0:00:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:00:26):**  roles and approaches to the carbon market, but who both believe that channelling finance  from carbon sequestration and storage can help to fund broader land regeneration.  Thomas Gent is a fourth-generation farmer based on the Lincolnshire-Cabernshire border  in England. He's the founder of Gentile Farming and is working with Agrena.com to  make their carbon payment platform available to farmers in the UK.  
**[0:00:49-0:00:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:00:49):**  Juna Mikola is a regenerative agriculture specialist based in Kampala in Uganda and  he's a founder of SoilWatch, which monitors carbon levels and soil health using both satellite  and ground-based measures. Welcome both.  Hello, thanks for having us.  Hi, thank you.  
**[0:01:05-0:01:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:01:05):**  Thomas, your family's been farming cereals and eggs for decades. What made you want to  diversify into carbon sequestration and storage?  That's a good question. Yeah, so we've been farming cereals for four generations,  but we've been farming sort of regeneratively or sustainably, whatever you want to call  it, for the past 13 years. We've always been looking at soil and how we can improve  
**[0:01:28-0:01:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:01:28):**  it over that period. And really during the first lockdown in the UK, I started to look  at all the other opportunities that regenerative agriculture could bring and carbon just became  one of those ones that was interesting and it seemed like there was an opportunity in  it. So yeah, I kind of set myself the challenge to see if I could make it happen.  And you're now working with the Danish agri-tech company Agrena to make their carbon trading  
**[0:01:50-0:01:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:01:50):**  platform available for UK farmers. So how did that relationship develop? I think you  started trying to sell carbon yourself and now you've sort of got into this sort of  slightly bigger corporate world.  Yeah, absolutely. So yeah, I'm just a farmer. I didn't know much about carbon before we  started to look at this, before I started to look at this. And really in the first lockdown,  
**[0:02:09-0:02:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:02:09):**  I had a lot of time on my hands and I set myself the challenge to see if I could make  the carbon offsetting happen on our farm, see if I could sell the carbon certificates  from our farm. And I tried many different ways to do that. I tried lots of different  ideas and opportunities and Agrena came across Agrena about a year ago now and they was developing  this carbon platform and they needed a bit of help and they needed a bit of abilities  
**[0:02:33-0:02:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:02:33):**  to bring it to the UK. Very kindly, they formed a relationship with me to let me bring it  to the UK basically.  And Juna, you're operating primarily in Africa and on quite a grand scale to unlock finance  for sustainable land use. What role does carbon play for you and the work that you do?  So at Woods, we are a group of co-founders, everybody has a background working on aid  
**[0:02:53-0:02:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:02:53):**  and development and agriculture in mainly East Africa and Horn of Africa and Sahel.  And as we've seen tens of probably hundreds of different projects, we could increasingly  see that a lot of human suffering was actually caused by environmental degradation and land  degradation. And we didn't see a lot of funding going into that. Also, we didn't see, we're  talking about NGOs, UN agencies and so on. We didn't see also people really understanding  
**[0:03:19-0:03:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:03:19):**  that what land degradation is because it takes a long time to happen and what kind of a negative  impact that has for development. That's why how we got started with the soil. So now naturally,  we increasingly see that carbon is being priced. So as we, as the land degrades, you lose carbon  from there, from the soil and also above current biomass and vice versa. Also, if you're able  to restore land, then you gain carbon. So we see that as an element to partially finance  
**[0:03:49-0:03:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:03:49):**  landscape restoration and sustainable land use in these areas where we work.  So it's about channelling funds that are available for carbon into delivering more sustainable  land use more broadly.  Yeah, exactly. So at the moment, we are in kind of like extractive land use and extractive  economy where we continuously driving down the ecosystem capacity to maintain human life.  
**[0:04:09-0:04:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:04:09):**  A lot of people know it, a lot of pastoralists we work with, they know it, a lot of farmers  know it. We hope that carbon and having a price for carbon that can help to incentivise  more sustainable land uses and land management regimes.  Mason Now, that's the same for you, Thomas, isn't  it? That the monetisation of carbon is a way of bringing more money in generally to the  
**[0:04:30-0:04:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:04:30):**  farm so that you're able to support that regenerative production. Now, you mentioned at the beginning  that you were farming sustainably or regeneratively. And of course, the two are quite different.  So what is it that makes you certain that you're farming regeneratively?  Thomas It's a really good question. And I think the  word regeneratively is kind of banded around quite a lot of the minutes. It seems to be  
**[0:04:50-0:04:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:04:50):**  a very hot subject, especially in corporate worlds where this is getting used. I'm very,  I'm quite nervous that the word regenerative farming is going to get a bit of a greenwashing  thing where people don't quite know what it means and it gets miscommunicated. So I mean,  when I speak, I usually say, you know, we farm regeneratively, sustainably, whatever.  We farm focusing on the soil and partnership with nature. That's kind of how I define it  
**[0:05:13-0:05:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:05:13):**  essentially.  Mason And Juna, you're working, you know, the data  sets that you're working with are all about using, you know, big macro data, using satellites.  And I wonder what is it specifically that you can tell from satellite data and whether  you primarily rely on the data that's coming from satellites or whether there is a process  
**[0:05:30-0:05:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:05:30):**  of on the ground verification as well?  Juna Yeah, so this is actually something quite  new. It's only starting from 2017. We have a bit better granular data, but we can analyse  more in detail what's happening on the land. So this is somehow new and that satellite  data is also combined with the different machine learning algorithms. So there's a lot of new  
**[0:05:49-0:05:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:05:49):**  tech which is yet to be, we yet to find that what is the best way to leverage this technology  and science. What we measure, the main things that we measure is the photosynthetic activity  and biomass being produced. And we analyse that on a timescale. So how does it change?  So that's kind of the main thing you can see from the satellites. But that takes a bit  of modelling as well. So it's actually the way we process data and the way we analyse  
**[0:06:13-0:06:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:06:13):**  basically three main components. There's the satellite data. So there we can get information  about the biomass, photosynthetic activity and so on. And then we have different process  based models with which we can then once we have this satellite data, we can then feed  in and feed in different climate factors, moisture, temperature and so on. So then we  can compute other variables from there as well. And yes, we do need some on the ground  
**[0:06:38-0:06:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:06:38):**  verification as well. You're basically predicting something and then you need to go and check  that how far your prediction is. And in many areas there's a bit of a problem. We don't  have a lot of on the ground datasets. This is likely to improve. And as we have calibrated  the models to new areas, then we're going to need less and less on the ground verification.  So you're measuring specifically moisture and greenhouse gas emissions. But when you're  
**[0:07:01-0:07:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:07:01):**  talking about biomass, what does that look like on a satellite? What is it that you're  actually seeing in order to be able to analyse?  So what you see is that if you think about what makes basically this planet work is that  the core engine is photosynthesis. That makes water to cycle, carbon to cycle and so on.  So and if you think about what happens in photosynthesis, you have basically energy  
**[0:07:25-0:07:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:07:25):**  coming from the sun and then that's being bind together with carbon to biomass and then  you have water going in as well. And then what you have coming out is then biomass and  oxygen. So plants, the leaves, they actually kind of solar panels which extend to gather  radiation from sun. This is what reflects back to space and we can compute certain indicators  based on that. Just looking at leaf growth we have depending of the plant type and so  
**[0:07:52-0:07:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:07:52):**  on. So these are the kind of indicators. We're looking at it, that's what we can see as well.  So it's not just carbon, we can even let's say on ranks and management we can even analyse  how much 4H per hectare is being produced. So we can tell you how many heads of livestock  you can grow in that area can feed. And as you know, the plants don't take carbon from  the soil, they rather other way around they add it to the soil. So based on that, that  
**[0:08:13-0:08:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:08:13):**  tells a lot what's happening for the carbon as well there and how much biomass being produced.  And then obviously certain amount of that biomass is then carbon.  So for both of you it seems that the motivation behind the work that you're doing with carbon  is to regenerate land. And while carbon's the easiest form of natural capital to monetise,  the aim is to use the funding, to channel that funding to help deliver a much greater  
**[0:08:37-0:08:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:08:37):**  range of ecosystem function on the land in question. And Thomas, I just wonder, coming  back to you, what the particular changes are that you're most interested in measuring?  I think this is the really exciting thing about regenerative agriculture as a carbon  solution compared to a lot of other ones. What happens is when we improve the soil and  when we look after it in the correct way, it definitely has a carbon benefit, but it  
**[0:09:00-0:09:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:09:00):**  has multiple other benefits that come alongside that. You know, you don't pick one, they all  kind of happen at the same time. That's how nature works. Obviously the carbon is the  bit that we measure and it's the bit that we can sell because that's what the companies  want to purchase. And it's kind of the easiest metric that we can talk about at the minute.  But what we can see very quickly is biodiversity metrics coming in, water quality metrics coming  
**[0:09:21-0:09:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:09:21):**  in to kind of build the whole package of, you know, when a farmer's making this transition,  he has this impact on all of these different areas. And as we start to quantify all of  those other areas, I really think what's going to happen is we're going to just increase  that carbon value or increase the value of the produce that comes off that farm.  It's interesting when you talk about those multiple outcomes, I'm thinking about regenerative  
**[0:09:43-0:09:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:09:43):**  agriculture and again, how we stop it being greenwash and how we actually explain it to  people. And it always seems to me that basically year on year, things need to be getting better.  And it may well be that in a particular year, there's a problem, there's a particular weather  event that changes that, but providing that trend is improving, that there is an upward  trajectory from each of those metrics, you can realistically say that that land is regenerating.  
**[0:10:07-0:10:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:10:07):**  Is that what you're finding on your own farm, Thomas?  Yeah, absolutely. It's very difficult for farmers that are on one year cycles, one year  short term rent agreements, that kind of thing. And when you look at, you know, yields, obviously  really important every year, that kind of thing. That's the business case that a farmer  needs to do to be able to keep, you know, to keep in business and to keep farming. But  
**[0:10:26-0:10:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:10:26):**  soil improvement is such a long term game. And the regeneration of the land is not going  to take one year, it's going to take decades, probably at least five years. So exactly,  we need to keep up those practices over that period of time to make that, to make any change  really.  And you know, the projects that you're working on are counted in terms of hundreds of thousands  
**[0:10:46-0:10:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:10:46):**  of hectares. And I wonder if you could talk about why it is that that land in the Sahal  is under threat and in need of regeneration in the first place.  Yeah, that's actually an interesting subject. So first of all, Sahal, it means coast in  Arabic. And if you start coming down, so you have the Sahara and then you start coming  south, the next biome is not a rainforest, but it's precipitation gradually start to  
**[0:11:09-0:11:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:11:09):**  increase. So you have different forms of semi arid and arid lands there, savannah and straplands  and so on. When we talk about degradation of that area, many times it's people just  mentioned climate change, what we see is it's rather just a multiplier of climate change.  So it just makes things work. But the first, if you look at the drivers of land degradation  in this area, it's mainly unsustainable land use. And most of that is related to food production.  
**[0:11:34-0:11:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:11:34):**  Both cropping and then livestock production. And well, there's different kind of unsustainable  uses is bush following, slash and burn with every seven to 10 years, land is being turned  to, you go to a new land and you basically turn natural ecosystems to crop land. But  then also a big driver of land degradation here is the livestock sector. What we see  in Sudan on the 70s, the livestock herd was about 40 million animals. And at the moment  
**[0:12:03-0:12:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:12:03):**  it's over 140 million. And the reason why this herd has grown so fast is because the  pastoralist livestock system, it got integrated with the global economy. So before they were  mainly growing this, keeping herd for themselves a little bit for the sales, and now most of  it, or big part of it goes for the export. So we have a huge increase on the herd size.  And what we think is that, so if you look at the prices, what they get, so most of their  
**[0:12:29-0:12:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:12:29):**  animals have been exported as live cattle, and the prices are just fractions, what they  have from the other parts of the world. So we see that these commodities, they don't  truly capture the resources that have been used for producing those products and the  costs. And what is happening on the global scale, on the global trade that we're subsidising  the welfare in rich countries are the cost of the ecosystems here in the poor countries  
**[0:12:57-0:13:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:12:57):**  or poorer countries, which then again affect the human life here.  Jason Vale, The New York Times, What I'm sort of hearing there is that there's been a transition  away from what is essentially farming, cropping, livestock production for local markets and  a gradual, I mean, over the last 30, 40 years, a gradual intensification of that in order  to feed a global marketplace.  
**[0:13:19-0:13:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:13:19):**  Fabio Piscopo, The New York Times, Yeah. And actually here it's even, so here we can talk  about on, let's say if you have to increase your agriculture production in a country,  you have the vertical expansion. So let's say you try to get more out of hectare. And  here a lot of it is, so a lot of smallholder farmers, they use no fertilisers at all or  anything like that. So a lot of here it's just horizontal expansion as well. So which  
**[0:13:42-0:13:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:13:42):**  means that we have taken massive, massive amounts of natural habitat, dryland forests,  forest rangelands, and we turn them into cropland and then we farm them for a couple  of years and then we abandon it. And you basically leave manmade desert behind. And the same  goes for the livestock sector that you can drive thousands of kilometres and all the  grass is gone. And then you talk to the people who were living there in the seventies, they  
**[0:14:06-0:14:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:14:06):**  tell you there was a tall savannah grass growing and there was giraffes and predators and everything.  So a lot of that intensification has also been just a horizontal expansion of production.  Jason Vale, The New York Times, Thomas, it seems to me, listening to what Juna said there,  it's a degree to which the African story of land degradation isn't so very different from  the story in the UK, albeit that what's happened in the Sahel is perhaps over the last sort  
**[0:14:29-0:14:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:14:29):**  of 40 years or so, whereas in the UK it's maybe taken 100 or 200 years. But still that  commodification and pressure from the global marketplace have been key drivers in unsustainable  land use. Do you think that this new global market in carbon has a capacity to change  that?  That's an interesting point. And I think that's, well, it's really why I started looking into  
**[0:14:53-0:14:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:14:53):**  all of this because I knew we was farming in a very different way, not to everybody,  but to the average, I would say. And we were still having to sell on the commodity market  price for the commodity market value. And that was all we were getting, but I knew we  were producing it in a completely different way. So personally, that's what I wanted to  achieve. I wanted to find a way to differentiate our product. And the only way I could do that  
**[0:15:16-0:15:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:15:16):**  simply at the start was carbon. As I get increasingly kind of into this industry, I can see that  I think in the future, the value is not going to be selling your carbon certificate to a  company or that kind of thing. It's going to be tying it alongside your product. So  what we should really be doing is valuing the product that comes from a regenerative  farm much greater than, for example, as Juna said, in some of those situations, which seems  
**[0:15:39-0:15:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:15:39):**  crazy. How can you farm a land and then degrade it so much that you have to abandon it? I  think the point is like everything's interlinked. And when you improve soil, you improve everything.  Improving your carbon practices or carbon impact as a farm and sequestering and reducing  your emissions is going to have impacts on all of those other things. So if we can focus  on kind of a simple thing that farmers can really get their heads around and actually  
**[0:16:03-0:16:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:16:03):**  make it happen on the ground, because you have to remember that farmers have to make  this happen on the ground. It is a complex thing to switch away from more conventional  practices to using more regenerative practices in the UK on some of our soils. So we need  to keep it simple, but we need to allow them to get that reward.  Juna, central to this conversation, I guess, is the degree to which we're trying to deliver  
**[0:16:25-0:16:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:16:25):**  the multiple outcomes that you and Thomas have been talking about this morning, or whether  we're focused on single outcomes. And I know those are kind of polar opposites and the  world doesn't quite work like that. But do you think that there are risks that the carbon  market could simply create new unintended consequences with land use, for example, being  skewed away from food production and used primarily to intensively sequester carbon?  
**[0:16:49-0:16:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:16:49):**  And indeed, if that is a risk, are there ways in which we can guard against it?  So we focus a lot, we work on the dry lands and rangelands and let's say 50% of the world's  surface can be classified as a dry land. And up to today, there's been mainly that people  clearly start to understand that resource for this forest, a big carbon sink, but what  is many times poorly understood that there's way more carbon being stored in soils, for  
**[0:17:15-0:17:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:17:15):**  instance, than in the urban environment and atmosphere together. So already the ecosystems  where we work, you don't have enough precipitation that there would be a full scale forest growing  here. So what are the kind of land uses in these areas, except of just natural habitat?  By rangelands, we mainly mean areas where you'd have livestock or large herbivore, wildlife  herds, benefiting for the forage and straps which are growing. In these areas, let's say,  
**[0:17:44-0:17:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:17:44):**  from the point of view of rangeland management, actually the forage production correlates  positively with the soil organic matter or carbon in the soil. If we're able to put up  regimes that help to manage large areas of rangeland more sustainably, we're not actually  reducing the food production, we're increasing the forage production, which means we can  increase the herd, we just move the herd differently. And then you come to different grazing plans  
**[0:18:11-0:18:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:18:11):**  and rotational grazing and holistic grazing and so on. So we think for sustainability  of the carbon market, there has to be these win-win situations. And the local communities  have to benefit from that. Even if that's not the main risk for nature-based carbon  offset projects is that they're not socially sustainable. So the local communities won't  benefit it and that's why they will, let's say, go and cut down the trees.  
**[0:18:41-0:18:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:18:41):**  So there's a real difference in terms of the quality of the carbon drawdown and the additional  benefits of the carbon that's pulled in. I wonder, you know, when you're talking about  quality there, are you largely providing data that supports a regulated carbon market or  are you supporting the voluntary carbon market as well that Thomas is involved in?  Yeah, so at the moment we are looking at a lot of projects. Some projects have already  
**[0:19:05-0:19:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:19:05):**  been there for quite a while and we're just taking an evaluation of the net carbon fluxes  of those activities. So the main source of funding would be then looking to scale these  projects and channel finance to sustainable land use. These are like what you call multilateral  climate finance institutions and then monetary carbon markets as well. And I would maybe  add there that as maybe carbon is being increasingly priced and monetized, it's even for different  
**[0:19:33-0:19:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:19:33):**  investors and donors, it is one of the key metrics is that what is there. The same way  you'd be looking at how much economic value a large-scale agriculture project is creating,  you've been looking at what is the net carbon flux of that project. So there's a lot of  different finance years who are interested on, let's say, on projects which have a land  use element that what is going to be the impact on the ecosystem carbon of these projects?  
**[0:19:59-0:20:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:19:59):**  So for some people it's just about the carbon and for other people there is a desire to  make sure that the carbon drawdown is happening in balance so that it's driving improved ecosystems  as well.  Yeah, so the way we see it and I need to repeat what Thomas said as well, looking at carbon  alone is not going to do much. What we're looking at here is we can call it something,  
**[0:20:24-0:20:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:20:24):**  for instance, integrated landscape management, but rather an interdisciplinary approach on  landscape. So we're looking at both socioeconomic factors and then we're looking at the ecological  factors. And for instance, we might have an agricultural investment plan and the side  of the economic value it's creating, we're also calculating the value in the ecosystem  services that that project will create. And so there carbon also plays a role and then  
**[0:20:49-0:20:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:20:49):**  can actually, so many times if you look at the, where does the, how do you create sustainably  value from land or even in a regenerative way, carbon only has, it's just one element  of finance. Maybe there's an increase for its production, maybe because you have more  soil organic matter, you're actually improving your profitability of, so it's pretty much  those same things that Thomas is also working with.  
**[0:21:13-0:21:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:21:13):**  And in terms of the carbon market, verification and quality of that carbon drawdown is clearly  super important. And I wonder what sort of challenges you face in your work and how you  and your partners such as NGOs and the UN guard against possible destruction of the  sequestered carbon assets. How do you make sure that those carbon assets don't get degraded?  What are the challenges is that, let's say the dynamics of land degradation are extremely  
**[0:21:40-0:21:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:21:40):**  complex because you have both ecological factors that you're looking at and combined with the  socioeconomic factors. And that's why we many times, a lot of nature based solutions would  be seen as very simplistic that there's just the one, let's say you dig holes in the ground  or you just plant trees, I guess because you know, people are lazy to really address these,  the real drivers of land degradation. And we saw oftentimes socioeconomic. So I would  
**[0:22:06-0:22:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:22:06):**  say that's the main challenge is really to understand that how can we stop financing  unsustainable land use and how can we start financing sustainable land use? And I think  a lot of research, it's and you have to need multidisciplinary teams to do that. You need  biologists and you need sociologists and you have to bring all that science together. So  it's really complicated. And that's also the way you got it. So the main, the better you  
**[0:22:28-0:22:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:22:28):**  do your homework, the better you really understand the socioeconomic context on the ground and  also the ecological factors there and how they are intertwined and how, for instance,  the ecosystem restoration can sustainably improve the livelihoods in that area. And  we have to remember in many African countries, for instance, something like 70% of the population,  their livelihood is directly depending on natural assets and natural capital. So the  
**[0:22:55-0:23:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:22:55):**  only way really to improve lives in that area, sustainably, it's not giving them free food,  but it is to improve those natural assets that then sustain human life. So I guess that's  the main way to go is to do your homework well, and really understand the socioeconomic  factors on the ground and how they're connected with the ecosystem health.  And to make sure that the economic and the social value of working with those carbon  
**[0:23:20-0:23:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:23:20):**  assets is greater than continuing with that sort of slash and burn approach to agriculture  that was there previously.  Exactly. So that's actually an interesting discussion is that if you, we talk about pricing  carbon to fix the market failure, and that is mainly there, that we've been increasing  the too much carbon dioxide on the atmosphere. But from the point of view of somebody who's  
**[0:23:44-0:23:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:23:44):**  working with the land use in these areas, by pricing carbon and taking that in account  in economic calculations, we actually fixing much more negative externalities, not only  climate change. And why is that? It's because carbon is the main building block of all living  material and even actually decomposed material. So when you start actually putting a price  on that asset, then the economic calculation, how you're using your land, that changes.  
**[0:24:09-0:24:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:24:09):**  Thomas, another key principle of carbon farming is additionality. How do you on your farm  go about achieving additionality and verification in terms of the carbon that you're sequestering  and storing?  Absolutely. So the two kind of key pillars of any carbon program is always additionality  and permanence. Obviously, permanence is touched on really well, we can talk about that as  
**[0:24:31-0:24:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:24:31):**  well. But additionality is something we need to cover, something we always have to talk  about. So what it means essentially is that we're doing something beyond what was normal  practice and how we see it is to make any significant change to a soil to improve it,  practices have to be carried out over a consistent period of time to make any reasonable change.  So what the Agrena program does is it rewards farmers for changing away from inconsistent  
**[0:24:57-0:25:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:24:57):**  or unreliable kind of uses of regenerative practices to much more consistency in their  usage. And farmers when they sign up to the program commit to multiple year consistent  use of regenerative practices.  And with Agrena, because I think that, you know, when you were first trying to earn money  for the carbon that you'd produced in your farm, you were using the Agrena system. Is  
**[0:25:18-0:25:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:25:18):**  there sort of a toolkit that's used there for you to help with analysing those metrics  so that you know precisely how much additional carbon has been sequestered?  Absolutely. So essentially, when a farmer wants to come and learn about what the opportunities  might be for them, they come on the system, they type in their information on a field  by field basis, and we run the calculations through those numbers. And then we obviously  
**[0:25:42-0:25:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:25:42):**  do a lot of verification on those numbers at the end. But what it means is that any  farmer at any point can come on for free, just plug some numbers in and see what results  they get. It needs to be accessible and it needs to be as simple as it can.  So is it an Agrena, sort of a bespoke system that Agrena has developed? Or are you plugging  into something like the farm carbon toolkit to get those numbers correct?  
**[0:26:04-0:26:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:26:04):**  It's a bit of a mixture of both of those things. So Agrena have their own system and their  own team of scientists and carbon scientists. And then we also plug in in the background  to the Cool Farm tool, which is obviously an industry standard carbon calculation system.  So it's a combination of those two things. But if you're a farmer coming on the system,  you wouldn't be able to tell the Cool Farm tool is in the background, but it is.  
**[0:26:25-0:26:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:26:25):**  And of course, Cool Farm tool, as you say, you know, they are well known, certainly in  Britain as being, you know, very robust calculators of carbon. So that's really interesting. Now,  for me, Thomas, the principle that farmers should deliver net zero for their own businesses  before using their land to offset for other industries seems to me to be quite important.  I think that you have a different view.  
**[0:26:49-0:26:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:26:49):**  I definitely don't have a different view. I would agree with you. It's definitely important  that farmers become net zero. The interesting thing is what obviously we, you know, we have  to take a bit of a position on this because, you know, we're helping farmers produce these  certificates or run these numbers. And what we've decided is we want the farmers to decide,  we want the farmers are doing the work, the farmers are producing the asset and producing  
**[0:27:09-0:27:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:27:09):**  the carbon certificate, the farmers should decide whatever they want to do with it. We  issue the certificates directly to the farmers carbon bank account, if you want to kind of  imagine it like that, and then the farmer does whatever he chooses. I personally think  in the future, you're going to get the most value out of your product, your tonne of wheat,  your tonne of grain, if it becomes of that net zero package. But right now, obviously,  
**[0:27:31-0:27:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:27:31):**  there's no option for me to sell my grain as net zero. So this year, I'm probably just  going to sell all of my carbon certificates. But next year, I will expect probably to keep  them. I hope to find a deal with a grain buyer who wants that.  I guess at the crux of this debate, Thomas, is around the race for net zero and the fact  that farmers are in a unique position where they can actually deliver net cooling as well.  
**[0:27:56-0:28:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:27:56):**  And of course, farming and food production has been part of the problem, depending on  how you analyse the amount of emissions that are going into the global atmosphere. It's  anything up to around 30% of carbon emissions are coming from agriculture. And so there's  a degree to which if you're in the energy sector or in the transport sector, and you're  looking across at farming, then you're saying, well, why is it that farming is able, in the  
**[0:28:18-0:28:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:28:18):**  first instance, to deliver net cooling, but why are they waiting to deliver net zero and  taking my money from the energy sector or the transport sector in order to help me deliver  my emissions? You're in this unique position. Is it not the case that you should be delivering  net zero in your own business before then going further onto that cooling and monetising  that additional element?  
**[0:28:40-0:28:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:28:40):**  It's a really good point. And it just gets, I think you've got down to the crux of the  matter really well. Like any other industry is working really hard to reduce their emissions.  They're never ever going to get below zero, right? They've just got to get as low as they  possibly can. Farming and what we do, we're in, you know, we've often had a tough time  in our industry, we often get the finger point at us. But this is the most exciting time  
**[0:29:03-0:29:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:29:03):**  to be a farmer because we have this opportunity to provide solutions and to support other  industries that need the help basically. Definitely, we need to, it needs to be a collaboration,  it needs to be part of, you know, the whole world needs to improve. We all accept that.  But farmers are doing the work, they're making a difference on the ground. It's not easy,  it's expensive, it requires investment. And so they need support to do that. And I think  
**[0:29:27-0:29:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:29:27):**  the best way to do it is putting a price on carbon and finding those companies that are  doing bad, you know, releasing a lot of emissions and force, you know, forcing them to find  solutions and to help solutions. And farming's in this most exciting position of, as we've  said before, a win, win, win. You know, if you plant a monoculture of trees, it's not  great for other things. But if you plant, you know, if you improve soil, it's a win  
**[0:29:49-0:29:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:29:49):**  for everybody.  MasonEMENT Of the way that you were always so positive about this, that this is a fantastic  time for being a farmer. And I agree with you entirely. I think this is a really exciting  moment for a whole range of different reasons. A lot of it linked into this ability to analyse  the multiple metrics and understand the rebalancing of land. And carbon is of course, part of  
**[0:30:08-0:30:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:30:08):**  that. And, and I guess there's a degree to which whether you're offsetting for another  industry or offsetting for your own business, if we're getting towards net zero and net  calling and we're accelerating that process. That's got to be a good thing. Juna, you're  helping to reverse desertification across large swathes of land in the Sahal. So you  must have to deal with a wide variety of farmers and pastoralists. How do you go about getting  
**[0:30:31-0:30:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:30:31):**  buy-in for your projects from people on the ground?  Juna O  Yeah, so that's actually related to what Thomas just said that I think we're in a very exciting  moment because for long periods of time, the society used to look down to farmers and ranchers  and pastoralists. But we're increasingly now seeing that perhaps they're doing a very important  
**[0:30:55-0:31:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:30:55):**  work and that is that they are the stewards of land, which is probably the most, I mean,  which is the most valuable asset that we have. The way we are working here is that a lot  of communities they're becoming, we set up different kind of community-based natural resource  management committees and so on. Farmers and pastoralists, they're not only food producers  anymore, but they're also conservationists and natural resource managers.  
**[0:31:21-0:31:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:31:21):**  In that case then, so let's say whether it works or not, it's still, there are project  way it works and there's project way it doesn't work. And there's a lot of research to be  done there. I'm actually going to start also doing my own PhD research on that as well.  The thing is what we're setting up is that farmers and pastoralists, they're going to  be also not just being benefiting from these co-benefits of increased natural assets such  
**[0:31:45-0:31:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:31:45):**  as soil organic matter and increased vegetation cover and let's say improve water cycle, but  they're also going to be paid for carbon. So you're setting up different payments for  ecosystem services programmes. And then let's say if a pastoralist group follows the grazing  plan which improves the range of health, so for its production, water infiltration and  also carbon sequestration, then they also get paid for that. But yeah, there's still  
**[0:32:10-0:32:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:32:10):**  a, there's definitely, this is a new industry and there's a lot of research to be done.  But I do believe that we're going to be finding better and better ways to get the buy-in from  the local communities. Both, that's brilliant. Thanks so much. It's  been a fascinating conversation. I'd like to thank my guests, Gina Michela from Soil  Watch and Thomas Gent from Gentle Farming. If you've enjoyed listening, please come back  
**[0:32:33-0:32:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Soil--satellites-e1e3roh#t=0:32:33):**  and listen to more. Tell your friends, like us, review us and share our links. Farmgate  is a partnership project for Farmwell and FAI Farms. We're funded by San Calpa and you  can join the conversation on Twitter by searching for Farmgate podcast. I've been Finn Lo-Kustain.  Bye for now.  