### Farm Gate  (2021-30-18)
**[0:00:00-0:00:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to Farmgate. I'm Finnlow Kustein, the Chief Executive of Farmwell.  The best solutions for land use deliver multiple outcomes, especially in places where land  is relatively scarce and expensive. In recent years, opponents of renewable energy, particularly  solar electricity with its large, glassy arrays, have argued that land should be kept in agricultural  production. From the other side, solar developers have argued that arrays are nearly always  
**[0:00:30-0:00:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:00:30):**  sited on low-grade land and that biodiversity will benefit from the soil being given a break  from intensive monocropping. Well, what if we could do both? What if we could combine  the farming of electricity from the sun with land management that regenerates the soil  and produces high-quality nutrition? Sophie Fernley-Whittingstall lives in Wiltshire,  in the UK, and provides community engagement and communications advice for the solar industry.  
**[0:00:54-0:00:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:00:54):**  Trent Hendricks is from Cabriero Ranch in Missouri, USA, where he produces lamb and  beef with certification from the American Grass Fed Association and the Allen Savory  Land to Market programme. Welcome both. Sophie, let's start with some basics. Solar farms  are large industrial installations which constrain land use for up to 40 years. So why is solar  on agricultural land a good thing? Well, Finnlow, as you said in your introduction, it's all  
**[0:01:21-0:01:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:01:21):**  about multifunctional land use. Our land is under increasing amounts of pressure to deliver  lots of different objectives. And a solar farm isn't just about generating clean renewable  energy. It can tackle climate change through the energy generation, but it can also support  biodiversity in the ecological initiatives. And you can keep the land in agricultural  use contributing to the supply of food, for example, with sheep grazing, honey bees making  
**[0:01:50-0:01:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:01:50):**  honey and other food related initiatives. So why would a farmer want to have a solar  farm on their land in the first place? In the UK, certainly it's increasingly difficult  for farmers to make a good living from farming both due to Brexit and the implications of  that, and also due to the extreme weather conditions caused by climate change. I think  we've all seen evidence of that in Europe. Obviously, a solar farm can help with tackling  
**[0:02:16-0:02:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:02:16):**  the climate emergency. But for a farmer, it can also provide a reliable, secure income  in terms of rental from the land, which is guaranteed for the life of the solar farm,  which nowadays is about 40 years. After 40 years, all the infrastructure for the solar  farm can be completely removed. And the land can be returned to its original use, probably  in a better condition. Overall, the footprint of the infrastructure takes up only about  
**[0:02:43-0:02:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:02:43):**  1% of the land take used. 1%? So there must be some distance between them if it's only  a 1% land impact. That's exactly right. So the solar panels are supported on frames that  are piled into the ground. There is no concrete used, other than for some of the supporting  infrastructure such as substations. And then wide gaps are left between the solar panels  to allow them to get the maximum amount of sunlight, but also that leaves plenty of space  
**[0:03:10-0:03:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:03:10):**  for other farming activities to go on around them. Do you tend to have lots of cables sort  of trailing around the place or those buried under the soil? The cables are all buried  underground. There are some cables that are attached to the solar panels. Anything like  that is usually elevated so that it's out of the reach of an inquisitive sheep so that  it's quite safe and secure. Now, Trent, you're a sheep farmer rather than a solar farmer,  
**[0:03:35-0:03:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:03:35):**  but you've developed a pretty unique model for rearing livestock regeneratively in and  amongst the solar arrays in the USA. How does your system work? It's an interesting marriage  of very old traditional livestock rearing in a relatively modern environment. For example,  since the dawn of time, people have been taking their livestock to food, to feed, to grass,  and following that we call it transhumance. And essentially what we're doing today is  
**[0:04:03-0:04:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:04:03):**  the same principle, is we are taking our sheep to grass, the difference being that the grass  is under solar panels and we haul them there in trucks instead of going in a circuitous  pattern up and down mountains and so forth. So we're really just applying age-old stock  rearing land management skill sets in a modern environment. That's really fascinating. It's  the idea that you're recreating something which is essentially a traditional form of  
**[0:04:31-0:04:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:04:31):**  agriculture but then giving it this modern sort of more technical spin on it. And I'm  just curious, do you have to pay rent to get those grazing rights from the solar farm owners?  We are paid to manage vegetation on these sites. And so we receive payment for managing  the grass. We are given the contracts because we manage them predominantly with livestock  leading to other attributes and outcomes on the land that one would probably not be able  
**[0:04:59-0:05:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:04:59):**  to enjoy or participate in with a mechanical or chemical solution. So we are providing  a service and we are compensated for that.  So in the same way that in the UK you've got farmers that are earning an income from having  the solar farm on their land, you're earning an income by managing, by servicing the solar  farms around and about in the USA. And you're quite a big business. You work in many different  
**[0:05:21-0:05:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:05:21):**  states don't you, but you have different operations in different places around the USA.  That is correct. More of a regional footprint. We do work in multiple states and the movement  of the animals is largely relative to the size of the properties. Originally many of  the solar properties were rather small so those animals may get hauled more frequently  but typically very short hauls, 10 miles, 20 miles up the road. But as the solar industry  
**[0:05:46-0:05:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:05:46):**  is maturing, we are now looking at sites that are many thousands of acres and those sites  will have resident flocks where only the production is moved in and out of those sites under normal  circumstances.  And as a regenerative shepherd, when I think of regenerative grazing I'm generally thinking  of adaptive multi-paddock grazing, mob grazing, that sort of thing. Even within these larger  
**[0:06:09-0:06:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:06:09):**  sites are you able to use that same principle and constrain the space that the sheep have?  Absolutely. That's a critical component for managing not only the vegetation but the welfare  of the sheep from a consistent plan of nutrition to managing parasites, et cetera. We are always  moving them to clean ground and of course it's highly variable based off of the needs  of the animals, the size of the site, quality of the forage. I mean there's a lot of variables  
**[0:06:35-0:06:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:06:35):**  that go in there. So yes, we do use holistic plan grazing that comes under a lot of different  names, but essentially it's an intentional management plan moving sheep according to  the needs of the sheep, the land and the forage, and of course in a solar farm, the needs of  the solar farm operators.  So essentially it's the same as being a regenerative shepherd anywhere else. It's just that you've  
**[0:06:56-0:07:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:06:56):**  got this kind of additional constraint. And I wonder as a regen shepherd, what kind of  additional constraints you find on a solar farm that you wouldn't come across in a normal  field or ranch?  I think some of the biggest ones is interfacing with more people. The larger the solar site,  the more technicians, the more service oriented people that are getting out of sites and ensuring  
**[0:07:17-0:07:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:07:17):**  simple things like gates being closed and preferably not having solar technicians having  to work in and around the sheep just for everybody's convenience factors. So we have another level  of scheduling, also working with routine maintenance on a solar farm, making sure that we've grazed  ahead of them to ensure that they're working in short drafts as much as possible. Most  of these solar farms have a very adequate external fence, but we do have predation issues  
**[0:07:44-0:07:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:07:44):**  from time to time that need to be managed much like anywhere else. We would graze livestock.  The biggest thing is just in a owned or leased pastured situation, we look at forage and  we say we can potentially store that forage. Whereas on a solar farm, we have specifications  we need to adhere to. And that may mean that we either need to graze more aggressively  or potentially mechanically intervene from time to time. So instead of managing the growth  
**[0:08:14-0:08:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:08:14):**  of the grass and viewing it solely as food for the sheep, we also have to ensure that  it does not shade the site. The number one priority of a solar farm is to collect sunlight  for electricity so we cannot have grasses, forages, et cetera, limiting that production  and we can't have vegetation interference with mechanical hardware, et cetera. So there's  just a few filters or parameters that we would engage in on a solar farm that we would not  
**[0:08:41-0:08:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:08:41):**  have to necessarily deal with in a traditional grazing environment.  World Finance, when you're talking about the height of the grasses there, I'm thinking  about the rest periods that you tend to associate with regenerative grazing, where you have  long rest periods and you can have really quite high grasses. Does that mean that you  have shorter rest periods between grazing sessions perhaps than you might on a ranch  
**[0:09:02-0:09:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:09:02):**  that didn't have the solar installation?  David  Typically no. In our spring, when everything is growing very rapidly, that's typically  our biggest threat of shading time. If we can manage that first round of growth, we  can typically handle it quite well the rest of the season. There are variables there in  
**[0:09:20-0:09:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:09:20):**  the type of forages planted in the south, in the mid-south. In the United States, a  lot of warm season perennial type plants, plants that grow by rhizome. They're typically  height limited in a natural state anyway, but they also tend to be lower quality feed.  So we've found that in order to manage the rapid growth of grass in the spring across  thousands of acres, it's difficult to do that. You never have enough sheep in the spring,  
**[0:09:47-0:09:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:09:47):**  and it's easy to have too many sheep in the late summer or winter. So that's a balance  that we have to manage more closely in a solar situation than we would in a non-solar situation.  And sometimes we will mechanically manage grass for two reasons. One, it buys us time  to ensure that it doesn't shade, but it also means that when we do bring the sheep in,  the feed value of that grass is higher. But we are not typically sacrificing rest time.  
**[0:10:17-0:10:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:10:17):**  In fact, I would say that we do a pretty good job of ensuring there is complete rest between  grazing. And what we do is we hit the grass typically harder than we might else wise to  make sure that it's set back sufficiently so we can give it the time it needs and have  all the species of forage have an equal chance to regrow before we come back again. So, you  know, sometimes we do a great job, sometimes not so much. It's nature. You know, we definitely  
**[0:10:44-0:10:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:10:44):**  look, use feedback loops to ensure that we're continuously improving.  And what about the sheep and the technology itself? Do you have sheep sort of leaning  on things or chewing things that then get damaged or vice versa? Do you have sheep that  get injured by rubbing up against the corner of something that they shouldn't?  No, we've not seen that could be an issue. It's a frequent question. We've learned that  
**[0:11:05-0:11:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:11:05):**  inverter pads are, it's a good idea to put a little fence around them to exclude the  sheep from them because it's in the sheep's nature to fill their belly and then go find  a hive place to lay down and ruminate. And they like the high ground for a couple of  reasons, including looking out for predators and possibly more importantly, enjoying the  breeze that they get. And inverter pads on solar sites tend to be some of the higher  
**[0:11:29-0:11:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:11:29):**  ground and they like to lay on them and when they stand up, they ignore and the cooling  fans on the inverters draw air in and you can potentially foul the inside of that. We've  also had one situation where there was an emergency stop button that was at an ideal  location for sheep to scratch their backs on and it shut down a portion of the array.  So we've learned it's much simpler just to put a small fence around it, keep the sheep  
**[0:11:55-0:11:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:11:55):**  off of it. Other than that, no, not really. Sometimes there's roads in a site they like  to lay down on the roads for similar reasons and so that can foul roads up a little bit.  Good rain usually takes care of that. Gray dogs, feral dogs are a bigger issue. More  suburban environments, but you know, you deal with that in a non-solar environment as well.  So there's a lot less friction with the sheep and the equipment. The sheep adapt actually  
**[0:12:20-0:12:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:12:20):**  quite quickly and typically we don't see an issue.  So in your business, you're earning money as a shepherd, rearing sheep and selling the  sheep. You're also earning money by servicing these solar installations, using the sheep  to do that. Now this is a pretty unique business model, it seems to me, from across in the  United Kingdom. Are you unique across in the USA or are there loads of people doing this?  
**[0:12:43-0:12:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:12:43):**  It is growing very, very rapidly. It's still very much the early days and that's part of  why we enjoy getting an opportunity to speak about what we do to ensure that the industry  is growing professionally. There's a lot of small operators and that's a fantastic thing,  but we do want to make sure that as an industry, we begin to identify efficiencies in performance  and delivery in the business structures, the costing models, et cetera. And it is a fantastic  
**[0:13:15-0:13:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:13:15):**  opportunity and you know, just a small aside on that is part of why we see it as a fantastic  opportunity is agriculture is extremely capital intensive, very thin margins, very subjective  to environmental impact and market cycles. If a producer can secure a multi-year contract  to take care of land for a solar provider, it now has consistency of cashflow. It allows  the producer to invest more aggressively into CapEx and capital expenditures. It also provides  
**[0:13:47-0:13:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:13:47):**  that cashflow baseline and we see it as a fantastic opportunity for new producers and  young producers and family businesses that want to create opportunity for younger family  members to participate. So it really is a fantastic opportunity for agriculture. We  have a great desire to do our bit to ensure that it becomes a good viable industry that  we would love to see the vast majority of solar farms managed in this way.  
**[0:14:14-0:14:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:14:14):**  Sophie, I'm really interested in how this experience in the USA can transpose to the  UK. Sheep already quite often feature on solar farms around Britain. And I wonder how those  relationships between solar developers and farmers come about as it stands and whether  this sort of model that Trent's talking about exists here at all.  Well, yes, sheep have been grazing on solar farms since the early days of the solar industry  
**[0:14:39-0:14:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:14:39):**  in the UK, dating back to around 2013, mainly because large scale solar farms are usually  built on agricultural land and the landowner or landowners because nowadays solar farms  are getting increasingly large, they may already farm sheep. If they don't, they usually know  somebody else who does. I'm working on an interesting project at the moment with two  landowners. One is an organic sheep farmer and part of the site will be grazed by sheep  
**[0:15:10-0:15:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:15:10):**  all the year round, because that's part of their business model. The other part of the  site, we're looking to maximise the ecological and biodiversity benefits a little more. So  the sheep grazing will happen in the autumn and the winter, which will allow the wildflowers  to get established and set seed in the spring and the summer. So there are a lot of different  ways that you can manage a sheep grazing regime on a solar farm here in the UK. And yes, it's  
**[0:15:36-0:15:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:15:36):**  something that we're seeing more and more of now.  And are you aware of any solar farms in the UK that have sheep on them using an adaptive  multi paddock approach, for example, using electric fences to constrain the area that  the sheep are in, you know, more than the field itself? Or is it that they generally  go in and they have the run of the field?  
**[0:15:54-0:16:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:15:54):**  I haven't seen that in the UK. Our land pattern tends to consist of smaller fields, I think  than in the US. So what I do see and I live very close to a solar farm, which I walk past,  you know, three, four times a week. And I noticed that the farmer moves the sheep from  field to field. You know, they will stay in one field for a week or so and then they'll  move into the next field. But I haven't seen the fields subdivided up like that with electric  
**[0:16:23-0:16:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:16:23):**  fencing here. But I don't see why it wouldn't work here if it works in the States.  And I wonder, you know, where the incentive comes from, or where the idea comes from to  actually have a solar farm in a particular place. Is it farmers that are getting in touch  with solar developers? Or is it the solar developers getting in touch with the farmers?  Is it the farmers developing the solar themselves?  
**[0:16:42-0:16:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:16:42):**  It's a bit of both really. The number one constraint on where you can put a solar farm  is a connection to the electricity grid. Increasingly, as the electrical grid is becoming more  constrained here, we're looking for other opportunities as well. So for example, you  might want to put in a solar farm that has a private wire direct connection to a large  energy user, say close to an industrial unit or a supermarket or something like that. But  
**[0:17:08-0:17:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:17:08):**  the number one constraint is access to the electricity grid.  So if you're just talking about constraints in the grid connection, I mean, how far away  does a solar farm need to be from a grid connection? And why is that?  Well, you can build a solar farm up to about 10 kilometres away from a grid connection.  10 kilometres? That's quite a long way actually.  
**[0:17:27-0:17:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:17:27):**  Yes, you can sometimes connect directly into the grid on site if you've got pylons or overhead  electricity lines crossing the site. But also if grid capacity is constrained, you can look  at connecting directly into an energy user as well, which is happening more and more  here in the UK, particularly since it's become harder to make the economics of solar work  with the withdrawal of subsidies.  
**[0:17:50-0:17:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:17:50):**  You just mentioned subsidies there. And of course, you know, going back sort of five  years or so, there were a lot of community scale solar farms. And these days, they tend  to be much bigger. Why has that change happened? Why aren't their community scale solar farms  now?  Well, we call it the solar coaster in the UK because of the very rapid changes in government  
**[0:18:09-0:18:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:18:09):**  policy, which have had a big influence on the size and scale of projects that have been  developed. There was no solar development at all between about 2016 and 2019. And now  because of the falling costs of solar, it has become economical without a subsidy, but  it means that you have to do the projects at a much larger scale. So you're seeing now  developers developing projects of around 50 megawatts, which is still of a scale that  
**[0:18:38-0:18:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:18:38):**  can be decided by the local authority rather than by the national government. And now a  50 megawatt solar farm is probably you're looking at a capital cost of around 25 million  pounds. That puts it out of the reach of most community energy projects or developers. But  increasingly, we're seeing developers partner up with community groups to offer shared ownership  in their solar farms, and community investment in the solar farm so that communities can  
**[0:19:04-0:19:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:19:04):**  still get involved with them. But that way, they leave the tricky stuff of raising large  amounts of money to the developers and their investors, but the community can still get  involved and have a share of the profits going back into support the local economy by working  in partnership with larger developers.  Jason Vale,  
**[0:19:17-0:19:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:19:17):**  So those larger developments that we're talking about now, they're up to 50 megawatts, as  you say. I've seen, remember that community solar farms tended to be around sort of five-ish  megawatts. Is that right? So they were obviously much smaller. And what kind of land area are  we talking about for 50 megawatts?  Karen Dodd  
**[0:19:39-0:19:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:19:39):**  So for a 50 megawatt solar farm, you need around 200 acres of land. It's got to be relatively  level land that can be easily screened from any neighbourhood properties because people  don't like to look at solar farms, and they don't like to look at solar panels where they  had green fields before. So we make sure that we can put, if there aren't already existing  mature hedges and woodland, we make sure that we can plant those to fill up any gaps so  
**[0:20:04-0:20:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:20:04):**  that people don't have to look at the panels. They also need to be on areas that don't have  any special landscape designations. So it's difficult to build a solar farm in an area  of outstanding natural beauty. It may be difficult or more challenging in Greenbelt. And finally,  we look for areas of land that are not best and most versatile. So that means a grade  3B or below.  
**[0:20:28-0:20:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:20:28):**  Jason Vale,  And of course, it's that sort of land that often can benefit the most from a regenerative  approach to agriculture, where you're improving the quality of that land and recycling the  nutrients, getting it working better than it was before. So from that perspective, it's  really interesting to hear when you've got a large area like that, that ability to stack  
**[0:20:45-0:20:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:20:45):**  enterprises becomes really important.  Yes, absolutely. And you know, as I mentioned at the beginning, it's about using your land  to deliver more than one objective. If you have solar panels on the land, the land underneath  it managed positively with wildflower meadows to boost biodiversity and ecology, increase  the number of pollinators on the land. You're also benefiting from carbon sequestration.  
**[0:21:09-0:21:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:21:09):**  But perhaps the biggest benefit is you're no longer pumping lots of chemicals into the  land in order to be able to get a crop off it. The land is regenerating itself over time.  Trent, one of the key reasons that you talk to people like me is that you want to demonstrate  that regenerative agriculture is a big solution, that regen is possible at scale. Now, I know  that you don't want to go into specifics about the size of your business, but are you able  
**[0:21:33-0:21:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:21:33):**  to give us some idea of the size of your flock? Because we're really not talking in terms  of two or 300 ewes, are we?  No, and we do run quite a few ewes, several thousands, but we also purchase many thousands  of feeder lambs or stocker lambs from other producers that we take through the green season  and then fatten and harvest. So we're running many, many thousands of lambs as well as thousands  
**[0:21:58-0:22:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:21:58):**  of ewes across. So we would view it as a commercially viable, statistically viable operation going  across many, many thousands of acres. And really the pipeline of growth of additional  land coming online under solar is staggering. That's one of the things that we're looking  at as an industry, oddly enough, is are there enough sheep to handle the growth in solar  in the next decade. So we're having larger conversations about how do we ensure that  
**[0:22:26-0:22:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:22:26):**  there's enough animals and equally importantly enough people trained to manage animals to  ensure that we can manage this land and vegetation under solar in the most ecologically viable  way possible.  How big are the solar farms that you're working with and how many sheep are you likely to  be managing in an individual farm? Is there a rule of thumb?  
**[0:22:47-0:22:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:22:47):**  Not so much. There's a lot of variables that impact it. However, we're looking at sites  that are many thousands of acres contiguous one single site, even a site that say only  500 acres, we may still have 3000 sheep on that site. Again, there's a variety of reasons  we do that. It is more cost effective to run a larger band of sheep on a site than to build  lots of temporary fence to move them around. So we can, particularly most of our properties  
**[0:23:16-0:23:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:23:16):**  are if they're not connected are still in a relatively small area that we might move  them 20 miles up the road. It may be on a larger site for two months and then they may  spend a week at a time on a handful of smaller sites and then come back in a planned grazing  rotation. Just a small aside on that is that allows not only for full recovery of the plants,  but supports the biodiversity so that ground nesting birds have a chance to have their  
**[0:23:44-0:23:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:23:44):**  eggs hatch and the young birds become young adults and be able to leave that environment  before we come back and graze. It allows plants to set seed and flowers and attract pollinators.  There's a variety of reasons why we do that impact and having sheep continuously graze  not only could lead to potential degradation of the land, but certainly would not support  whole healthy, biodiverse environment that is the main reason we were contacted by solar  
**[0:24:12-0:24:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:24:12):**  in the first place is our track record of working with the Savory Institute and being  able to verify and validate that we can regenerate plants and we can sequester carbon. We can  do these things and it's just really exciting to be able to have a chance to do it at a  much larger scale with a higher visibility project.  I want to come on to your relationship with the Savory Institute in just a little while,  
**[0:24:35-0:24:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:24:35):**  but before we do that, I'd like to pick up on the welfare element because I know that  there will be people who are listening to this podcast who are perhaps uncomfortable  with the idea of livestock being transported in large numbers in trucks between different  solar installations every few days. So I just wonder if you could help us out and talk through  that transportation element and talk about how you ensure the health and welfare of your  
**[0:24:57-0:24:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:24:57):**  flock.  Yeah, absolutely. We believe in having a very transparent operation through education awareness  that people learn and become more comfortable with ideas that perhaps at first blush they  may have a reaction to. We're very careful about the genetics. We select for a variety  of reasons. We work in a hot area that tends to be quite humid and not all sheep thrive  
**[0:25:22-0:25:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:25:22):**  under those conditions. So we've largely settled on hair sheep in this case, predominantly  Dorper and Dorper crossbred sheep that can handle the stress of the heat and the humidity.  They also, interestingly enough, by default, are browsers or non-selective grazers having  originated in South Africa as a cross between the Persian fat tail and the Dorset sheep.  And these are very docile sheep. It's almost like a milk cow. We work with them all the  
**[0:25:53-0:25:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:25:53):**  time and when we go to gather, we actually have learned that we make sure we do not open  the doors on the trucks and trailers until we're ready because they will simply walk  on themselves. It's like calling cows to a new pasture through a gate. They know there's  fresh grass on the other side. And so they're like, hey, you know, let us in, let us in,  take us to somewhere else where there's fresh grass. And it's just really not the stress  
**[0:26:17-0:26:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:26:17):**  on the animals that people would maybe think if they didn't have the experience of working  with livestock. That being said, we have very vigorous health protocols that we follow.  We have put gobs of money and time into researching the mineral supplements that we need. We've  got some excellent supplements that we work with manufacturers to ensure that the nutritional  needs of the sheep are met, particularly with the variables and forage type and quality  
**[0:26:44-0:26:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:26:44):**  to ensure that gut health is optimal. When you have a ruminant, if you can keep that  room in full and functioning well, that animal can handle a lot, whether it's external stress,  internal parasite stress, variations in feed quality and volume, keeping that animal healthy  and digesting well is absolutely critical. And so that's a big area of our focus. And  we run all very late model equipment specifically designed to allow for maximum airflow at the  
**[0:27:15-0:27:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:27:15):**  same time for winter transport. All the trailers can be boarded up so that there's minimal  airflow to ensure that the animals are maintained at a comfortable level. So we take animal  welfare very, very seriously. In fact, there is not a livestock producer in the world that  has anybody care more about their animals than they do. That is our wealth. That is  our financial security is in those animals. And there is nothing more important to us  
**[0:27:41-0:27:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:27:41):**  than ensuring that those animals are as healthy and happy as we can make them. We take care  of the sheep, the sheep take care of us. It's fascinating, isn't it? Because you're  talking there about this really synergistic model that you're running where there is energy  being produced, there's food being produced, there's biodiversity being produced because  of the way that you're managing the sheep in a regenerative way. You're building soil,  
**[0:28:05-0:28:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:28:05):**  organic matter, drawing down more carbon at the same time as you've got the renewable  electricity that's reducing the carbon intensity on the grid as well. It's really interesting  stuff. And Sophie, of course, there are direct welfare benefits for sheep being grazed in  solar farms too, aren't there? Well, yes, absolutely. So in times of bad  weather, the solar panels provide shelter from the wind and the rain. And in times of  
**[0:28:31-0:28:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:28:31):**  extreme heat, they can provide shade. And I have had anecdotal evidence from farmers  that their actual yield of land has gone up slightly.  So it's not just the welfare, but the health of the sheep that are being impacted as well.  In Britain, we've talked a little bit about different ways of managing the sheep within  a solar farm installation. But I'm wondering if you've come across examples of other regenerative  
**[0:28:54-0:28:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:28:54):**  farming or other farming systems around solar that don't include sheep.  At almost all the solar farm projects that I work on in the UK, we invite beekeepers  to keep beehives on the solar farm or on land immediately adjacent to the solar farm. But  they like to keep their hives inside the solar farm because the fence provides an element  of security. Again, I've had a beekeeper tell me that his honey yield has increased since  
**[0:29:22-0:29:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:29:22):**  the pollinating flowers were grown around the solar panels. He also has seen less of  the nasty predatory Asian hornet. In other countries, they're experimenting with growing  fruit and vegetables on solar farms. As long as the width between the rows of panels is  wide enough for a small tractor, which it usually is, there's no reason why you can't  grow, for example, soft fruit like raspberries and so on. We're not quite there yet in the  
**[0:29:50-0:29:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:29:50):**  UK, but I think that is probably the direction that we'll be going in. And that goes by the  good name of agrivoltaics.  You'd be able to grow arable as well. It would just be a different way of doing it. And there  are plenty of farmers that we've spoken to who are growing lines of trees with arable  rides in between them. The same could be true with solar.  
**[0:30:08-0:30:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:30:08):**  Yes, since you said that I thought of agroforestry, yes. I don't see why you shouldn't. Yeah,  absolutely.  Trent, your impact as a regenerative farmer is monitored. You're certified by the American  Grass Fed Association as well as by Savory Land to Market programs. What did the people  at the Savory Institute think about your approach to regenerative agriculture when you first  
**[0:30:28-0:30:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:30:28):**  talked to them? It must have been an original concept for them.  They're a very creative bunch. We've been working with them for many years now and just  really impressed with their worldview. They're about doing good everywhere. And while some  people may not want to look at a sea of glass, whether we agree with it or not, it is happening  and it is going to continue to happen. So how do we make the best of it? How do we add  
**[0:30:55-0:31:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:30:55):**  the most value to this essentially inevitable tide of solar production? And there's nothing  singular in nature. There are very few examples that say this is a standalone species with  no impact against it or on others. That just isn't part of nature. Everything is in holds.  Alan Savory and the Savory Institute are all about understanding holds, the W-H-O-L-E-S.  And the holistic management is about considering everything from every angle. It's about the  
**[0:31:26-0:31:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:31:26):**  relationships between. And they're being incredibly supportive of our work. In fact, we've worked  with other members of the Savory Institute in other countries around the world, giving  them the benefit of our experiences. They evaluate solar grazing opportunities in their  countries and regions. So a tremendous amount of support and we're able to verify and validate  that the land under solar is in fact regenerating.  
**[0:31:54-0:31:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:31:54):**  When you talk about demonstrating that, Trent, can you just give us an idea of some of the  outcomes that you're measuring there?  Yeah. So we use the ecological health index or ecological outcome verification, which  is a myriad of data points reduced to an ecological health index, a single number representing  the property on a baseline of a year evaluation. And we do long-term studies every five years  
**[0:32:19-0:32:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:32:19):**  and we do short-term monitoring every year in between. And that allows us to identify  on a range of minus 100 to plus 100, we plug in that ecological health index number. And  as long as that number is improving or increasing year over year, it's a positive trend line.  Therefore we can say that the land is regenerating and land regeneration results in many, many  variables. For example, we have seen land under our management go from 1% organic matter  
**[0:32:50-0:32:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:32:50):**  to over 4% in less than six years. We have seen water retention, water absorption rates  increase dramatically. The world is beginning to wake up to the fact that water is more  important than oil. And we need to understand how to be stewards of that water to ensure  that there's sufficient clean water widely dispersed for all of our needs and how we  manage the land directly connects to water availability and quality. And so being a steward  
**[0:33:19-0:33:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:33:19):**  of these lands and having the tools provided by the Savory Institute to not only manage  the land, but to also be able to pull statistically viable data that allows us to make better  decisions that also verifies and validates that yes, progress has indeed been made or  in some instances progress may not have been achieved, but then we have a feedback loop  that allows us to say, okay, here's what didn't work. Here's what went wrong or here are the  
**[0:33:48-0:33:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:33:48):**  factors outside of our influence that contributed to this situation. How do we pivot? What do  we do differently? You know, if in fact do we need to do anything differently or is this  an anomaly in a weather pattern that we simply need to power through? So being able to have  a model that allows us to evaluate and have continuous improvement through feedback is  phenomenally valuable. And quite frankly, that's why our family business was approached  
**[0:34:18-0:34:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:34:18):**  initially by solar was as a result of having that experience in that formula and cooperation  with the Savory Institute. So there's some forward thinking people in solar that are  saying, hey, whether we intended or not at the outset, we are stewards and owners of  vast swaths of land. What are we going to do with that? One, it has to be managed, but  how can we manage it in a way that has the most desirable results with a moderate cost  
**[0:34:46-0:34:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:34:46):**  structure and by managing land in a way that can be verified as regenerating, it positions  the land to potentially participate in ecometric or carbon schemes for additional revenue flows  that could possibly one day offset the cost of managing that land. So it's a very genuinely  capitalistic approach while also a very environmentally aware and sensitive approach.  That's really fascinating. I'm really interested in that statistic that you gave us there of  
**[0:35:19-0:35:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:35:19):**  going from 1% organic matter to 4% organic matter in six years. There's a lot of argument  that's taking place at the moment about the degree to which soil can be grown, soil carbon  can be grown. And I just wonder what your own view is, Trent, about the amount of soil  that can be accrued, the amount of organic matter. Is it finite or does it just keep  going? You know, it's a good question and I don't think anybody has a finite answer  
**[0:35:48-0:35:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:35:48):**  on that. We know that there is no doubt that we can build healthy soil. We know that if  we do not adopt more regenerative practices, we will lose soil and degenerate soils through  monoculture cropping and extractive cropping and mining approaches. So really why is that  a goal of a finite number? Because who would have believed we could move from 1% to 4%  in six years of organic matter. So if they said, no, you can only do 1% every 10 years,  
**[0:36:22-0:36:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:36:22):**  then we would not have achieved what we achieved. So I'm reluctant to say, here's where the  ceiling is. I would say we can demonstrate, we can validate, we can prove without any  argument that we can build soil. We can increase the organic matter, which essentially leads  to, you know, storing more carbon in the ground. An interesting detail as we've evaluated this  particular property in the last few days that we got this data on is that we have monitored  
**[0:36:51-0:36:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:36:51):**  the land output production of agricultural product, in this case livestock. And essentially  for every one point of increase in organic matter, we're having a one fold increase in  animal livestock production on the same land base. So when we went from 1% to 4% organic  matter, we increased the agricultural output of that same land by approximately 4x as well.  Do we think over the next decade that same rate of increase will be maintained? Doubtful.  
**[0:37:25-0:37:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:37:25):**  I don't say it's impossible, but I am also not foolish enough to say that it's a guarantee.  But what if we don't achieve that? What if we only achieved 10% of that? That's a fricking  home run. I mean, that's amazing. It's a whole win. There's no argument. And so I think people  discuss the wrong things. I think they're focused on the wrong metrics. I think that  their motivations may be suspect. And so really, we just prefer to focus on the positive outcomes  
**[0:37:53-0:37:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:37:53):**  that we can validate within our own enterprises. And we could not be more excited about our  ability to steward the land in ways that lead to incredibly positive outcomes as a whole.  Sophie, just finally, one of the issues that we've been coming back to quite a lot in the  podcast recently, particularly in the Land Unlocked series that we've been doing with  the Food Farming and Countryside Commission in the run up to COP26, is the importance  
**[0:38:19-0:38:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:38:19):**  of power being given back to people in having local power to deliver change on the ground  and taking it back from some of the big corporate profit centres that exist. So in terms of  solar farms, whether it's here or in the USA, they're often owned by people in profit centres  that can be quite far removed from the land itself. And I wonder if that's a concern?  Well, not really. First of all, the farmers who host the solar farms are getting a rental  
**[0:38:48-0:38:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:38:48):**  income for having solar panels on their land, which allows them to continue to farm in the  way that they want to, that is probably best for the planet. But then secondly, many solar  farm projects will put money back into the local community through a community benefit  fund or through a community ownership scheme, as we discussed earlier. But then eventually,  solar farms are assets, just like many other things. And a lot of them end up being owned  
**[0:39:16-0:39:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:39:16):**  by pension funds. As you know, there's a big move afoot for pension funds to divest away  from investments in fossil fuels. And a solar farm is a really good asset for a pension  fund to invest in because it is stable and predictable returns. And so anybody who has  a pension is benefiting indirectly from that solar farm. And then I suppose the final issue  that we haven't actually covered is that solar energy is currently one of the cheapest new  
**[0:39:46-0:39:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:39:46):**  forms of energy generation in the world on a par with onshore wind. In some places, it's  cheaper. And so the benefits of solar are being felt in everybody's pockets, because  it's helping to bring down energy costs for everybody.  So that's really interesting. You're saying that although that profit centre might be  elsewhere, because you've got the farmer, because you've got that local land, because  
**[0:40:08-0:40:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:40:08):**  you're engaging with the community in the design of that solar farm, and because there  might be a community fund associated with it, quite apart from the fact that then the  investments are going into people's pension funds, that there is a sort of a cycle that  brings it back to local people in the end anyway. That's fantastic. That's been so interesting.  But that's all we've got time for. I'd like to thank my guests, Trent Hendricks and Sophie  
**[0:40:31-0:40:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:40:31):**  Fernley-Wittingstall. You can find Sophie on Twitter using the handle at SFWcomms and  Cabri Ho Ranch can be found on Instagram. If you've enjoyed listening, please come back  and listen to more. Tell your friends, like us, review us and share our links. Farmgate  is a partnership project for Farmwell and FAI Farms. We're funded by San Calpa and you  can join the conversation on Twitter by searching for Farmgate Podcast. I've been Finnlow Kastain.  
**[0:40:55-0:41:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Stacking-sheep--solar-energy-e163cga#t=0:40:55):**  Bye for now.  