### Farm Gate  (2020-02-24)
**[0:00:00-0:00:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to Farmgate, I'm Finnlow Kustain. It's World Antimicrobial Awareness Week, so  we're doing our bit. What is antimicrobial resistance? Why is it a problem? What are  the drivers and what can we do about it? I'm joined by Laura Hyam from Vet Sustain and  by Oysen Thorsen, the Chief Executive of FAI Farms. Hello both, Laura, let's get cracking.  What is antimicrobial resistance? So antimicrobial resistance, or AMR, is the ability of microbes  
**[0:00:34-0:00:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:00:34):**  so that they are microscopic organisms such as bacteria, viruses, protozoa and fungi to  grow and survive in the presence of an antimicrobial agent. So in essence, this means that microbes  can change to render antimicrobials ineffective. So this is like the sort of process of evolution  at micro level. That's right, because, and we're talking specifically here mainly about  bacteria, because antibiotic resistance is one of the most pressing public health threats  
**[0:01:04-0:01:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:01:04):**  of our time. So there's a real focus on antibiotic resistance and often antibiotic resistance  is used interchangeably with the term antimicrobial resistance. But yeah, indeed, bacteria can  multiply so rapidly that if they obtain a mutation, either just through random mutation  or by acquiring genes from another bacteria, they can then get an evolutionary advantage  over their counterparts and can grow and multiply and form a new colony of superbugs, essentially.  
**[0:01:33-0:01:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:01:33):**  So what you're saying is that these bacteria are evolving at such a rapid rate that the  antibiotics that we've discovered, the bacteria are evolving so that they can fight these  things off faster than we're able to develop them. That's right. And even at the time when  antibiotics were first discovered in the 1920s by Alexander Fleming, scientists then were  saying that actually resistance is an inevitable outcome of this new discovery and the application  
**[0:01:59-0:02:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:01:59):**  of antibiotics, because bacteria will always evolve and generate these evolutionary advantages  to fend off whatever environmental challenge they come across. So it's always going to  happen. And so it's no surprise now that we've got what is an escalating public health threat  that we now need to really take charge of and develop strategies to try and tackle.  And why is it such an important thing? Why is it a problem?  
**[0:02:24-0:02:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:02:24):**  Yeah, so it means that we're starting to erode our antibiotic arsenal. So we've got multiple  classes of bacteria now at our disposal for modern medicine. And in fact, antibiotics  really define and underpin modern medicine and surgical procedures. So now, these surgical  procedures and medical advancements, they're very commonplace to you and I, and they're  really underpinned by this suite of antibiotic agents that we that we now use, and we have  
**[0:02:53-0:02:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:02:53):**  at our disposal. But obviously, if we start to reduce the number of antibiotics that are  effective, we start to see major health challenges. And at the moment, antimicrobial resistance  causes 700,000 deaths per year. And that's estimated to escalate to 10 million by 2050.  So we're talking about some serious health problems here, and that result from treatment  failures, other adverse health outcomes, prolonged hospital stays, and obviously, ultimately  
**[0:03:20-0:03:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:03:20):**  death as well. We're looking really at comparing Victorian age type medicine with modern medicine,  we've got a booming human population, and we've got some incredible medical tools at  our disposal. In the animal world, and we've got a slightly different picture, I suppose,  and at the moment, antibiotics are incredibly important for animal health and welfare, but  also for food production and food safety. So we actually use antibiotics in the animal  
**[0:03:48-0:03:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:03:48):**  world, both for animal health and welfare, but also for these other production gains,  which we obviously see in food animal production.  Could you talk to us a little bit about what are the causes of this antimicrobial resistance?  Antimicrobial usage absolutely is the leading driver of antimicrobial resistance. So that  usage in people, animals, and in fact, in horticulture as well, is considered to be  
**[0:04:11-0:04:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:04:11):**  the leading driver across many institutions and researchers across the world. In horticulture,  which is an interesting one, antibiotics have also been used since the 50s to control certain  bacterial diseases in high value fruits, vegetables, and ornamental plants.  In fruits and vegetables?  That's right. So streptomycin and tetracyclines and other types of antibiotics are used on  
**[0:04:31-0:04:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:04:31):**  sprays in particularly high value food plants, for example, to tackle the likes of fire blight  in pear and apple and bacterial spot in peaches, but also in citrus as well. So yeah, there  is, there is usage, but it's relatively small, but usage generally is the biggest driver,  but there are other critical drivers that are emerging in the research. For example,  concurrent disease and invasive procedures in people have been linked to the emergence  
**[0:04:57-0:05:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:04:57):**  of antimicrobial resistance as an additional sort of factor. And also in animals, some  production practices and diets have been linked to antimicrobial resistance emergence. So  there are clearly multiple factors at play here that may involve stress and immune compromise,  or even microbiome sort of factors in the animal's guts as well. So this is of real  interest that we look at holistic solutions that bring in all of these risk factors.  
**[0:05:22-0:05:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:05:22):**  Jason, I wonder if I can bring you in here. I wonder if you could talk to us about, you  know, why it is that antibiotics are used on farms and in particular, I guess why they're  overused and where the problems lie. Because my understanding is that a lot of the time  that this data isn't being collected. We don't know how much antibiotic is being used on  farms and that's part of the problem.  
**[0:05:42-0:05:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:05:42):**  It is part of the problem. As Laura says, animal agriculture is the largest consumer  of antibiotics globally. It's used for a number of reasons. It can be a growth promotion,  prevention of disease, and obviously it's also treatment of disease. There's also a  number of different types of antibiotics used for those different types of purposes.  You mentioned treatment of disease there. Surely that's a good thing. If animals are  
**[0:06:08-0:06:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:06:08):**  sick, we need to treat them.  Absolutely. And that's part of the sort of antibiotic stewardship and responsible use  of antibiotics that we promote absolutely includes looking after the animals and treating  the animals that need it. But in fact, sort of keeping antibiotics for that particular  purpose and moving away from the use, sort of preventative use of antibiotics. So using  
**[0:06:32-0:06:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:06:32):**  it as a kind of production support, you know, something that you do every day to either  encourage growth or just hope the unforeseen problems don't appear. So we're sort of trying  to get companies to think about this as, you know, be more targeted, know more about how,  what kind of use is happening in your supply chain, for what reason, and then use that  insight to then drive more responsible use of antibiotics.  
**[0:06:59-0:07:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:06:59):**  Just help me out. When we're talking about routine use of antibiotics, I mean, you mentioned  growth promoting there. What other reasons are there? Because this stuff isn't cheap.  Why are farmers sort of using this on a routine basis rather than saving it to use when an  animal is actually sick and needs that boost?  Yeah, I think, I think it's worth going back a little bit and looking through the history  
**[0:07:18-0:07:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:07:18):**  of animal agriculture very briefly. And in order to answer this question, so since the  forties, we've seen a trend towards more intensive, specialised and mechanised systems of food  animal production. And so since 1945, for example, Great Britain has seen a 65% decline  in the number of farms but a fourfold increase in yield. And in the USA, we've seen an increase  in concentrated feeding operations. And through these changes, we've succeeded in attaining  
**[0:07:44-0:07:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:07:44):**  greater efficiency in food production, but also food security in some parts of the world  following the wars. But supporting this transition has been the introduction of antibiotics,  which has come up, which have come along at the same time. And soon after the advent of  antibiotics and soon after they were made commercially available for people, they were  soon introduced into agriculture. And that was as early as the 1930s. And researchers  
**[0:08:07-0:08:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:08:07):**  at the time trialled the use of mass medication in herds and flocks in feed, and they were  introduced in the forties. And then not long after that it was discovered that antibiotics  actually accelerated growth in those herds and flocks. So soon after that, which was  a bit of a watershed moment, antibiotics were rapidly used and spread across the globe to  control disease, promote growth, even to preserve food. And that's on farms in fishing and whaling  
**[0:08:33-0:08:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:08:33):**  operations, processing plants and in aquaculture production as well. So you can see here we've  got this coevolution over time of both intensification of agriculture and the introduction and widespread  use of antibiotics. And so now we've got this inextricable link between the two practices,  which will now be very hard to unpick. And in fact, antibiotic usage is now considered  by some to be a critical component of contemporary livestock production. And so now that we're  
**[0:08:58-0:09:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:08:58):**  seeing calls to reduce and mitigate our usage, we've now got a big job of work to do to understand  what systems and what approaches can support minimal antibiotic usage without compromising  other sustainability outcomes such as animal health and welfare.  Oistun, what do you think we need to do? What are the key things that we need to be doing  at this point?  
**[0:09:17-0:09:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:09:17):**  We're seeing that both regulation and consumers are moving fairly fast in their understanding  on antibiotics. And for FAI, this means that our focus is on the food industry and we want  to drive our clients and other companies in the food industry to move fast on this issue.  So we want to race it. We think it's a critical issue. And for us, it starts with policy and  with measuring. Right. So, you know, the work that we do is helping companies first get  
**[0:09:47-0:09:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:09:47):**  a handle on what is this crisis? What does it mean to them? What kind of threat does  it entail for them, for their investors, for their customers, for their suppliers, if you  like? And then really critically, how do they monitor the use? So we have a tool that we  call antibiotics monitor that basically helps big companies with global supply chains and  poultry, for example, to really accurately, simply collect the right information. So collect  
**[0:10:18-0:10:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:10:18):**  the information around what antibiotics are being used, for what reason? Where is it happening?  Do we see differences between regions? What differences do we see between production systems?  And then using that data to really drill down and understand why is this farmer or this  supplier over here? Why do they have so much better results or lower use than this one  over here?  
**[0:10:43-0:10:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:10:43):**  Do you find that you are having to sort of bash down those doors at a global level with  these food brands and say, look, come on, antibiotic resistance is something that's  really important, you need to put it on your agenda? Or is it something that increasingly  those food companies are coming to you and asking about and understanding that it's embedded  in that whole idea of sustainability?  
**[0:11:02-0:11:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:11:02):**  I think it's a combination. So we have some companies that come to us, they understand  that this is a threat to society, to economies at large and their supply chain and customers.  But then you also see, for example, through the last FAIR ranking, which ranked protein  producers across the world, according to a number of different kind of sustainability  metrics, they found that 70% of protein producers were high risk for antibiotic stewardship,  
**[0:11:31-0:11:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:11:31):**  meaning that 70% of them had, you know, were not communicating any information about antibiotic  use in their supply chain. Many of them don't have a policy in place, they don't have an  approach for this issue. So it's clear that while some do and some want help with this,  we also see there's a massive need to push kind of off the shelf solutions to those companies  who haven't yet realised what a big threat this is.  
**[0:12:00-0:12:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:12:00):**  And what kind of a threat is it? What, you know, in terms of global food businesses,  what is the business risk of not taking this threat seriously?  Again, the sort of investor network that looks at antimicrobial resistance as a threat to  their portfolios, they came up with a figure that the cost of AMR in 2050 would be something  around a hundred trillion US dollar to the global economic system in terms of losses  
**[0:12:28-0:12:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:12:28):**  to the economic system. So that could be obviously through jeopardising food production, human  loss, longer sick leaves, longer hospital stays, you know, the sort of the myriad of  kind of knock on effects that you have when our core, our core mess and stop working.  So it's an astronomical number. Then there's a more immediate one around companies wanting  to be responsible businesses, showing that they, you know, that they are on top of the  
**[0:12:58-0:13:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:12:58):**  challenges that could undermine their business. They're looking after their reputation and  you see more and more NGOs and investors and media really raising this issue and looking  to companies to see what are they doing and how are they, how are they tackling this risk?  I guess that reputational thing, I'm kind of struck by that, that figure that you've  just used there, a hundred trillion dollars by 2050. And that isn't just within those  
**[0:13:23-0:13:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:13:23):**  businesses themselves. This is, you know, being felt across the world economy, isn't  it? And it strikes me that there's an analogy here with, with climate change and with the  fossil fuel sector, that in the same way that the fossil fuel sector has driven human induced  anthropogenic climate change, which has a knock on cost for everybody around the world,  that the food companies are going to find that they, that the finger is pointed back  
**[0:13:46-0:13:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:13:46):**  at them for this rise in antimicrobial resistance, which is costing everybody, costing everybody's  economy so much money.  Yeah, I think that's, that's why we are raising it on, on, on their agendas. We think that,  you know, as, as customers of animal agriculture, they have a, have a responsibility. They have,  you know, relationships and means and opportunity to drive that behavior that we want to see  
**[0:14:09-0:14:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:14:09):**  and drive that stewardship and responsibility. When it comes to this issue, we see food companies  as having a really critical role. This is an opportunity to be part of the solution.  And that's what, that's what we're interested in. So we're interested in putting, putting  off the shelf solutions in front of companies that have an opportunity to make a real difference  in our mind that starts with education. So training, we offer training to people in the  
**[0:14:34-0:14:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:14:34):**  food chain to understand this issue better, to understand what a good policy looks like,  to get a, get their heads around the different types of antibiotics that exist and how they  can drive better, better results. And then it's that next step of monitoring and collecting  very detailed information about how big this problem is for them.  And do you think that there is any element, you know, in the same way that we saw with  
**[0:14:58-0:15:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:14:58):**  climate change, is there any sort of form of denial from within these food companies?  Because if on one hand, as Laura was saying, we've got people within the food industry  saying that antimicrobials, routine antibiotics are critical for livestock production, then  surely there must be some pushback to this idea that the whole food industry has to change  the way that it's working with antibiotics.  
**[0:15:19-0:15:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:15:19):**  I'd just step in here, if you don't mind, I think just to address that point there,  that why have we got this kind of dichotomy between an urgent, very real and present danger  of AMR affecting human populations, and yet this consideration of antimicrobials as being  critical to livestock production.  Ultimately, there is still and there's recently been, you know, contention around the concept  
**[0:15:39-0:15:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:15:39):**  that antimicrobial usage in animals leads to antimicrobial resistance in people. There  are so many steps between that usage in an animal right through to clinical disease affecting  a person. So with clinical consequences, there are so many steps. Every step has been documented  by pretty robust research. But what has been the challenge from the research community  has been stitching all of those steps together to one long chain with evidence to support  
**[0:16:07-0:16:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:16:07):**  the whole the whole chain that has been done by a small number of researchers, including  from the European Food Safety Agency and other European partners. It has been done recently,  but only with a very small number of landmark studies, I'd say. And so it's only been until  recently that we've had that fairly solid evidence, but it's still contended and it's  the evidence is still scant, I would say. So yes, I think that there has been that concern  
**[0:16:31-0:16:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:16:31):**  within certain groups that there isn't enough evidence to suggest that we need to make drastic  changes to our antimicrobial usage and production systems and our agriculture as a result.  Are you able to talk us through that? How does antimicrobial resistance spread between  people and animals and the environment, that whole thing?  Sure, yeah. So there's plenty of evidence to back up the notion that the usage of antibiotics  
**[0:16:56-0:17:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:16:56):**  in either an animal or a person leads to the emergence of antimicrobial resistance. That's  fairly well documented, although even that is pretty complex in that there are very specific  there's a very specific combination of antimicrobials and bacteria that that need to interact in  order to see that risk of antimicrobial resistance emerging. So even that's quite complicated,  but there is fairly good evidence that the usage of some antibiotics will lead to the  
**[0:17:20-0:17:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:17:20):**  emergence of certain types of drug resistant bacteria. So that's fairly solid. And the  links between the emergence of that particular antibiotic resistant bacteria moving from  an animal to a person, that's fairly well documented too. We see that there's various  researchers that have kind of swabbed animals or farming environments and found antimicrobial  resistance in farming operations and linked those to the shedding of pathogens in the  
**[0:17:46-0:17:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:17:46):**  farming family or in stock people. That's fairly well documented. But then the whole  chain of antimicrobial usage in an animal right through to clinical disease in a person  is quite challenging to knit together. But it has and does happen on occasions. So there  are various means by which that bacteria can spread from an animal to a person. In that  example, with a farming family, we've obviously got direct contact. And that's particularly  
**[0:18:15-0:18:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:18:15):**  a problem for animal health workers, so vets, but also farmers and stock people, abattoir  workers and processes. So the people have literally hands on interactions with with  livestock. We've then got the consumption of food. So this is where consumers and citizens  come into the equation. We see sometimes that antimicrobial resistant bugs end up on food  products. And so when we handle them in our kitchens or consume undercooked food, we can  
**[0:18:40-0:18:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:18:40):**  acquire antimicrobial resistant diseases.  So these are kind of the superbugs.  Absolutely. Yeah, absolutely. And then the final...  Give us some names, give us some examples.  So Campylobacter would be a really good one on uncooked chicken. And that's been a very  
**[0:18:53-0:18:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:18:53):**  sort of broadly publicised issue. Certainly Campylobacter in itself is a major foodborne  problem, foodborne pathogen for people across the world. But there are instances where we've  seen, for example, fluoroquinolone resistance in Campylobacter that go on to form superbugs  and infections in people that are very, very hard to treat. And some of that has been traced  back to the usage of enofloxacin in chickens. So that's a fairly well publicised example.  
**[0:19:20-0:19:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:19:20):**  And then the final pathway from animals to people is via the environment. So the shedding  of either antibiotic residues or antimicrobial resistant determinants or pathogens from those  that have been treated in effluent. So that's both people and animals shedding resistance  that can end up in waterways and soils, etc., and go on to infect people that way. And depending  on where we are in the world, that could mean that it ends up in our water systems or in  
**[0:19:48-0:19:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:19:48):**  water for bathing and etc., etc. So that the environmental contamination is also a concern.  Fantastic. That's really interesting, really clear. Thank you very much for that. There  are loads of antibiotics out there, but some are more important than others. There's a  kind of a tiering, isn't there? There are human critical antibiotics and then others  that are less important. And how is it that we're supposedly differentiating this?  
**[0:20:10-0:20:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:20:10):**  Yeah, so our global institutions, such as the World Health Organisation and the World  Organisation for Animal Health, the OIE, have both classified our antibiotic arsenal into  various categories according to their importance to both human health and to animal health.  And probably the most influential is the World Health Organisation's list of critically important  antimicrobials. And of that list, they have pulled out what's called the highest priority  
**[0:20:34-0:20:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:20:34):**  critically important antibiotics, which consists of four classes, the fluoroquinolones, the  macrolides, the third and fourth generation cephalosporins and colistin, also known as  the last resort antibiotic. And those are the ones we hear a lot about in terms of restricting  their usage for when they're really needed, not only in people, because these are the  drugs that are used in very, very serious infections with very few alternatives for  
**[0:20:59-0:21:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:20:59):**  treatment. So they're really, they're really classed as critical and precious, if you like,  for human health. But in the animal world, they're used also quite widely in many jurisdictions.  And so of course, we're under even more pressure in the veterinary and animal agriculture worlds  to restrict our usage of these so-called HPCIAs. And that's where again, FAI's advice comes  in that we're creating these policy positions to try and restrict usage of these particularly  
**[0:21:25-0:21:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:21:25):**  precious antibiotics for when they're really needed and backed up with diagnostic testing.  Okay, so you've convinced me, I'm a citizen, I'm out in the supermarket, what can I do?  Is there some way that I can avoid food that has been stuffed full of antibiotics?  Yes, there's no stamp. You'll be disappointed to hear it's not as simple as that, like an  organic stamp or a red tractor stamp or any of the others. It's not as simple as that.  
**[0:21:50-0:21:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:21:50):**  But doesn't the organic stamp tell us that, you know, there's less antibiotic use?  There's certainly stricter regulation in the organic sector around the usage of medicines  such as antibiotics. So it could be a good place to start. But again, it's quite nuanced.  There are studies to show that antibiotic usage in organic agriculture is lower in certain  species. But there is also conflicting evidence to suggest that actually, in some organic  
**[0:22:13-0:22:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:22:13):**  production systems, access to an outdoor range and access to wildlife also can be a source  of infectious disease and therefore a risk factor for antibiotic usage. It's not as simple  as it might seem, fortunately.  So I mean, just looking for something like organic or some more sort of sustainable,  higher quality, higher welfare type brand isn't enough. It's very difficult. There isn't  
**[0:22:35-0:22:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:22:35):**  a label that's out there, certainly in the UK, that says antibiotic. There is in the  US, though, isn't there? There is an antibiotic.  There is. In the US and a few other markets, you have seen the emergence of antibiotic  free production.  So that's good, yeah.  
**[0:22:51-0:22:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:22:51):**  It's driving awareness, I guess, about the issue. We should all be more responsible about  how we handle and use these medicines. And antibiotic free is one way and it's sort of  at one end of the spectrum. But to your point earlier, there are times when animals need  treatment. We believe that that can be done in a responsible way where you're still keeping  overall usage really low and the risk to resistance also really low. So that's why we're sort  
**[0:23:23-0:23:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:23:23):**  of taking that broader approach where every company should be thinking about what does  that responsible use look like for them? What are the right metrics to be reporting on in  order to show that they're making progress, that they're sending that message to their  suppliers, the suppliers understand what's expected of them, and that then ultimately  filters down to farmers, to veterinarians who can support that type of system that doesn't  
**[0:23:50-0:23:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:23:50):**  rely on routine use of antibiotics.  I want to pick up on something that you mentioned 10 minutes or so ago, where you were talking  about the risks that businesses are facing. And so let's connect that now. We know that  the food businesses, that food in general, the way that food is produced, the routine  use of antibiotics is driving antimicrobial resistance. This is something that we as citizens  
**[0:24:12-0:24:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:24:12):**  and that the policy world cares about. But at the same time, as citizens, it's very difficult  for us to do an awful lot about it. So we kind of rely on organisations like FAIR that  you mentioned before, the Rumour Alliance, and other NGOs. And are the NGOs somehow,  are they being successful?  I think so. I think the investors coming together and putting this right on their agenda is  
**[0:24:37-0:24:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:24:37):**  a very powerful signal. It's important for, you know, that's a message that cuts across  every level of a company when your key big institutional investors are asking you questions  about your antimicrobial stewardship. It gets it up on the agenda. Same with the types of  rankings that you see from both NGOs and investors are important, keeping this issue alive, keeping  the focus on them. And then obviously, the hard work is in implementing the change. And  
**[0:25:10-0:25:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:25:10):**  I guess that's where FAI position ourselves. We think that we can, you know, we can help  the companies that understand that this is something they need to tackle, but don't necessarily  know what the next steps are.  Okay, so think of a company and tell us an example of best practice.  So it starts at the governance level. So it starts with recognising AMR, microbial resistance,  
**[0:25:33-0:25:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:25:33):**  as a key threat, then spelling out a clear policy, typically associated with goals and,  you know, clear outcomes that this policy is going to drive in their supply chain, specifying  what species they're concerned with, what sectors they're working in, and what approach  they're taking to both recording antimicrobial use, improving and sort of refining the use  of antimicrobial use and also overall reducing the use.  
**[0:26:02-0:26:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:26:02):**  Then the next step is measuring it. So getting a handle on the data, engaging with suppliers,  that's what we have a tool for, to get the right information in. And that does take some  handholding and take some support and training for the suppliers to understand what information  is expected, why they're being asked to report this information, and then importantly, what's  going to happen with this information? What are you going to do with this? And we work  
**[0:26:31-0:26:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:26:31):**  with a large company that is doing this across their entire global poultry supply chain to  really get a handle on where are the high risk areas, where are the areas where they  can learn from, where is this a really big problem, and where should they put more resource,  if you like, and more effort into combating this particular threat.  And then finally, we think there's an important role of training and education on this subject.  
**[0:27:00-0:27:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:27:00):**  It is complicated, as this podcast has shown to it, it's complicated in vocabulary. The  science is there, but it's complex. And just disseminating more information and training  about that topic for people that work in the food chain.  So really, to summarise that, we're looking for food businesses to have really clear policy  around antimicrobials and antibiotic usage, which then leads to measuring that usage actually  
**[0:27:30-0:27:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:27:30):**  within the supply chain, doing that data recording, reporting then that data, first of all within  that individual company, but ideally reporting it in a way that is public and transparent,  and sharing best practice within that supply chain so that individual farmers, individual  processors are able to work out what they're doing well, what they're not doing quite so  well, and then make those adjustments within their production system. So essentially, reduce,  
**[0:27:54-0:27:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:27:54):**  refine, replace.  Correct. I think that's exactly right. And I think that, you know, combined that is a  really strong signal effect. It's a signal effect through that public stakeholder reporting,  showing the what you are doing to your peers, you get that recognition also in the public  rankings, whether that's fair or other other NGOs, your investors see that you're taking  
**[0:28:18-0:28:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:28:18):**  this seriously.  Well, it sounds like it's a societal threat in terms of the health of society in terms  of economics, when we think of that enormous figure, the cost of increasing antimicrobial  resistance over the course of the next 30 years to 2050. But also, there's a reputational  risk for those companies as well, isn't there? And as citizens become more aware of this,  
**[0:28:39-0:28:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:28:39):**  as NGOs work harder to drive change in food supply chains and amongst the brands, as we  have global rankings like the fair index, that's the sort of thing that will hopefully  drive us to the kind of change that we need to see. Well, look, that's been fascinating.  Thanks very much. But that's all we have time for. So I'd like to thank my guests, Laura  Hyam from VetSustain and Eystein Thorsen, the chief executive of FAI Farms. If you've  
**[0:29:06-0:29:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Tackling-antimicrobial-resistance-emu5h0#t=0:29:06):**  enjoyed listening, please come back and listen to more. Tell your friends, like us, review  us and share our links. FarmGate is a partnership project for Farmwell and FAI Farms. We're  funded by San Calpa and you can join the conversation on Twitter by searching for FarmGate podcast.  I've been Finnlow Kastain. Bye for now.  