### Farm Gate  (2020-52-15)
**[0:00:00-0:00:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to Farmgate. I'm Finn Loke-Kustain. Today I'm talking to the producer and director  of Carbon Cowboys, Peter Bicke. Carbon Cowboys is a series of ten films about regenerative  agriculture and adaptive multi-paddock grazing. They demonstrate the enormous potential of  this model of land use and introduce us to some remarkable characters and success stories.  Peter Bicke is a professor of practice in both the School of Sustainability and the  
**[0:00:32-0:00:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:00:32):**  Cronkite School of Journalism at Arizona State University. He's helping to lead a five  million dollar research project focused on multi-paddock grazing in which he's collaborating  with 20 scientists and 10 ranchers, focused on soil health and soil carbon storage. Peter,  welcome to the program. Let's start, if I may, by asking you just to describe the  Carbon Cowboys project. What is it? Why did you make the films? And how did the project  
**[0:01:00-0:01:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:01:00):**  come about in the first place? Sure. Well, Finn Loke, thanks for having me. I made a  movie called Carbon Nation that came out in 2011 and in that film we were looking for  solutions to climate change. And it became really clear in our research and our filming  and all the people I met when we were promoting the movie that soils were both a huge cause  of carbon emissions in the atmosphere. Maybe a fifth of the carbon that's in the atmosphere  
**[0:01:23-0:01:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:01:23):**  right now is from soils, from being plowed and eroded. And also when soils are treated  properly they could be a huge factor in drawing down enormous amounts of atmospheric CO2,  get stored in the soils as carbon and that's just simply by photosynthesis. The plants  suck down the CO2, burp out the oxygen for us to breathe and then feed all the soil life,  the soil microbes, carbon. And in my hunting for that solution I discovered that the folks  
**[0:01:50-0:01:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:01:50):**  who were raising cattle, grazing cattle in a way that emulated the way bison, big giant  herds of bison used to move across the great plains here in the US and there's other herding  animals around the world that helped build up soils. But the bison specifically helped  build up some of the world's most amazingly rich and deep topsoil, 15 feet deep in the  great plains before we started plowing it about 150 years ago. And so there were farmers  
**[0:02:13-0:02:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:02:13):**  that were emulating that with 100 cows, 150, maybe a little bit more, maybe 800. And there  they were moving them around with electric wire, putting them into small herds on their  farms and having tremendous success. And you could just see the success from across the  fence with their neighbor. Their forage was gorgeous and so much more productive. Their  animals were healthier. They were able to produce a lot more food on the same acres  
**[0:02:35-0:02:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:02:35):**  with the same rainfall. So I was very, very intrigued by this. So in 2012, 2013 I started  shooting the first of the soil carbon cowboys short films called soil carbon cowboys. And  that was released at the end of 2013, beginning of 2014. And it did really well. Just put  it up on Vimeo. We didn't do any press and up to a million people in 150 countries watched  that short little 12 minute film. So I decided to keep making short films on the adaptive  
**[0:03:04-0:03:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:03:04):**  multipatic grazing. We call it amp grazing around the US and Canada and in the UK. We've  got a film that takes place in Devon and Cornwall, two different farmers. It was just remarkable.  The similarity of stories, the similarity of success, whether it was in super wet area  like, you know, Southwestern England or a super dry area like Kansas or New Mexico,  the same methods were working in both places. One in England to get the water off their  
**[0:03:28-0:03:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:03:28):**  land without washing their land into Plymouth Sound. And then in Kansas holding every drop  of rain into their soil so they could grow as much forage as they could during severe  droughts that we had earlier in this decade.  So let's, let's get into some of that detail in just a moment. But I'm, there are a couple  of things that sort of raised there. There is this concern that multipatic grazing is  
**[0:03:49-0:03:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:03:49):**  intensive grazing, that it's somehow an intensive way of rearing livestock. Do you think that's  the case? Is that your experience?  That word intensive seems to have like a negative connotation and managed intensive grazing  is one of the ways people describe it. Mob grazing is another, holistic management is  another strip grazing. There's a lot of descriptions. We use the term adaptive multipatic grazing  
**[0:04:13-0:04:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:04:13):**  because it's adaptive. It changes each year, can change within the growing season. You  never want to do the same thing over and over again with nature. It likes difference. It  likes disruption. All I can tell you is that the farmers who are using this method, putting  a lot of animals in a small amount of area for a short amount of time and then letting  them move on. The land is in phenomenal shape. The water cycles return where streams that  
**[0:04:36-0:04:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:04:36):**  were perennial two generations ago and had dried up except for during heavy rainfall  are now perennial again. Wildlife is showing back up on these pieces of land directly across  the fence from their neighbors where they're not showing up. You're seeing breeding birds,  wildlife that's rare, that's really depleted, taking advantage of the natural ecosystems  on these farms. So I'm just looking at nature. I'm looking at the animal health and I'm looking  
**[0:05:01-0:05:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:05:01):**  at the farmer's bottom line, the farmer's happiness, the farmers getting themselves  out of debt. Those are my indicators.  And of course you liken them to bison. I think for many people our understanding of what  cattle farming looks like is very much it's a modern vision. It's the vision we've grown  up with with cattle sort of standing in a field. But of course that would have been  
**[0:05:21-0:05:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:05:21):**  very different in the way that cattle herded together traditionally, the way bison herded  together. I mean that's the natural behavior of cattle, isn't it? So in many ways it's  simply recreating that natural behavior.  It's letting the cows be cows. And not only do cows herd together, we were filming in  Missouri and the farmer there was talking about how when there was bad weather, families  
**[0:05:44-0:05:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:05:44):**  would gather together because they know who's the grandmom, who's the mom, who's the baby,  and that families of animals would herd together within the herd. Why were they in herds in  the first place? Well, it's protection. You know, wolves were picking off the stragglers  of the bison herds and so stay in the herd for protection. And also the food's good,  so stay in the herd and move on to the next piece. And these animals, they don't want  
**[0:06:06-0:06:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:06:06):**  to eat the grasses and the forage down to the nubs, down to the soil. But if that's  all you give them, that's what they'll do. They only want to eat about half of it. And  then they naturally stomp down the rest of it, which is a great soil cover. Then they  want to move on. And so the farmers are enabling them to do what they do. It's like us with  asparagus. You know, there's that certain point where you're just like, nah, I'm not  
**[0:06:27-0:06:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:06:27):**  eating any more of that. It's too rough. It's the same thing for the cows. And the cows  know how to balance their diet too. We get into this in the film Time Will Tell, which  is the Cornwall and Devon story, where there's a scientist Shred Provenza, who's out of Utah  State University. He's done all these studies to show that grazing animals know how to balance  their diet if they're given a plethora of choices. And so another thing that the farmers  
**[0:06:49-0:06:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:06:49):**  that we filmed do is they try to just play with as many different crops as they can on  their fields to see what's working, to see what's punching through compacted soil, to  see what the animals like, to see what the pollinating insects like. You know, they're  really working on an ecosystem. It's very creative.  I want to ask you about some of your key insights and some of the people that you've met over  
**[0:07:08-0:07:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:07:08):**  the course of making these films in just a moment. But I want to go back to the introduction  where I was describing you as both a professor of sustainability and a professor, you know,  in the School of Journalism. You're a filmmaker and a scientist. And it's kind of a double  life. It's sort of the Bruce Wayne and Batman sort of thing. And I wonder, I wonder which  identity you most associate with. Do you think of yourself as more of a filmmaker or as more  
**[0:07:37-0:07:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:07:37):**  of a scientist?  I'm a filmmaker who was curious about solutions to climate change, which led me to AMP grazing,  adaptive multipathic grazing, and led me to the fact that there's a lot of science that  hasn't been done on this type of grazing when compared to conventional grazing. I then met  a bunch of scientists and thought, well, we should put together a team. So the way I would  
**[0:07:58-0:08:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:07:58):**  put together a movie crew, the way I would fundraise for a movie is the exact same muscles  that we use to help put together this team of scientists and fundraise for the science.  But I'm not a scientist. I'm a wrangler of scientists. And so I helped lead the team.  But my job is the communications and the fundraising for the science. And we have phenomenal scientists  from all over the US and the UK. We're working with some amazing people from the University  
**[0:08:25-0:08:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:08:25):**  of Exeter on greenhouse gas measurement. And so my job is to get the funding together and  then help scout the farms. And then so we're doing science to understand what adaptive  multipathic grazing is compared to conventional grazing. And then I'm making a documentary  on all that science on the farmers we're meeting and the scientists out in the field. And so  that particular project started the team first got together at the beginning of 2014 and  
**[0:08:51-0:08:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:08:51):**  we got out in the field to do research in the spring of 2018. And now we've been out  in the field a few years. Some science is still going on out in the field, but we're  starting to write our first papers now and the film is being edited now. And so that  project will be sort of coming out to the world in early 2021.  You talk about the funding model and the way that funding for a movie is much the same  
**[0:09:14-0:09:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:09:14):**  as funding for the research. I wonder where the funding came from because and part of  the reason for asking that is because over the last three years in the UK and I know  that this conversation is taking place at various different stages of development within  the European Union and various places around the world, around soil carbon sequestration.  Clearly you were an early adopter of that knowledge. But other people are starting to  
**[0:09:40-0:09:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:09:40):**  wake up to the fact now that as you said, a fifth of the carbon in the air is coming  from bad soil use, that there isn't this enormous potential if we manage land well to get soil  sequestering carbon as well as trees and hedges and ponds and these other things. But when  I talk to people and they say, well, you know, where is the science on this? Where are we?  Are we ever going to be able to predict, you know, the levels of soil sequestration? The  
**[0:10:07-0:10:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:10:07):**  place that I am perennially pointing people to is Carbon Cowboys because you're the guys  that are actually doing this work. And so was it difficult getting the funding in the  first place or was there an appetite from the people that you spoke to?  Funding in my experience is usually very difficult, just period. Funding for a documentary, funding  for science, you know, however you want to slice it. Funding to get that new job, trying  
**[0:10:30-0:10:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:10:30):**  to get your parents to give you an allowance. My kids are lobbying for that. Funding is  a challenge. So persistence is a really helpful thing. McDonald's is our biggest funder. They're  in for a $4.5 million grant for this research we're doing. The research right now is 6.3  million at this point. And we've used about three and some change of McDonald's grant,  which has been matched. And we raised the rest of the money through other funders. And  
**[0:10:56-0:11:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:10:56):**  one of the first things I did when I was starting this project in 2013 was I wanted, and I've  actually been talking to people in the fossil fuel industry for years about this type of  grazing because I thought they're the ones who've got the biggest carbon problem. Why  wouldn't they want to find what could be the cheapest carbon solution? That was amazing  how much reticence I had from that industry to even look at the grazing options, even  
**[0:11:21-0:11:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:11:21):**  look at soils as an option. But eventually in 2013, I came up against, was introduced  to, didn't come up against, I was introduced to a fellow who worked at Shell in the division  called Shell Game Changer. His name is Russ concert. And he understood what I was talking  about. He understood the idea that if you use soils to draw down carbon, that might  be a pretty cool way to do things. And it might actually make the company look good  
**[0:11:43-0:11:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:11:43):**  as well as be actually doing good. The problem with Russ at that time was he was retiring  after 32 years, but we were in, we got a grant from Shell Game Changer to study. They said,  show us the business case. And what we said to show was you're spending $150 a ton to store  CO2 mechanically after you spend a billion dollars building a facility to actually capture  that carbon. We're seeing farmers drawing down carbon at a high rate for a profit. You  
**[0:12:08-0:12:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:12:08):**  could pay a farmer $10 a ton per hectare per year for CO2, or you could pay $150 a ton  to store it mechanically. You could have that carbon be in an ecosystem where it's doing  some good with the farmers, or you could have that carbon taken out of the system and pumped  down to an old gas well, you know, that's now going to be a pocket for, for liquefied  CO2 and take it out of nature with the CCS method. So we made the case.  
**[0:12:33-0:12:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:12:33):**  So there's the business case, as you, as you described it, that's the, that's the ambition,  but you got to get there. And so you've got to be able to measure, you've got to be able  to, well, I guess there were two ways of funding carbon sequestration on there. There's the,  the method where farmers measure the amount of carbon that's in their soil and then the  payment is retrospective. All there's the way of saying, well, I can predict because  
**[0:12:55-0:12:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:12:55):**  we have the science to back us up that we're going to be able to draw down this much carbon  over the course of the next decade, therefore fund us to be able to do that work. And I  guess there are, there are models in between. So what is it that you're doing apart from  making films and meeting these, these fantastic farmers who, who are, you know, living the  kind of work that you're talking about? What kind of research are you involved in? What's  
**[0:13:17-0:13:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:13:17):**  the, what's the bread and butter work of a carbon cowboy?  Sure, sure. And, and, and sort of just with what you were saying, I'm more of the school  of take a measurement on January 1st, 2021, come back five years later, see what soil  carbon measurements you have, and then pay the farmer based on true carbon storage measurement,  how much more carbon is in the stock in that, in that farmer's land. And you can, you can  
**[0:13:39-0:13:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:13:39):**  sort of say, Hey, we assume based on your methods and based on your soil type and based  on the research we've got that this much carbon will be stored. And if you need to get a loan  ahead of that and pay the loan back with the carbon sales, I could see models, business  models like that. The work we're doing is, is measuring whether amped grazing, regenerative  grazing actually is a mechanism for, for ecosystem improvement, for drawing down carbon, for  
**[0:14:06-0:14:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:14:06):**  improving the farmer's lives, for making the animals healthier. We're measuring soil carbon  and a whole lot of different methods of soil health. We're measuring the microbial communities,  bugs, birds, biodiversity, and population. We're measuring greenhouse gas cycling, methane,  nitrous oxide, CO2. We're measuring water infiltration. We're measuring forage production  and nutrient density of that forage. We're measuring animal wellbeing and then the farmer  
**[0:14:33-0:14:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:14:33):**  wellbeing, the how well are the farmers doing? Those are a lot of metrics. Yeah, those are  the metrics we're measuring and we're doing it in farm pairs. So we have adaptive on one  side of the fence or down the road. And then we have a conventional grazing on the other  side of the fence. And we've got five farm pairs in the Southeast US that we're studying.  And then we're talking about replicating in the upper Great Plains in the US. And we're  
**[0:14:56-0:15:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:14:56):**  also now having conversations with different countries to replicate the research and make  sure everyone's using the same methods so that we can get data in France and get data  in England and Australia and New Zealand and Brazil. And McDonald's has been very, very  interested in replicating the research around the planet.  Why that many metrics? Is that because you think that that is the number of metrics that  
**[0:15:19-0:15:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:15:19):**  need to be taken, possibly amongst others, to demonstrate broader sustainability? Or  is it because you need to measure and monitor that many different things to be able to accurately  assess the carbon drawdown? Or is it just that you're trying a whole range of different  metrics to see which one works best? We chose all those metrics because we thought they  all had an integrated part in soil carbon accrual or depletion. And we might find that  
**[0:15:47-0:15:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:15:47):**  after we finish the Southeast work that we might be able to pare some of that down, that  we don't need to go as deep on all those different metrics.  Our scientists from each one of those specialties made a very good case of why measuring bugs  are very, very much part of the ecosystem. And biodiversity of plants and birds and bugs  is a great indicator of how healthy that system is. And that healthy system will be drawing  
**[0:16:12-0:16:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:16:12):**  down more carbon than an unhealthy system. There's also the need for ecosystem services.  There's a lot of people who want to enable farmers to have income streams beyond carbon  so that if you're showing that you're helping the water table and you're helping water infiltration  and your system is so spongy and healthy that you're actually making flooding downstream  less damaging because your soil soaked up the water before it could become a flood,  
**[0:16:36-0:16:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:16:36):**  that that's a value for society. We want farmers to be making money in all the ways they possibly  can because at least in the US, and I know in the UK as well, farmers are woefully underpaid  for producing such an essential part of our economy, food. And in the US, the highest  rate of suicide amongst any group right now is farmers. It's insane. I didn't come at  this thinking I'd be an advocate for farmers, but I love farmers. I've met so many farmers.  
**[0:17:02-0:17:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:17:02):**  They're amazing people. And I don't want them to have to put hazmat suits on during any  process of producing food for us.  I'm just interested in where you think we're up to right now in terms of monitoring soil  carbon development, in terms of being able to say this farm, this field has sequestered  this amount of carbon over this time and therefore this has a value associated with it because  
**[0:17:28-0:17:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:17:28):**  there are so many different land types, so many different soil types, often within the  same farm. So how do we go about managing that sort of a problem?  The most expensive way to measure soil carbon right now is physical taking samples and sending  them to the lab, a meter deep or deeper, and doing the serious analysis. And that's what  we've done on our project. We've done the old school, serious, expensive, slow analysis.  
**[0:17:54-0:18:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:17:54):**  I think that another piece of the puzzle is going to be what are called eddy covariance  flux towers, these towers that can measure the greenhouse gases flowing into and out  of an ecosystem. And those are very expensive, but with some really cool work, like I said  with the University of Exeter that we're doing, they're actually developing cheaper towers  like from $100,000 to $15,000. And we're testing those towers on one of our farm pairs on our  
**[0:18:22-0:18:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:18:22):**  research and the cheaper towers are showing themselves to be more accurate and actually  more able to do the work in a farmland system. The other ones are sort of getting clogged  up with bugs literally, and these are just designed better so the bugs don't clog them  up so bad. And so if you imagine if just one iteration is down to $15,000, they're already  thinking they can make that $7,500 a tower and you turn that into a business and all  
**[0:18:49-0:18:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:18:49):**  of a sudden, could those get down to $2,000 a tower that are measuring greenhouse gases,  it becomes the new weather vein. And if you get enough of those creating a network, then  you still do the soil measurement, but you get the greenhouse gas towers going and then  you can really start using models to accurately assess carbon accrual and respiration in larger  and larger areas. And then you tie that in with satellite data of forage production and  
**[0:19:16-0:19:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:19:16):**  soil moisture and things that are happening now with satellite data. And then you tie  all that together with artificial intelligence. That's where a lot of folks are seeing the  progress going to getting all of those different inputs of data, never leaving the expensive  hard soil data collection behind. That's got to stay. But doing it less and less and getting  a bigger and bigger area with all the other new technologies, that's what we are working  
**[0:19:44-0:19:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:19:44):**  on, our science team specifically, so trying to build up the knowledge so that we can start  building models to get this thing at a much larger scale. So it becomes cheaper and cheaper  per farm. Sounds like a combination from what you're talking about there, because for an  individual farm to do all of that would be, you know, that's a lot of complexity. Yeah,  absolutely. But so what we're kind of looking at is a combination of state owned facilities  
**[0:20:11-0:20:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:20:11):**  with satellites and data about land type and that sort of thing. Then having private companies  who are able to crunch these numbers and provide information for farmers. But then there is  still a role for the individual farmer to actually do that soil carbon measurement themselves  to dig up those samples, send them off to the lab or count the worms. So what you're  looking at is quite a patchwork of processes coming together in order to be successful.  
**[0:20:37-0:20:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:20:37):**  Yeah, I think that's accurate. And, you know, there's governments that have satellites,  there's private companies that have satellites, there's insurance companies that have satellites.  I've been talking to some folks there, obviously, big companies that are doing AI, can we get  them interested in this? That's been something I've been working on for a while. The models  that I think need to exist to really have a robust, transparent, accurate soil carbon  
**[0:21:00-0:21:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:21:00):**  market, I don't think exist. I think there's usable models that are out there right now  and folks need to get going. So, you know, use them. But I hope that all the sort of  contracting and ideas of the future are leaving it open for when the better models are developed,  they can be implemented and put into place because I think the modelling is going to  be really key. And I think the modelling has to be built on really solid, robust, accurate  
**[0:21:27-0:21:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:21:27):**  data.  It's hard to predict, you know, how quickly things will come to pass. You know, think  of the solar industry worldwide, it's moved enormously in the last decade as take up and  technology has changed. But if you were to stick your finger in the wind, how long do  you think it's likely to be before we're in a position where with a fair government, with  
**[0:21:49-0:21:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:21:49):**  a government that's prepared to sort of, you know, think about this, or private companies,  so there's either state actors or private companies that are prepared to pay for that  sequestration in one form or another, and farmers prepared to do the work. How far away  do you think we are from having a system in place?  I think systems are getting into place now. And big companies understand, including McDonald's,  
**[0:22:12-0:22:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:22:12):**  Bargill and General Mills, they understand that unless they have a resilient supply chain  of food, they don't have a strong future. And so regenerative agriculture is now looking  to be just simply smart business. And so then when you start going down the road of it's  just smart business, then you have a lot of deep pockets wanting this sort of thing to  happen. And our work with Shell, they decided not to fund this big research project. And  
**[0:22:38-0:22:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:22:38):**  15 hours later, McDonald's came in and said yes. So that was a bit of a roller coaster  day back in 2016 when that happened. But what's happened with Shell is the ideas that we brought  to Shell, we got all the way up to the C-suite. We were annoying and persistent because we  thought this was just too frickin' important. And it worked. And now Shell has a whole division  called Nature Based Solutions. And they've got a vice president of Nature Based Solutions.  
**[0:23:05-0:23:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:23:05):**  And one of their lead scientists is a guy who's been collaborating with us the whole  time and he's working with University of Exeter on this greenhouse gas measurement work that's  on our farms. And so Shell's now collaborating with us on our research. And they're committed  to $300 million in carbon offset purchases in the next three years. And they've just  made a very distinct commitment to all that work no matter what happens with the price  
**[0:23:28-0:23:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:23:28):**  of oil. They've made a very strong commitment just in the last few weeks to keep that going.  That was a question I was having. So there you've got an oil company that understands  the ideas of carbon mitigation as a part of their responsibility.  Is there a danger that if soil-  Always.  
**[0:23:46-0:23:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:23:46):**  If soil carbon sequestration is seen as a way, as a get out of jail free card for the  oil industry, that it could actually slow the transition as this technology and soil  is developing?  At a certain point, I don't think that fossil fuels are going to be needed for our transportation  needs. I think that's happening. I think that air transportation is going to be slower,  
**[0:24:08-0:24:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:24:08):**  but it will happen eventually. At a certain point, the fossil fuel industry will either  change or be out of business. That's how I look at it. And so why not use those resources  right now to regenerate the world's soils, which are dying, and help slow down climate  change, which is insanely on top of us now. And so to me, that's my strategy. Let's get  all hands on deck to regenerating our world's soils because they're in really bad shape.  
**[0:24:34-0:24:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:24:34):**  And by doing that, we can help slow down climate change. The fossil fuel industry is going  to either be here or not in 20 or 30 years, those companies. I've got no game in that.  I've got no interest in that. I want to use their resources now to help fund this massive  change we need in agriculture.  So for you, it's a false dichotomy. You just need all hands on deck. And we need to be  
**[0:24:57-0:25:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:24:57):**  getting that carbon sequestered in any way we possibly can and reduce fossil fuels as  quickly as possible.  Yeah, the fossil fuels are going to be reduced because that's happening. Think of how many  amazingly smart people are working on that. Okay, so when I started carbonation in 2007,  Google came out with this formula. They said renewable energy less than coal, R-E less  
**[0:25:20-0:25:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:25:20):**  than C. And their take on it was it was really smart. The only way that coal goes away is  if renewable energy is cheaper. It's a market thing. It's not an emotional decision. And  that's happened. Coal is now more expensive than solar power and wind power. When you're  building facilities now, you're going to be building solar and wind and the battery storage  that's coming down the pipe. It's just becoming better business. And so that's the game. I  
**[0:25:46-0:25:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:25:46):**  don't care if a fossil fuel company is in business in 20 years. I do want their resources  to help rebuild our agricultural system.  So we've talked about the way in which farmers can make money by monitoring and measuring  the amount of carbon that they're storing over time and then selling that aggregated  carbon storage to the highest bidder effectively to or to somebody they're contracted to. Do  
**[0:26:11-0:26:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:26:11):**  you think that we will ever be in a position where we're able to predict the sequestration  rates of soil in the same way that we can with trees?  Probably but here's a really important thing. Carbon market is cool. And like I say, we're  doing things to help get that going. But what we think is when a farmer transitions to regenerative  agriculture, to regenerative practices, their profit margin by treating their soils with  
**[0:26:35-0:26:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:26:35):**  respect and their increased productivity, that's going to be their biggest place of  profit. The price of carbon will be icing on the cake. It'll be, you know, it'll take  care of property taxes and it'll take care of, it'll take the edge off because profit  margins are so thin anyway. But the real profit increase for the farmers will be in how they  treat their soils and what the soils give them back. And so that's what to me, the strongest  
**[0:26:59-0:27:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:26:59):**  argument for this to happen is it's really, really, really smart for the farmers. Now,  getting this information to the farmers, letting them understand that these are options that  they can take and that it's okay to change. That's the work. The carbon markets, the carbon  price and things like that. I think those will be nice to have. I think deeply rich,  healthy soils will be a need to have. And so I think, I think focusing on educating,  
**[0:27:25-0:27:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:27:25):**  getting knowledge to the farmers, making the transition as easy as possible, finding loan  mechanisms that are favorable to the farmer, favorable to groups that like impact investing,  favorable to banks that want to get their loan paid back because regenerative farmers  will pay the loan back because we're using nature and nature is a great thing to base  your business on. Those are the things that I think are going to get this to scale. And  
**[0:27:48-0:27:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:27:48):**  those are the things that we're working on now for like next projects and pilots. How  do we get farmers to change? And then let's go ahead and measure that change too, because  we want to see what's happening in their soils. We want them to make that extra money from  carbon in their soils.  Fantastic to hear about all of the work that you're doing there and all of the detailed  
**[0:28:07-0:28:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:28:07):**  knowledge that's being built up. And are you looking for people? Do you want people, farmers  who, you know, aren't part of your project? Are you wanting people to get in touch with  you about taking part and monitoring on their own land? Or have you got enough farmers already?  This is still such a small movement within such a big need. What we've got going right  now, because we are, you know, we are storytellers and now we want to be story gatherers as well,  
**[0:28:30-0:28:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:28:30):**  is on our website, carpetandcowboys.org, which has the short films, which was, you know,  the reason we started talking, but we've got so much other work going on. We have a thing  there under a tab. It's like, tell us your story and farmers can get in touch with us.  And if they need to know things, if they want to learn where to learn, we've got resources  on our website that we're constantly adding and we'll connect farmers. So let us help.  
**[0:28:54-0:28:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:28:54):**  We're here to help as much as possible, as often as possible.  Perfect. Now, obviously during the course of making the films, you've met a lot of farmers  and some of them, I guess you've got to know really pretty well. I watched a webinar that  you'd done with three farmers that you clearly had a huge amount of respect for, but you'd  built that personal relationship.  
**[0:29:14-0:29:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:29:14):**  I have become a big fan of farmers and seeing folks who are working with nature and experimenting  with their entire livelihood, you know, talk about gamblers, right? It's a remarkable thing.  And so just meeting the farmers, like there's a farmer and he's a ranch manager for a big  farm in New Mexico. It's our film Fencing an Owner. Basically the owner died and the  children wanted to go towards amp grazing. They wanted to do something regenerative,  
**[0:29:43-0:29:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:29:43):**  but the ranch manager, the guy who's there all the time, he knew it wouldn't work. He  saw this type of grazing fail, but what he didn't realize was the folks who were trying  it weren't really trying it and were failing because they weren't going all the way. And  the family said, Hey Melvin, we love you. We want you here. We want you to stay, but  we're changing our methods. And so he was offered the opportunity to keep his job or  
**[0:30:05-0:30:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:30:05):**  not, but the job was going to change. And he said he noticed the change almost immediately  and they noticed changes to the better during a 15 year drought. What was really funny about  that was he was sitting on camera. He's like, I don't want some kid in a baseball cap and  tennis shoes to come here and tell me how to graze. And there I was in a baseball cap  and tennis shoes filming him. And I was like, you know, Melvin, I'm not telling you what  
**[0:30:27-0:30:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:30:27):**  to do, but I am filming you. He laughed. And I'm not the kind of person that's on ranches  a lot. Like I'm a different kind of person than is in the farm world. And so when I show  up, you know, city boy with liberal thoughts and all that stuff, you could see where a  conservative farmer and I might not get along. What's amazing is how well we do get along  and we're getting along because I respect what they're doing and we're getting along  
**[0:30:52-0:30:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:30:52):**  because they know, I respect what they're doing and they know they're doing something  special. And you know, you hear politically how polarized the United States is and you  can make the case and you could go to Congress and see the idiots up there. But when I'm  out in the world, when I'm out in the country, I'm not seeing that. I'm seeing great common  ground amongst a lot of very, very different types of people. If people just take the time  
**[0:31:15-0:31:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:31:15):**  to actually listen and learn. And what I've discovered quite frankly is the common ground  that we've been looking for since we made carbon nation years ago is it's the ground  soil. I know I vote differently than most of the farmers I've built. I know that for  a fact, but we don't care because the soils are so much more important. And you were asking  about timing, like when do I think things are going to click in and things like that.  
**[0:31:38-0:31:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:31:38):**  And sometimes we're surprised by how fast things shift once they get to a certain point  like solar. And there was just a bill introduced into the U S Senate, two senators that are  Democrats, two senators that are Republicans. And it's a regenerative agricultural bill  in this day and age with this administration in office. And it has a good shot because  it just makes sense. Soil health makes sense. It's a, certainly all of our research, all  
**[0:32:03-0:32:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:32:03):**  of our social economic research we've done. When you talk about soil health, people like  it and people like nature. They trust nature. If you've got a solution that includes nature,  people will gravitate towards that. So during COVID the farmers in our films who sell directly  to customers, their sales are out the roof right now because people trust nature. Their  sales have gone up from 300 to 1200% over this time last year, people trust what these  
**[0:32:29-0:32:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:32:29):**  farmers are doing and they realise that COVID is killing people who have preexisting conditions.  And so people are starting to realise, wait a second, what I eat is my health. You mean  you are what you eat. You mean my grandmother was right.  It's a remarkable insight, the way that soil, I mean land in general, you know, there's  been lots of fixation around climate change on all kinds of different solutions. And you  
**[0:32:54-0:32:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:32:54):**  know, the low hanging fruit has always been seen as, you know, transport or energy, this  sort of stuff. But it's only recently that people have started looking at soil, started  looking at land use. And it's remarkable, you know, when you talk about the US and it's  not just the US, the UK is the same. I'm sure many other countries are where there is enormous  political or social polarisation. But when you get two people in a room just to have  
**[0:33:17-0:33:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:33:17):**  a conversation and they're away from social media and they're talking about the things  that matter to them, you know, people are just people. And it's great to hear that.  And it's great to hear the way that the soil and land use, you know, potentially is this  way of bringing communities together and doing it around solutions rather than problems.  Look, Peter, I could talk to you for hours, but I'm going to have to cut this conversation  
**[0:33:41-0:33:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:33:41):**  off because, you know, that really is all we've got time for. But I'd like to thank  my guest, Peter Bick, the producer and director of Carbon Cowboys. You can find the films  on the Carbon Cowboys website, carboncowboys.org. If you've enjoyed listening, please come back  and listen to more. Tell your friends, like us, review us and share our links. Farmgate  is a partnership project for Farmwell and FAI Farms. We're funded by San Calpa and you  
**[0:34:06-0:34:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-Carbon-Cowboys-efeugp#t=0:34:06):**  can join the conversation as ever on Twitter by searching for Farmgate podcast. I've been  Finn low, Christine. Bye for now.  