### Farm Gate  (2022-59-04)
**[0:00:00-0:00:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to Farmgate. I'm Finnlow Kustain, the Chief Executive of Farmwell and founder  of the Food and Global Security Network.  Sir Dieter Helms, CBE, is Professor of Economic Policy at the University of Oxford and Fellow  in Economics at New College, Oxford. From 2012 to 2020, he was the Independent Chair  of the Natural Capital Committee and he was knighted in the 2021 New Year's Honours  
**[0:00:27-0:00:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:00:27):**  List for services to the Environment, Energy and Utilities Policy. His most recent books  are Net Zero and Green and Prosperous Land. Welcome, Dieter. Thanks so much for joining  me. Is the environment safer now that the trust government has been replaced?  Almost certainly, yes, but that's a pretty low baseline. There was a real threat to rolling  back all the things that have been achieved in the last two or three, four years and all  
**[0:00:55-0:01:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:00:55):**  the spirit of the legislation that's been put in place. And when the new Prime Minister  and the first Prime Minister question time highlighted, without being asked, his belief  that the Environment Act was a substantive achievement of the Conservatives, that I think  to me was an important and another U-turn from what trust and kwatang had been threatening  us with.  
**[0:01:20-0:01:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:01:20):**  So, was this just a kind of a blip and the last few years continue as if that blip never  existed?  Well, I think you have to understand what was really going on behind the election of  trust and kwatang. You know, it's all to do with Brexit. It's pretty apparent, whether  you're pro or anti Brexit, that Brexit has caused a big hit on the British economy. After  
**[0:01:42-0:01:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:01:42):**  all, we now have the greatest trade deficit of all time except two years during the Second  World War when the Americans were bailing us out. It can't be the case that Brexit has  made trade easier and the outcome of Brexit has not been a massive burst of growth. So,  when trust and kwatang say they wanted more economic growth, and indeed to be fair, since  Rachel Reeves and Keir Starmer said the same thing beforehand, the Brexiteers on the right  
**[0:02:12-0:02:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:02:12):**  of the Tory party always had in mind that Brexit was a means, not an end in itself,  and a means to creating a deregulated, low tax, so-called Singaporean Thames. And that's  a perfectly coherent argument. What's happened is that it's been systematically rejected,  and that's a very important step forward. But Singaporean Thames means relaxing a lot  of the environmental considerations, regulations and initiatives, and means essentially going  
**[0:02:45-0:02:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:02:45):**  back to the idea, economic development in the narrow and crude sense first, environment  a luxury, which we can currently ill afford. And that's how we got to this attack on nature.  And the idea, the bizarre idea, actually, that pursuing environmental policies was somehow  anti-growth. It's pro-growth, and we might come to that.  Yeah, I'm interested because, of course, the Conservative policy will now be to continue  
**[0:03:12-0:03:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:03:12):**  with the policies that we've had over the last few years developed in that post-Brexit  conversation. And the Labour Party has the idea, really, that you can be environmental,  but to be environmental, you need to invest in the economy. You need to invest in growth  to achieve that growth. So I wonder where it was that Liz Truss was coming from in her  idea that somehow the green agenda was anti-growth. Do you have any insight into what it was that  
**[0:03:36-0:03:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:03:36):**  she was thinking?  Well, if we look at the architecture of environmental policy in the UK post-Brexit, and it's largely  associated with Gove, but not entirely, there are three bits. There's the bit that came  before, which is the 219 amendment to the Climate Change Act, which puts the net zero  target at 100% for 250. That's cross-party support. That's what the Conservatives signed  
**[0:04:03-0:04:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:04:03):**  up to. And that's what the kerfuffle has been about, about whether Sunnock goes to COP26  and when some of the right wing of the Tory party suggests that now isn't the time, etc.  Well, that's the first pillar box. The second pillar is the Agricultural Act. And the Agricultural  Act sits there as defining a new framework in which public money for public goods is  central and also polluter pays. And it's the biggest break since 1948 in British agricultural  
**[0:04:35-0:04:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:04:35):**  policy. The third bit is the Environment Act, the one I had most to do with, which is about  embedding essentially the 25-year plan and trying to meet Gove's commitment that environmental  standards will be higher than Europe, not lower going forward. So those are the three  bits of architecture. The deep question is, do those three bits of the environmental legislation  framework, that architecture, do they increase economic growth or do they stand in the way?  
**[0:05:05-0:05:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:05:05):**  And the crude anti-growth argument about this stuff is, you know, it's newts in ponds that  builders can't build things. It's objections to putting pylons all over the place. It's  building on the green belt and somehow the environment stands against that. Well, all  those issues were already there. Okay. And some of them are just, you know, tropes and  others are serious. But the main point is that investing in net zero, developing renewables,  
**[0:05:35-0:05:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:05:35):**  developing batteries, developing electric cars, developing hydrogen, developing nuclear  maybe, all of those things are serious investments in the economy. And it's very hard to argue  they're anti-growth. When it comes to agriculture, you start from a very low base. It's 0.5%  of GDP. It's by far the biggest causer of climate change relative to its size in the  economy, right? Its emissions are, when properly measured, not far short of the whole of the  
**[0:06:02-0:06:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:06:02):**  power sector, but it's a very small part. It's very hard to work out how you could get  less value for money than under the CAP scheme of paying people to own land. If you want  to improve productivity, which is in the quasi-quatern growth plan, it clearly identifies low productivity  in agriculture as a problem. Well, paying people to own land is clearly not going to  help increase productivity, whereas promoting soil protection or that kind of stuff is contributing.  
**[0:06:32-0:06:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:06:32):**  So you get into that space on agriculture. And on the environment side, if you have poor  health, rivers in a terrible state, if you have waste all over the countryside, right,  it's hardly, hardly contributing to people's wellbeing in the wider sense of economic prosperity.  It is also actually narrowly anti-growth too. And so that's why I think, flipping night's  head, it's not the environmental policies were anti-growth, they're pro-growth. The  
**[0:07:01-0:07:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:07:01):**  trust plan actually for all it's dressing up was itself anti-growth because it was going  to undermine things which will contribute to a sustainable economy going forward.  Now, you mentioned GDP there in relation to agriculture. And of course, yes, that's absolutely  right that in GDP terms, agriculture doesn't earn a huge amount, but when we factor in  those other things, those external costs, the costs to wellbeing of poor decisions in  
**[0:07:26-0:07:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:07:26):**  terms of agriculture, the costs to our environment, then that cost becomes much more significant  and the impact on people and society more broadly becomes very significant.  Yeah. I mean, one way of putting what you've just said is to say that if you take the full  cost of agriculture into account, it actually negatively contributes to the economy. It's  minus, right? It starts with 0.5 plus, but once you subtract off the costs of all the  
**[0:07:50-0:07:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:07:50):**  pollution in the rivers, the environmental emissions, the net zero emissions, damage  to biodiversity and the countryside, once you add those things in, yeah, you get to  a negative value for agriculture. And all I'm saying is not farmers fault, what farmers  are doing in responding to the incentives that are in front of them. You know, I have  a hugely optimistic view about this. Since it's pretty hard to do it worse, and it's  
**[0:08:15-0:08:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:08:15):**  pretty hard to get so little value out of our land, it must be possible to improve upon  that position and thereby improve the economy. Now, GDP doesn't capture some of this stuff  and it doesn't worry about the state of assets, it just looks at flows. But any sensible measure  of how well our economy is doing, whether it's sustainable, whether we're passing on  an economy and a set of opportunities for the next generation, at least as good as we've  
**[0:08:41-0:08:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:08:41):**  got, any sensible measure would say that the scope for improvement from the outcomes of  agriculture is one of the lowest hanging fruits in the economy.  Just before we move on to how we start to get there, I suppose, I just want to come  back to what you mentioned about Rishi Sunak there. Of course, he has taken this decision  not to go to COP, and even if he reverses that decision in the future, is that a win  
**[0:09:07-0:09:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:09:07):**  for the right wing of the Conservative Party? He has reversed his decision. That's now been  announced. I think it was inevitable. Is that a win or lose to the right wing of the Conservative  Party? I mean, you know, one has to take politics seriously. Because someone's on the right  wing of the Tory party doesn't make them wrong about all sorts of things. And we need to  be very careful to distinguish between arguments that the right make, which have substance,  
**[0:09:38-0:09:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:09:38):**  and we all ought to take seriously, and arguments which are based on a different social and  moral basis than other people might share. It's very important to have them as like,  understanding why people voted for Brexit and respecting the fact they voted for Brexit,  even if, in my case, I'm not in favour of this policy. So the decision to go to COP  in 27 is symbolic. And because Biden's going, it kind of makes it what all these COPs are,  
**[0:10:06-0:10:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:10:06):**  which is an opportunity for meetings on the side about other stuff. It's a lot easier  to go and do this than do all the pomp and ceremony of a visit to the White House. The  really interesting question is, does it make any difference? And my view is we've had 26  COPs so far, every single year since 1990. When we started this process, we've added  two parts per million concentration of carbon in the atmosphere, which is what the climate  
**[0:10:30-0:10:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:10:30):**  change is about, it's about the stock of carbon in the atmosphere. And the NDC framework on  carbon territorial emissions is not the way to measure the stuff. It flatters the UK in  a way which is, in my view, totally undeserved. The transfers to developing countries are  smaller than the annual dividend of Saudi Aramco. And what's being done to protect the  rainforest is pretty limited. And my own view is that it's good to have climate change highlighted.  
**[0:11:00-0:11:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:11:00):**  And that's what COPs do. But if anyone thinks the COP process is going to crack climate  change, I'm afraid I'm on a different planet for them. There's no evidence he's done that  so far. And this convenient argument for politicians, you know, one more heave and we're going to  get there. Sadly, very sadly, that's just not true. What will the right say about this?  Your trust was going to go, of course it was going to go, world stage. So they can't really  
**[0:11:26-0:11:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:11:26):**  object across the party to Sunak going, I mean, I think, you know, there'll be quite  a lot of emissions from the plane flight out there and the other people go with him, and  the emissions coming back. Will it make a difference? No. Is it probably politically  wise to do? Yes. And, you know, the Conservatives are, under Sunak, really very keen to get  back on the go of agenda. And that's very much Sunak's approach. And it's really distinct  
**[0:11:55-0:12:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:11:55):**  from Truss's approach. You talk about yourself as an optimist, and yet there you're talking  about the COP process, really describing it as a failure in many ways over the course  of the last 26, 27 years. I wonder what makes you feel optimistic when we think forward  about climate change and the other elements of the crises in nature. So biodiversity,  loss and desertification, what makes you feel optimistic that we can solve this big problem  
**[0:12:24-0:12:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:12:24):**  that we all face, this great challenge? OK, so the first point to say is there is no doubt  the COP process has failed, right? We're on 417 parts per million carbon in the atmosphere.  And if anyone told you at the beginning of this process that we'd add two parts per million  of carbon equivalent to the atmosphere every single year, including the financial crisis  and including the lockdowns, they would not call that a success. So anyone who claims  
**[0:12:49-0:12:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:12:49):**  a success, go back to 1990, look at what the aspiration was, or 92, and look at the outcome.  It's a ghastly failure. And I don't say that it wouldn't have been even worse without the  COP process. And I don't say that people shouldn't continue to meet up. But I do believe one  more heave is going to fail. The second point about optimism is that you need to work out  where we are. You need to be brutally realistic about the baseline. And that's what I am.  
**[0:13:21-0:13:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:13:21):**  I do want to call a spade a spade. You know, it isn't going well. Similarly on biodiversity,  we have one of the most biodiversity depleted countries on the planet, right? It's not going  well. I was visiting peat bogs last week in Scotland and seeing the damage being done,  that has been done. So you need to be brutally realistic, which gets you to the baseline.  Then there's two steps to the optimism. The first one is it's pretty hard to do it worse.  
**[0:13:47-0:13:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:13:47):**  You know, you can't do things much worse than pay people to own land. You can't do it much  worse than have territorial carbon emissions basis which don't take into account imports  and our carbon footprint. You can't do it much worse than including dracs, sorry, excluding  dracs as emissions from our measurement of what we're doing. And so on and so on. You  know, there's only one way we really can go, which is up. Now the second point is lots  
**[0:14:15-0:14:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:14:15):**  of people say, well, okay, so we can improve things incrementally. But you know, it's not  the revolution that just stop oil or extinction rebellion would look for. I think, by the  way, those kinds of things are utterly hopeless. And they backfire really badly. But the assumption  that people make is that all we've got to address these great environmental problems,  biodiversity, land, climate change, etc, is just the toolbox that exists today in the  
**[0:14:44-0:14:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:14:44):**  garage. And in my lifetime, I've gone from doing my doctoral thesis on Olympus portable  typewriter with Tippex and carbon paper, when there were no fax machines, which I noticed  today are about to be phased out, no mobile phones, no internet, no digital data, none  of that stuff. And in my lifetime, my world has been utterly transformed in a way I had  no idea was going to happen. And if you look to the technology, there are all these people  
**[0:15:12-0:15:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:15:12):**  who say, well, well, you're a techno optimist, etc. You know, that's naive. The issue is,  our technologies marching on, which are helping to address these questions in every university  I go to, it's full of bright young people trying to come up with new ways of addressing  climate change. We've got digital data, which tells us what's happening on every square  20 metres of this planet, we can see exactly what people are doing. We can look at catchments,  
**[0:15:37-0:15:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:15:37):**  we can model them, we can use the data in ways we never could do in the past. You can  even track a cocoon from one end of Africa to the UK and back in real time. All of this  stuff adds, you know, electric cars are primitive, the batteries are still environmentally pretty  awful. But you know, there are new generations of batteries to come, right? And then there's  energy, you know, the sun comes up every day, it delivers more energy in an hour than the  
**[0:16:03-0:16:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:16:03):**  entire world's electricity industry produces in a year. Okay, there is no shortage of energy.  The shortage is our ability to harness this stuff without having to fall back on fossil  fuels to deal with intermittency, low density, diffuse types of renewables, for example,  in a constructive way. And you know, when I go around my university, and I talk to people  doing their doctorates, just postdoctoral, etc, it's pretty damn exciting in the way  
**[0:16:32-0:16:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:16:32):**  it was that my university could produce a vaccine in seven to 10 days from receiving  a genetic code, which we would not have had 10 years ago, with a small bunch of scientists.  You know, this is revolutionary stuff. And we shouldn't be starry eyed about science,  we should be realistic. But let's be honest, unless we have better technologies, we ain't  going to crack our problems.  
**[0:16:54-0:16:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:16:54):**  W  about the way that the world has changed so much just in the last 30 years. And, you know,  therefore, it's perhaps a fool's game to try and understand or work out exactly what's  going to happen in the next 30 years. I think it's important in terms of trying to plan  for the future to have a vision of what that future looks like, and perhaps to work backwards  
**[0:17:14-0:17:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:17:14):**  from there. So, in terms of looking forwards and planning backwards, what do you think  our farmed and wild landscapes should look like in Britain in 2050?  Well, let me let me come at that slightly indirectly. Okay, so I think that a sustainable  economy is an economy where we husband the assets of the economy, such that the next  generation has a set of assets to choose how to live their lives. They have the capabilities  
**[0:17:42-0:17:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:17:42):**  to do what they want to do. We don't try and make them happy, like, you know, GDP terms,  we don't know what the opportunities are going to be. But they need certain things. And for  me, the things that need to be in place to make this stuff happen are the infrastructures,  the system infrastructures, which underpin an economy. Now, there are some system infrastructures  which we're very familiar with, you need an energy infrastructure to participate in society  
**[0:18:08-0:18:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:18:08):**  for firms to operate, you need a transport infrastructure, you need a broadband fibre  infrastructure, right, you need a water infrastructure, because without those things, it's going to  work. You need an educational infrastructure, and you need a health infrastructure. And  you need underpinning all of them, a natural capital set of infrastructure systems. Okay,  that's what an economy is to me. It isn't just, you know, anything's equivalent to anything  
**[0:18:33-0:18:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:18:33):**  else as modern economists look at things, some things are more important than others.  And the core of what any state has to make sure exists, and any society is that framework  of the basic things for which we will operate, we will function, and indeed, to be honest,  all the pollution goes through it too. So that's what you have to concentrate on putting  in place. Now, the natural environment, which underpins that law, what's it going to look  
**[0:18:59-0:19:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:18:59):**  like in 250? Well, you know, there's all sorts of things we cannot know. But there are some  things we do know. And there are some things we can focus down upon. First is that unless  it's green, we're not going to be prosperous. Okay, so we want decent rivers, we want biodiversity  rich rivers, we want lower carbon in the atmosphere, we want better air quality, we want waste  properly recycled. Turns out, these are the things in the 25 year plan, and they're going  
**[0:19:28-0:19:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:19:28):**  to be the statutory targets, right? These are, it's not rocket science to work this  out. Then there's a broader question, which is the one that's largely done, which is,  what's our land use going to be? And therefore, what is our land use strategy plan and framework?  And we basically think that the answer to that question historically has been loads  of agricultural subsidies, and the planning regime. It's all about planning. Well, it's  
**[0:19:55-0:20:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:19:55):**  much more than that. It's about systems, okay, and what those systems need to look like,  in order to ensure that they are genuinely, in the natural capital sense, renewable, they  sustain themselves and drive themselves forward.  So you've talked about system infrastructures there, and I find that a really interesting  way of thinking of and talking about nature, because you've talked about the way that humans  
**[0:20:18-0:20:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:20:18):**  can develop their own infrastructure. So for example, energy infrastructure, the transition  from a fossil fuel based energy economy to one that includes renewables, wind and solar,  and various other things, perhaps that we've not even thought of yet. At the same time  is then looking at piping, water infrastructure, transport infrastructure, education, broadband,  all those sorts of things. But then I think within infrastructure, you're also thinking  
**[0:20:41-0:20:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:20:41):**  about the structure of our soils, making sure that our soils function, making sure that  our biodiversity functions, that our water cycles properly through the land.  Oh, absolutely. And the question is practically, what kind of system units to use to think  about this problem? Now I like to think about catchments, because the UK is not the standard  drought this year, it's full of catchments. And catchments are always integrated, what  
**[0:21:06-0:21:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:21:06):**  happens at the top affects what happens at the bottom, etc. And actually, many of our  problems can be encapsulated within what I describe as system plans, system architecture  for catchments. So you take the Thames, and you start at the top and you go to the bottom,  and you add up all the money we're currently spending on the Thames, flood defence, concrete,  all that kind of stuff. We're, I mean, bluntly paying farmers to pollute the Thames, we have  
**[0:21:32-0:21:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:21:32):**  lots of money spent on recreation down the Thames, we spend a huge amount of money clearing  up the muck that's in the water system that's been put in it by various players in the river,  and so on and so forth. And when you add this lot up for any major catchment, it's a hell  of a lot of money. And again, I come back to my optimistic point, you couldn't spend  it worse. Can you imagine a system where you actually think it's sensible to subsidise  
**[0:21:55-0:21:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:21:55):**  someone to put the pollution in the river, and then you pay in your water bills to have  it taken out again? It's nonsense, right? So if you look at natural capital ways of  addressing a river catchment, you think about flood defence being largely natural, there  will of course have to be some infrastructure, physical concrete stuff, but most of it can  be natural. You think about carbon sequestration, well, where would you put the trees? Along  
**[0:22:19-0:22:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:22:19):**  the river banks. Why? Because you'd stop the runoff from the land, you'd be a filter for  some of the chemicals coming in, you'd slow down the water flow, it'd be much better for  the water itself, because it would cool it and provide shade, and it'd be damn good for  recreation and therefore mental and physical health. And then you go down the system and  you think about what the water company does, how it handles its sewage further down, whether  
**[0:22:44-0:22:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:22:44):**  it uses reed beds and stuff to do that. And so once you start to think about that, when  you think about the net economic gain, the economic growth in the end, the well being  of us that comes out of it, then you go back to, well, why the hell are we paying farmers  to do what they do and causing these incentives, which they rightly exploit, instead of paying  them for public goods and contribute to this? I'll give you another example. So there's  
**[0:23:08-0:23:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:23:08):**  this scheme to put a canal round Oxford to stop flooding on the west of Botley, and no  reason why listeners will know Botley, but it's just a low lying area on the west of  Oxford. And the question is, well, how much is that going to cost? And how much works  are involved in it? And the crucial thing in any environmental question, is there any  alternative? Well, would you want to spend a couple hundred million doing this? Or would  
**[0:23:32-0:23:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:23:32):**  you want to pay the Wildlife Trust upriver a few tens of million to hold back the water  and have all the biodiversity benefits of preserving water meadows, etc?  And indeed, not just the Wildlife Trust, but the farmers as well, who can make sure that  land is functioning better.  Absolutely. Why can't they bid to do this? It's against the concrete or the engineered  
**[0:23:53-0:23:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:23:53):**  solution. Now, it may or may not be the right answer. But in my world, I'm in this sense,  I'm very pro competition. I want to define what it is we need in our catchments. So we  make sure the next generation inherits the catchments in good shape, nature's in good  form, etc. But I want the system architect to auction this to all of any party that might  contribute to it and bring farmers right into the fray. So I'm a very, it's very odd, and  
**[0:24:18-0:24:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:24:18):**  sometimes it's presented the wrong way, but I'm very pro farmers, you know, we have to  have people that manage the land, and I'm actually very pro food production, and I'm  very pro thinking about soils as public goods. But, you know, in the end, if you don't create  the right incentive structure, if you don't invite people to the table to join in the  economic fest, if you like, the opportunities of contracts and so on, you're not going to  
**[0:24:42-0:24:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:24:42):**  make progress. Can I ask you about that idea of competition? Because one of the concerns  that I have is that in having a competition for natural capital delivery, there is a danger  that we get some exceptionally good work in some parts of the country, and then perhaps  nothing at all in other parts of the country. Is that a concern? Well, stuff has to be done,  and someone has to do it, right. And they can either do it in monopolies, like they  
**[0:25:07-0:25:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:25:07):**  do at the moment in water companies, or they can do it where other ideas and other people  come into the frame. So in my world, you take a catchment, and you say, okay, so what are  the outcomes we want in the most general sense, you know, what is the quality of the biodiversity  we want? What is the carbon sequestration we want, etc. And you then say, right, so  let's put those outcomes up on the system architects website for anyone to challenge.  
**[0:25:38-0:25:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:25:38):**  So you build a citizen's community, bring everyone on board to discuss what is a reasonable  set of objectives, given the Agricultural Act, the Climate Change Amendment Act, and  the Environment Act, right. So you've got a late legal framework outside. So people  will come up and say, you know, I've got different ideas about this, then you say, well, we refine  that, like any practical process, this is what we want to achieve. And these are things  
**[0:26:02-0:26:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:26:02):**  that need to be done. And you ask people to do it, you can ask state employees to do it,  you can ask monopolists to do it, or you can ask AN other people as well to say, could  they do it better. So you have to have a system regulator, the architect, who adjudicates  on this, they have to award the contracts. So even on the nationalised industries, you  know, the CGP didn't build power stations, they put them out of contract. Now, some people  
**[0:26:25-0:26:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:26:25):**  might do the job well, and some people might do the job badly. Some people might offer  a cheap price, but a bad outcome, right, and some people might offer. That's for the system  regulator to determine. But I put it to you that not allowing other people to the table,  not allowing other people to challenge, for example, the water companies, not allowing  new innovations to come forward is not likely to produce good outcomes. And let's be honest,  
**[0:26:52-0:26:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:26:52):**  it doesn't. The agricultural subsidy regime separate from the water regulatory regime,  as it's currently put in place, separate from the flood defence produces a lousy outcome.  We can do much better. We can improve the productivity of farming in the process, we  can improve the biodiversity, and never mind about we need more money, we just want to  spend the existing money a lot better than we currently do, then we can think about whether  
**[0:27:19-0:27:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:27:19):**  there's a case for more. But right now, you couldn't do it worse.  World Finance, thinking about the future again, I wonder if you expect there to be greater  food and farming diversity in Britain as a result of these changes, and as we move forward  over the course of the next two or three decades? Or whether you expect there to be an increase  in food monocultures?  
**[0:27:38-0:27:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:27:38):**  Well, let me preface my remarks by what's really changing in agriculture is the advances  in science and technology. Okay, so the two big changes which are out of the box are the  digitalisation of agriculture, and genetics. So the digitalisation enables extraordinary  possibilities. It enables the ability to be able to analyse in real time exactly what  the drill bit and the spray is doing. It enables in real time, with a satellite going around  
**[0:28:13-0:28:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:28:13):**  all the time, to see exactly what's happening on any piece of land. And it enables robotics  and automation, etc. This cannot do anything else than improve productivity, and it can  make it much easier to achieve environmental targets than otherwise would be the case.  You know, you can think why we have such low agricultural productivity is because basically,  who needs to invest in a robot when you can get loads of cheap Eastern European labour?  
**[0:28:43-0:28:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:28:43):**  And there's a real issue there, which some of the brexiteers got right, but now don't  understand the consequences, but they now don't have any fruit pickers. And so they  do have to invest in the technology. And that's a big wake up call. Genetics, whether you  believe in gene editing, etc, etc. And I understand that's entirely, that's very controversial.  Our understanding of what's going on in agriculture is much greater. For example, whether you  
**[0:29:10-0:29:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:29:10):**  think that gene editing is an answer to avian flu in the next 10 or 15 years is a really  open question. But you do know exactly what avian flu is because you can analyse the genetics  of the virus. So there's big steps forward. So my take is that this technology will combine  to lead to much higher output from a much smaller amount of land. So the limits of this  is to think about what indoor farming is. Go visit the Hutton Institute in Dundee. You  
**[0:29:42-0:29:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:29:42):**  know, this is an entirely indoor activity. It's completely organic, it completely recycles  the water, and it's entirely reliant on renewable energy. If you look at some of the protein  approaches, you know, in a small insect factory in a warehouse on an industrial state in France,  you can produce more protein than vast areas of upland estates in Scotland, you know, and  in the end, it's protein that people want. So I envisage a world in which we probably  
**[0:30:15-0:30:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:30:15):**  won't need all this land, and we will use much more science. And you think about it,  it's a very odd idea to plant stuff outside and leave it to the vagaries of the droughts,  the flood and the weather. So I think that rather than being, you know, hostile to this,  many people on the more green side of these discussions ought to embrace the possibility  that we could have much better use of land. We're stopping grazing sheep on peat bogs,  
**[0:30:46-0:30:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:30:46):**  right? What is the point of one sheep per five acres, which is all subsidized, and then  exported, etc. You know, there are so many better things we can do. And this comes back  down to making the technology work in line with our views about how the land use might  go.  One of the things that we talk about a lot on this podcast is agroecology and regenerative  
**[0:31:10-0:31:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:31:10):**  agriculture. And the idea that actually one of the cheapest and most efficient ways of  managing land is to make sure that the food production is well integrated with nature  and that the livestock and the way that the food is being produced is actually delivering  those land outcomes, those natural capital outcomes that we've talked about in the past.  And when we think about, you know, economics in the same way as environmentalism, for me,  
**[0:31:36-0:31:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:31:36):**  the idea of environmental and economic resilience comes from having a broad array of businesses,  whether some of those are indoors, some of those are outdoors, some of those are small,  some of those are large, some are selling into major retailers, perhaps, or exporting  and others producing much more directly for the general public. Is that a vision that  you would accept and that you would think was a good thing? Does that sort of fit with  
**[0:32:00-0:32:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:32:00):**  your vision of less land being more productive and a greater use of technology?  So, I'm sort of allergic to labels. So, I think people say, oh, let's do re-wilding.  And then you dig in and you realise what they actually have in mind or don't really have  in mind. Regenerative agriculture is the latest buzz. Pastures for Life is a very good organisation.  And I kind of got sympathy with people who, you know, want to make the land more nature-friendly  
**[0:32:33-0:32:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:32:33):**  or they really care about the regenerative characteristics of the soil and integrating  animals and so on and so forth. But the idea that what we need is diversity of farming  activity, that's, you can see why it sort of appeals. Who would be against diversity,  right? But let me put it the other way. I really care about every hectare, right? And  I want to know what's happening in every hectare. I don't want an apartheid in which there's  
**[0:33:01-0:33:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:33:01):**  some very chemical intensive agriculture. But don't worry, we've got some nice stuff  elsewhere. It's like people say, you know, we've got lovely field margin, usually mowed  to the last centimetre. But a nice field margin. But in the middle, we're concentrating on  just killing everything else but the crop, down to glyphosate in the stuff just before  we harvest it so that we can all enjoy glyphosate in the food chain, right? I put that aside.  
**[0:33:27-0:33:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:33:27):**  But you know, you know that kind of argument. And so let's give up on the kind of, you know,  Peterborough, you know, area to the east. Let's just accept they're just industrial  intensive chemical activities. But hey, we've got some nice things in Exmoor. This is completely  wrong. We don't want diversity in the sense of some pollute doing nasty pollution, and  some people doing nice things. We want all the land properly managed, right? And, you  
**[0:33:57-0:34:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:33:57):**  know, one of the themes that the regenerative movement pursues, which I'm very sympathetic  to, they worry a lot about soils, and what's been done to them. And they're right. Okay.  So soil has roughly four times the carbon of the atmosphere. It's much more important  as a carbon store than the atmosphere above us. Okay. And the ripping out of that carbon  into the atmosphere is deadly for climate change. And this isn't properly measured.  
**[0:34:24-0:34:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:34:24):**  And that's why, you know, the emissions targets, etc, are very, very imperfect. It turns out  that carbon in the soil is a very good proxy for biodiversity. Most biodiversity is beneath  our feet, not the sort of nice little tigers and wolves and beavers that people get terribly  excited about. I often get excited about them too, but that's not the bulk of biodiversity.  All in under our feet. And the amount of carbon in the soil is a good proxy for that. And  
**[0:34:49-0:34:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:34:49):**  by the way, the amount of carbon in the soil is a good proxy for the sustainability of  yielding crops going forward. Win, win, win. I've got you three wins, okay? The trouble  is, we have a system of support, which doesn't really reflect those. So there's no benefit  for managing soil to increase biodiversity. There is a yet no benefit for managing soil  to keep carbon in. The no till stuff works because people can use lots of glyphosate.  
**[0:35:15-0:35:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:35:15):**  And it's low cost because they can use glyphosate rather than ploughs and the traditional ways  of doing things. So holistically looking at every hectare of land in Britain, and making  sure every hectare of land is being managed in an appropriate way to bequeath those core  assets going forward is what matters. Remember, farming is the industry that most depends  on natural capital. It is the natural capital industry. And abusing your assets is like  
**[0:35:45-0:35:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:35:45):**  not putting the tiles back on the roof when the wind takes them off. It's not repairing  the building. And, you know, that's about short term and long term. And we need to incentivise  that. So I don't like labels. I've never fitted in any camp, just I never fit in any political  affiliation or whatever. I like to look at the fundamentals and think, what is it we  actually want to achieve?  
**[0:36:07-0:36:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:36:07):**  I want to move on to another topic in just a second. But just before we do, there are  lots of reports now from Idri looking at Europe as a whole to some of the work, the farming  smarter work that the Food Farming and Countryside Commission has been involved in. And they're  looking at the way in which every hectare could be improved, every hectare could be  used to manage natural capital well at the same time as producing food. But in order  
**[0:36:32-0:36:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:36:32):**  to deliver that, there needs to be dietary change. And I wonder whether that's something  that you think the state should take a lead on or whether it's something the market should  lead on. And whether when you think about dietary change, you're thinking about the  introduction of more lab-based nutrition and food replacements, or whether you're thinking  in terms of a greater diversity of vegetables and pulses, grains, as well as, you know,  
**[0:36:56-0:36:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:36:56):**  the meat and eggs and dairy that people are eating.  OK, so the dietary issue, it's various dimensions. I always worry about the state telling people  what to eat. It's usually counterproductive. And there is a question about individual freedom.  And if you want to eat yourself to death, you know, just like you might want to smoke  yourself to death, that's your problem. The difficulty comes when we as a society have  
**[0:37:19-0:37:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:37:19):**  to take the consequences of the choices that people make. So if you look at the obesity  crisis, if you look at the cost of a health service, if you look at the damage to the  productivity in the economy from people being ill and overweight, if you look at even in  the Covid case, how much damage was done by people who were effectively on, quote, the  wrong diets, we as a society all have to pay the price for the choices that people make.  
**[0:37:46-0:37:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:37:46):**  That's the first thing. The second thing is that the food that people eat is the result  of masses of advertising that's thrown at them. And most of the advertising, dare I  say, is for junk. So if you look at the TV adverts, if you look at the, you know, the  sponsors of TV programmes, all this kind of stuff, all the social media things, you know,  people are being given seriously bad information all the time. And it is the job of the state  
**[0:38:13-0:38:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:38:13):**  to stop promoters of junk lying to people. And I mean that really seriously. Okay. And  so it is right for the state to intervene in this area. Now, it's a completely separate  argument to say that people make choices about what they eat, which have carbon emission  consequences. And I'm in favour of people paying for the pollution they cause. I believe  it's individuals, us as consumers who cause pollution. Companies just do it for us. You  
**[0:38:42-0:38:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:38:42):**  know, it's not the evil oil companies that are digging up oil for fun. It's the fact  that 80% of our economy is fossil fuels, and we're using it in everything we do. So I think  that it is absolutely right that the state should intervene on dietary matters. I think  it should start in school. I'm appalled that kids have no idea what food is or how to cook  it or to do any of those component parts, let alone from the sheer pleasure of knowing  
**[0:39:07-0:39:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:39:07):**  how to cook, which is just great fun. They have no idea about gardening. They have no  idea about the food chain. You know, how do you design a curriculum for the young, for  the next generation, without incorporating these basic building blocks of life? Because  I'm in favour of that. I'm in favour of carbon taxes, a carbon price on all and everything.  And I'm in favour, going beyond that, of taxing some of the serious externalities. So it's  
**[0:39:39-0:39:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:39:39):**  absolutely right that we should tax sugar. It's really pernicious in what it's doing.  Whether we should tax meat, right, for carbon reasons, I think that's very, very questionable  because when you really think about meat, it's not the meat that's the problem from  a carbon point of view. It's what sort of meat. And if you really want to tax meat,  you have to recognise that each location has a whole set of different natural capital issues  
**[0:40:10-0:40:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:40:10):**  associated, including carbon. And it's great. You get rid of all the cattle, plough up all  the fields, glyphosate them all. You haven't got the grass sequestering carbon anymore.  It's very easy to make things worse. So I'm very, very suspicious of that.  And of course, you know, when we look at meat more generally, it's pigs and chickens that  have a much greater impact on the environment than cattle that have been produced in a more  
**[0:40:35-0:40:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:40:35):**  regenerative grazing system. And it's like my comment about not liking  terms like rewilding or regenerative, you know, vegetarianism, veganism, right? And  they become religions. Dieter, we're starting to run out of time  and there are a few other topics that I'd like to get on to. And the next is one that  I think a lot of farmers have raised over the course of the last few years of conversation.  
**[0:40:59-0:41:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:40:59):**  And one that I think it's important just to go into at least briefly at this point. Now,  public money for public goods is of course a fundamental pillar of the cap reform in  England. And we've talked about things like the maintenance of soil health, improved biodiversity  water cycling in the countryside. Why is food itself not thought of as a public good?  Well, because it's a private good. What does that mean?  
**[0:41:21-0:41:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:41:21):**  A public good is something that's non-rival and non-excludable. Okay, so if you turn on  the BBC, right, your consumption won't affect anyone else's consumption. And unless you're  forced to pay a license fee, they can't stop you listening to it. If you buy a bag of flour,  right, and you use it, I can't. That's rivalry. Okay. And is it excludable? Yeah, you can  stop me having it. You can sell it to someone else. It's a market good. So that's the fundamental  
**[0:41:48-0:41:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:41:48):**  point. Okay. And the idea is that basically, why should we pay people to produce private  goods for their private benefit, as opposed to pay people to produce public goods which  would not be produced in the market properly because the incentives are never there because  it's non-excludable and non-rival. Now, what's confused is the idea that something might  be in the public interest. It probably is in the public interest that Mars produces  
**[0:42:13-0:42:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:42:13):**  Mars bottles or whatever, right? The loads of things that are public interest which are  not public goods, okay? And if farmers are paid the proper price after the cost of pollution,  etc, for what they produce, the market should equate that. And the reason they don't, markets  don't work their way is because they're so distorted by the policy frames. Now, when  it comes to the great claim, we've got to produce food, okay, it then leads to this  
**[0:42:38-0:42:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:42:38):**  argument, okay, we've got to be self-sufficient, right? And you think, really? Right? So, if  you meant that you had to be self-sufficient, that food was really matter, you would look  around a lot of the land that farmers farm, which is not producing food, okay? Go to Exmoor,  in the middle of Exmoor, the most profitable thing to do is run pheasant shoots. And I'm  not against pheasant shoots or whatever, but that isn't land producing food. A lot of it  
**[0:43:01-0:43:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:43:01):**  goes into landfill. If you look at lots of lands that's used for all sorts of other activity,  I mean, golf courses, horses, all sorts of stuff. I mean, rightly, we use land for lots  of purposes. And rightly, farmers do all sorts of things which are not for anaerobic digesters  growing maize for these things, right? That isn't food. So, if you really meant it, and  if you really were worried about food security, it's quite straightforward, stop exporting.  
**[0:43:26-0:43:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:43:26):**  Do you have a definition of food security?  Food security is like energy security, like fibre security is, you know, what is the risk  that there will be a physical shortage of food supply? And then the question is, how  best to mitigate that? So, the risk of a shortage of food supply is pretty low, extremely low,  even during COVID, a few things were off the shelf, but the risk is very low. If you wanted  
**[0:43:53-0:43:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:43:53):**  to enhance food security, so you're worried about, I don't know, you know, the Second  World War and the convoys and all that stuff, I mean, as if you'd have 10 minutes to when  the fibre networks are done and all agriculture collapses pretty quickly, right? You know,  if you, if that's what you're concerned about, then yes, do certain things, right? Stop exports,  put exports controls in immediately, big for victory and all that kind of stuff. We are  
**[0:44:23-0:44:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:44:23):**  a million miles away from that. And by the way, you need to build some fertiliser factories,  you need to build some tractor factories. In fact, nearly all of the substantive infrastructure  around agriculture is imported. And when you say that you're going to, you know, you're  going to interfere with the trade, remember, you know, as many farmers discovered, you  know, they used to think it was great to sell stuff into Europe without trade barriers.  
**[0:44:46-0:44:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:44:46):**  It's different now. So, if you meant it, and A, I think that you would basically spend  all the money on fibre security, because you know, the whole thing would crack without  broadband infrastructure. Look what happened in Stormor when up in the north, when the  power went down, for 10 days, nobody could do anything, your robots wouldn't work, your  phone won't even work, right? Because it's voice over internet, nothing functions without  
**[0:45:10-0:45:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:45:10):**  those basic infrastructures. Similarly, you can't function if you haven't got water supply.  So, you really have to think this problem through seriously and just slug slogan, food  security good, food good, you know, everything else bad, there's like four legs good, two  legs bad and the animal farm all over again. It's just naive.  And so, food security is as much as anything about system resilience, whether that system  
**[0:45:30-0:45:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:45:30):**  is in relation to trade, or whether it's those earlier sort of infrastructural systems that  we were talking about from natural capital through to cable infrastructure.  Simon Cowell Do we want a resilient agriculture? Yes. Right.  What do we need to have a resilient agriculture? Resilient soils, resilient water systems,  resilient catchments. We need a whole chunk of it. We actually need resilient rural communities  
**[0:45:54-0:45:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:45:54):**  as well. All of those things have a public good element. But the food itself is a private  good. And even the most ardent advocates of subsidy in the old fashioned sense recognise  that it's not.  Coming on to trade policy, because clearly that's going to play a critical role in delivering  the type of land use that we want to see, sustainable land use of one kind or another.  
**[0:46:20-0:46:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:46:20):**  Can we avoid a race to the bottom in this brave new post Brexit world as global Britain  is potentially pulled from pillar to post? And if not, are there new mechanisms that  we need in place to avoid that outcome?  Simon Cowell When the Brexit discussions were ongoing,  I tried to persuade the farmers, the various farmers leaders that the trade issue is much  
**[0:46:41-0:46:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:46:41):**  more important than the subsidy issue. But the cap was evolving anyway. And you know,  it needed replacing and things needed to be done. And that's a great benefit of Brexit.  But actually, the trade was the big ticket. If you're in favour of self-sufficiency, of  course, you don't care about trade because you don't want any trade. You know, you want  to have it all home produced, autocracy, economies, etc. So the trade thing is very important.  
**[0:47:05-0:47:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:47:05):**  And almost all of British farming is utterly exposed to the trade arrangements. So if you  look at them, the way it was going under Truss as the negotiator for this stuff, before Truss  as Prime Minister, what people were advocating was free trade. And what free trade is, is  not fair trade. It's highly distorted. In her free trade world, it was readily admitted  that farmers could find themselves exposed to competition from imports produced under  
**[0:47:37-0:47:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:47:37):**  much lower welfare conditions, and much worse environmental conditions domestically and  get wiped out to the detriment of farming here and to the detriment of the planet. The  traditional argument is, well, agriculture is not very important. The car industry and  manufacturing is. All trade deals end up having a row about agriculture. But basically, in  the end, agriculture gets sacrificed for the greater trading good of the nation. I think  
**[0:48:03-0:48:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:48:03):**  this is terrible. And this is why I'm in favour of carbon border taxes. So you should pay  the carbon. But I'm also in favour of British farmers paying for the carbon. So it works  both ways here. I'm in favour of, yes, very coherent and strong welfare standards. And  I'm in favour of wider environmental standards too. I do not want beef raised on cleared  bits of the Amazon rainforest, taking out a hill farmers in Wales or Scotland. And I  
**[0:48:30-0:48:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:48:30):**  don't want high intensity carbon polluting grain and other products produced in Brazil  and elsewhere, taking out stuff produced in the UK, where there's a legitimate difference.  So I'm in favour of trade, I'm in favour of competition. But, you know, we start from  the wrong place where we say we want a free trade agreement with America. And let's be  honest, you know, for all the noise about free trade after Brexit, okay, so what have  
**[0:48:57-0:49:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:48:57):**  we got? Some sort of deal with New Zealand, some sort of deal with Australia, no deal  with the United States in prospect, which is the big one. And actually, everything else  just reproduces what the EU had in place in the first instance. So, so far, it hasn't  been bad. But the possibilities are really threatening to our countryside and our land  and to the farmers in it. And I think that rather than being anti trade, one needs to  
**[0:49:23-0:49:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:49:23):**  be pro what I call genuinely efficient, fair trade and not to include environmental costs  is to be inefficient and carbons where I'd start.  So talk to us about that carbon border tax, that that adjustment levy that I think you've  spoken about before, how would that work in practice? And are there examples in the world  of where it's already working?  
**[0:49:44-0:49:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:49:44):**  Okay, so remember that we have carbon territorial production targets. So all our net zero is  about reducing carbon emissions in Britain. So for example, and carbon equipment, including  methane, so slaughter all the cattle, slaughter all the sheep, import it all from Brazil,  and our emissions will fall and we'll have done better. You can see the craziness of  this, right? So any serious net zero target has to be based on carbon consumption, regardless  
**[0:50:12-0:50:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:50:12):**  of where the stuff is produced, because carbon knows no boundaries. So I'm in favour of,  I mean, it'll never happen, but it's the most efficient outcome. And you need to have it  in mind when you think about the practicality. I'm in favour of the same carbon price applied  to agriculture, electricity, heating, transport, everything, right. And I'm in favour of that  price applying at the border. So imagine a ship arrives at, I don't know, Southampton  
**[0:50:37-0:50:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:50:37):**  docks or somewhere, and it's full of, let's make it easy, steel, but it could be full  of animal carcasses or whatever. So it comes from China, we've closed our steel mills down,  we import the stuff from China, and the ship arrives at the docks, and the customer official,  when they're not on the beaches dealing with people coming across the channel, goes up  to the ship captain and says, so you know, can you pay your carbon due? You know, it's  
**[0:51:01-0:51:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:51:01):**  steel, this is the rate, and the ship captain says, she says, well, can I get out of this  please? Is it any way I can avoid paying this? So yeah, give us an exemption certificate,  show me you pay the carbon tax domestically back in China for the amount. And either way,  it doesn't matter where the carbon tax is paid for the carbon, it has the same effect,  right, because it makes the price of the carbon in the steel coming in the UK the same price  
**[0:51:24-0:51:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:51:24):**  as the steel produced in the UK from a carbon perspective. And of course, the great advantage  of this is you start to create a coalition of the unilateral willing on carbon. So if  the United States did this, which is toying with, and if the EU did it, which there's  a clear proposal to pursue that, that's 40% plus of world trade, you'd be sure as hell  China would have a carbon tax, India would have a carbon tax, everyone would go for a  
**[0:51:51-0:51:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:51:51):**  carbon tax, because you'd rather pay your own government rather than the Chinese pay  the British government, right? It's a no brainer. Then you've got a more global carbon tax in  place. And then, contrary to the whole COP process, something on the ground will actually  happen.  Now you've talked about the US being interested there, the European Union being interested  
**[0:52:13-0:52:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:52:13):**  in carbon border taxes. Are you getting any traction at all? Are you seeing any traction  in terms of the UK? Because I think there's a lot of support outside of government. Is  there support inside government for this?  Well, of course, you know, it's a tricky question, because we've had three different prime ministers  in the space of a few weeks, there was no support in a trust government for this. Johnson  
**[0:52:33-0:52:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:52:33):**  cakeism meant that you could be in favour of all sorts of things, but and signal that  you're on everyone's side. But dealing with the practicality was never I think, I think,  I think even Boris Johnson said never his forte. Will the Sunak government go there?  I don't know. I mean, we're in this cost of living crisis, everyone's very focused on  the here and now, people will scream about, oh, that means prices will go up for some  
**[0:52:59-0:53:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:52:59):**  of the imported stuff we have. You can see all the short term objections. But, you know,  again, I'm an optimist, okay, and on two grounds. First of all, I'm an optimist about carbon  taxes, because in the end, the government will run out of every other source of money.  So we'll do it because they need the money. Regardless of the environmental argument,  I don't care why they do it. I just want the right answer. But I'm optimistic too, because  
**[0:53:24-0:53:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:53:24):**  without doing this, we ain't going to crack climate change. And if you look at the way  the dictators are going in China and Russia and elsewhere, basically, they're never going  to come to the table and a cop and agree to what what would be sensible to achieve climate  change. So the question is, how do you force them to play ball? And we can't have a world  in which some major polluters don't face the price of carbon, but we make British and European  
**[0:53:49-0:53:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:53:49):**  and indeed in due course American companies pay these costs. It's like making farmers  pay for or start culling the cattle in order to import the stuff from Brazil. And that's  my ultimate piece of optimism. In the end, you can try all the other alternatives, but  ideas are powerful. And in the end, the analysis sees through all the lobbying fog. And that's  why we got the Environment Act. That's why the 25 year plan was accepted because it was  
**[0:54:19-0:54:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:54:19):**  the right idea for a green and prosperous Britain. And similarly in this carbon area,  we've tried everything else. It hasn't worked. So we actually have to get serious. Do you  want three degrees? Or do you actually want to do something about this? And again, you  know, I ultimately, I suppose, I believe in that humans are not suicidal.  Sir Dieter Helm, that's all we have time for. I'd like to thank my guest, Professor Sir  
**[0:54:47-0:54:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Prof-Sir-Dieter-Helm-CBE-e1q7v9i#t=0:54:47):**  Dieter Helm, CBE. If you've enjoyed listening, please come back and listen to more, tell  your friends, like us, review us and share our links. Farmgate is funded by San Calpa  and you can join the conversation on Twitter by searching for Farmgate podcast. I've been  Finlow Kastain. Bye for now.  