### Farm Gate  (2021-17-19)
**[0:00:00-0:00:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to Farm Gate, I'm Finnlow Kestane. White Oak Pastures is a 152-year-old family  farm in Bluffton, Georgia, USA. Like most other farms, White Oak Pastures took the chemical,  industrialising route after the Second World War. For example, using nitrogen fertilisers  that made the grass grow, but which degraded the microbial life that underpins natural  soil fertility. In 1995, the fourth generation took over. Will Harris began the transition  
**[0:00:36-0:00:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:00:36):**  away from industrial agricultural techniques and started redesigning his farm as a living  ecosystem. The success at White Oak Pastures has been celebrated globally and Will Harris  is my guest on Farm Gate today. Hello Will, welcome to the programme. Hello Finnlow, thank  you for having me on today, hope you're doing well. Could I start by, you know, just, it's a simple  question, I'm sure you get asked this a lot, but could you describe your farm now? What  
**[0:01:03-0:01:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:01:03):**  does White Oak Pastures look like today and how is it different from the way that it looked  in 1995? Well, it's quite different. Today the farm is polyculture. We pasture raised  five different red meat species, cows, hogs, sheep, goats, rabbits, and we hand butcher  them here on the farm. The pasture raised five poultry species, chickens, turkeys, geese,  skinnies, ducks. We hand butcher them here on the farm. We raised pastured eggs, pastured  
**[0:01:34-0:01:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:01:34):**  vegetables, honey, I mean organic vegetables, honey. The farm is 3200 acres here plus another  1425 acres that's a solar array that we graze. We have 176 employees, so that's today. 25  years ago it was about 1000 acres of land, monoculture of only cattle, probably four  employees. So it's from an economic impact perspective from a species, in every sense of  the word it's a very different operation. You know, one of the things that strikes me there is  
**[0:02:12-0:02:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:02:12):**  that it's not just about rearing the cattle now. You've got the whole thing on the site  that you're on, the rearing through to slaughter, to processing, to retail, and you know the  shops and all the paraphernalia that go around with that. I mean it's now, it's a huge business  where before it was a farm. Well it's still a farm but closing cycles is very important  to us. You know the way I farmed previously, very linear, very scalable, this is very cyclical.  
**[0:02:42-0:02:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:02:42):**  And when you were growing up, clearly you worked within the conventional system, you  know learning your trade from your father. And I think it was around 1995 that you decided  to take what was at that time a perfectly profit making conventional cattle farm business  and put it $7.5 million into debt. Now what convinced you that it was reasonable to take  that kind of risk? I did learn how to raise cattle from my father. It was a very linear  
**[0:03:11-0:03:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:03:11):**  industrial commodity cattleman and very good at it and as you said was very successful.  I went to the University of Georgia, I majored in animal science. I came home in 1976 and  further industrialized what was already a very industrial cattle operation. I ran it  that way for 20 years. After 20 years of operating in that manner, I started enjoying it less  because I had become increasingly aware of the unintended consequences of that farming  
**[0:03:42-0:03:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:03:42):**  system. The impact on the land and the animals in the community were unintended consequences,  they were unwanted consequences and it caused me to want to move away from that production  model. In what way did you become aware of it? It started out with me as an animal welfare  issue that was kind of the kit canary in the coal mine, raising calves, loading them up  on a truck, 100 calves on a truck. The ones two-story, two level truck, the ones that  
**[0:04:12-0:04:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:04:12):**  were urinating and defecating and the ones on the bottom driven 30 hours to a very different  ecosystem or something I just didn't like. I'd done it for 20 years and it hadn't bothered  me but I started to just not like it and so I started moving away from that model. I then  gave up chemical fertilizers, pesticides, on my land and then later and in the case  of the land and the animals, we studied the system and made very conscious decisions about  
**[0:04:44-0:04:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:04:44):**  how to change the way we were managing. In the case of the community, it was really a  pleasant unintended consequence. The community benefited. I should tell you that I mentioned  we got 176 employees. We have a payroll of $100,000 a week, $100,000 per week in one  of the poorest counties in one of the poorest states. The economic impact has been significant.  There are lots of other cattlemen around you, across Georgia, across the USA, who have started  
**[0:05:14-0:05:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:05:14):**  feeling frustrated with the conventional system, have started noticing the animal welfare issues,  perhaps have started even seeing the degradation in the soil for themselves but actually taking  that decision. One day, waking up, having thought about it for however many months and  say, okay, yeah, I'm going to do this. I'm going to make this decision. I'm going to  put this farm into debt. I'm going to put my family at risk. I'm going to put my legacy  
**[0:05:39-0:05:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:05:39):**  at risk here. That's a really big decision and I'm just wondering what it is about you,  Bill, that's different from the other farmers around you. First of all, let me put everything  you said is true, but it was much more gradual than the way you described it. In 1995, I  didn't formulate a grand plan to be what we are today. It was not that way. I just started  moving away from practices I did not like and embracing practices that I do like. So  
**[0:06:09-0:06:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:06:09):**  I'm going to be clear on that. To answer the question about the motivation, I think that  probably I became aware of the unintended consequences more than my neighbors because  I probably was more of an abuser of the tools. I probably used more herbicide, more insecticide,  more chemical fertilizer, probably more hormone implants in the cattle, more self therapeutic  antibiotics and onisols. If you drink one glass of bourbon every night, you'll probably  
**[0:06:44-0:06:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:06:44):**  be fine. If you drink a quart of bourbon every night, you'll see the negative parts of alcohol.  And I was probably an abuser of those industrial tools. I don't think I'm more sensitive than  my neighbors. I think I probably was more of an abuser than my neighbors.  Obviously as you go forward through that process, after 1995, changing gradually the practices  that you were involved in, you'll have noticed, I imagine pretty quickly, that there was a  
**[0:07:11-0:07:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:07:11):**  reduction in costs as you were reducing the inputs that you were putting on the land there.  But I'm wondering to what extent that helped to provide the capital for the investments  that were to come, whether you had to raise additional capital and really what the first  big investment on the farm was after you'd started moving down that more agro-ecological  road.  
**[0:07:34-0:07:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:07:34):**  Well, no, no, you've got one thing wrong there. Changing to this way of farming is not a cost  savings. It's true, you spend less on inputs, but your output falls way below what it had  been previously. Science did not give us those tools to add cost to production. They gave  us those tools to take cost out of production. So I made less money after I started doing  without the inputs than I did previously because while I was spending less, my production was  
**[0:08:05-0:08:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:08:05):**  far less. So not only did it not help fund the additional improvements that we made here,  it was a drag on what I'd done previously. We were making less money. And in fact, take  that a step further, a farmer cannot give up these tools, these production tools, and  continue to market into the commodity market. You will go broke. It will not work because  you're adding value to the product that the commodity market will not let you extract  
**[0:08:36-0:08:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:08:36):**  back. So if you decide to change your production model to one that's kinder and gentler for  the land and animals and community, you've also got to market your products differently.  That involves building a brand, finding a customer base that's accepting of it and willing  to pay something of a premium to cover the added cost of production. It also involves  being able to move the product into a monetizable product. Consumers don't buy cows and hogs  
**[0:09:08-0:09:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:09:08):**  and sheep. They buy beef and pork and lamb. So being able to monetize it is essential.  So when you talk about the way that you were putting cost into the business, I take it  that that was because as those inputs reduced, as your productivity reduced, you were still  trying to sell into the commodity market. And so what you found was that you needed  you were changing one side of the seesaw but not the other. And so you had to not only  
**[0:09:35-0:09:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:09:35):**  reduce the inputs and change the quality of that product, but also take on that retailing  and processing in order to make business sense of everything.  That's well said. That's exactly right. And so what was the first thing that you did?  You talked about building a brand there. Was that the first thing that came along or did  you say, well, you know, actually, in order to be able to do this and to take control  
**[0:09:57-0:10:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:09:57):**  of this, we need to build our own slaughterhouse, our own processing facility. What sort of  came first in terms of the big investments? Yeah, good question. So the first thing I  did, and this is what most farmers do, and it's a mistake is I changed the production  model without changing anything else. I gave up chemical fertilizers, pesticides, hormone  implants, so different antibiotics, confinement, feeding of grain, the ruminants, I gave that  
**[0:10:24-0:10:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:10:24):**  up, but continued to market my product into the commodity market. And I had less product  to sell because I had given up those production tools. So it was not working economically  for me. So we started marketing our beef as grass fed beef. At that time it was a monoculture  on the cattle. At the time it was very fortunate. The market for grass fed beef was just starting  to develop and I was using outside slaughter capacity to turn my cows into beef to sell.  
**[0:10:56-0:11:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:10:56):**  That worked well for a while, but I exhausted the excess capacity of the slaughterhouses  I was using. They only had so much extra slaughter capacity and then they ran out before I got  profitable. They say, you can bring six cows next week. I said, I need to bring 12. I got  12 that are ready and I've got the market to sell the beef from 12. I'm sorry, you can't  bring the six. And at that level, I couldn't make money. So at that, in fact, I was losing  
**[0:11:25-0:11:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:11:25):**  money. So I had to decide either to go back to the commodity model and commodity production,  industrial production, or invest in the processing capacity, the slaughter capacity, which is  ultimately the 7.5 million dollars that you referenced. I mentioned also earlier that  we are very focused on closing cycles and being able to slaughter the animals here allowed  us to utilize the waste from the animals as fertilizer. We take our plants, generate about  
**[0:12:00-0:12:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:12:00):**  nine tons of what they refer to as packing plant waste per day, five days a week. We  don't pay to have that haul to a landfill. We compost it here on the farm and apply that  compost back to our own land. So it's kind of a closed cycle.  Fantastic. So it's circular farming at its best where you're opening that loop and you're  closing at the same time, keeping the waste products, using those waste products on farm.  
**[0:12:30-0:12:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:12:30):**  I first came across you, Will, on the fantastic Carbon Cowboys films that have been produced  by Peter Bick. And, you know, they're really exciting to watch. And in that film, you talked  about the way in which when you first started that move away from conventional farming towards  regenerative agriculture and adaptive multi-paddock grazing, you talked about the dark days of  the first year or two. And I'm just wondering if that was connected to that, you know, having  
**[0:12:58-0:13:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:12:58):**  changed the production element, still trying to sell into the commodity, trying to wrestle  with that challenge. And I wonder if you could tell me what was the most difficult thing  within those dark days and what it was that pulled you through it rather than sending  you back in the other direction and just thinking, OK, well, hang it all. I'm going to let's  give up with this and go back to the way that we used to do things.  
**[0:13:21-0:13:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:13:21):**  Well, sadly, this is not to my credit, but probably naivety had a lot to do with the  decisions we made early on. You know, I had inherited a nice farm from my father, grandfather,  great grandfather, as you mentioned earlier. And I've never borrowed money and we'd always  been profitable. And I simply didn't know that I could get in the economic stress. I've  never been in financial trouble. I didn't know I could get in financial trouble. So  
**[0:13:48-0:13:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:13:48):**  I made the decision based on more what I want to do than economic decision that it probably  should have been. And when we borrowed the money, built the plant, and we still weren't  able to make money initially, which is not unusual, getting a new business going is always  difficult with cash flow. But the answer is that after I borrowed the money and built  the building, there was no going back. There would have been no market for the failed facility  
**[0:14:20-0:14:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:14:20):**  I built. So I simply had to make it work. And again, the timing was such that we were  able to do that. I don't know that we could do it today. I fear the economic conditions  have changed so much that we probably did all that in a sweet spot. If we'd been 10  years earlier, I know we would not have survived. If we'd been 10 years later, I'm not sure  we would have.  
**[0:14:45-0:14:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:14:45):**  The southern states of the United States of America, they're kind of synonymous with family,  family values. And I was at university in Memphis, Tennessee. And one of my memories  from there is how important family was to everybody. I just wonder how important your  family was at that time. You would have felt that you were potentially dragging your family  into a dark place, just as you were yourself. How important were they in holding you up  
**[0:15:15-0:15:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:15:15):**  and getting you through and making that business work?  Certainly, family could not be more important. There's no way I can express that. As far  as the support from my family, they never really knew the situation. My father had dementia.  He died of Alzheimer's. He was not aware of what was going on on the farm economically.  My wife was raising my family. She's a professional school teacher. She's never been heavily involved  
**[0:15:49-0:15:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:15:49):**  in the business. And my children, two of which are helping me run the business today, they  were young. So they didn't know either. So family was not an essential element in the  decisions we made either to get into this or the struggles to improve it.  So again, two of my three children do work here full time now, as do their spouses, all  four of them in management. And they've been very instrumental over the last 10 years or  
**[0:16:26-0:16:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:16:26):**  so, instrumental in making the business a success.  You mentioned that your father had dementia at the time that you were making the transition.  And I'm just wondering, your father had been a successful cattleman himself. He'd been  running the farm himself for presumably decades. If your father was aware of the changes that  you were making and the struggles that you were going through, what do you think he'd  
**[0:16:50-0:16:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:16:50):**  have said to you?  Well, he simply would not have let me do it. It was just as simple as that. He was very  much in control until he was not in control anymore. So his word would have been the law  and he would not have had it. He was very adverse. I doubt my father would borrow the  penny in his life. A child of the Depression, he was successful and just didn't believe  
**[0:17:13-0:17:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:17:13):**  in borrowing money. But I do think a lot about what would he say today. And I think he would  be very pleased with everything we've done, except for the fact that we still have operating  on borrowing money. We still have bank debt. We make debt service every month, but he would  not like that. I have no idea what he would say, but some of them would be real good and  some of them would be real bad. And the bad part would be loud and least with obscenities.  
**[0:17:47-0:17:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:17:47):**  And part of the reason, I guess, that there are still debts associated with this is that  you seem to be constantly investing. You're constantly growing, not just the business,  but the positive impact of the business in the community, buying up property and renovating  it for your farm workers. You mentioned you've got 176 employees now and $100,000 pay round.  Did you say a week or a month was a week? I mean, you know, just immense. And I wonder  
**[0:18:18-0:18:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:18:18):**  what the positive, what do you think the key sort of positive impacts are on the community  around you of you being successful and taking successful decisions in your business?  Well, the economic impact is very visible. The little town of Bluffton, Georgia sits  right in the middle of my farm. And we've bought a lot of the stores, old storefronts  and vacant lots and houses there. And it has gone from a ghost town, literally a ghost  
**[0:18:48-0:18:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:18:48):**  town, to a thriving, tiny little village. It's just tiny, it's 100 people. But it's  just very, very nice. It's a destination. People come there to be there. So that's been  very pleasing. And again, that was an unintended consequence that went well.  I'm just going to move on now. I'd like to focus a little bit on the welfare or the environmental  impacts, the positive impacts of your change. What do you think the key benefits are of  
**[0:19:18-0:19:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:19:18):**  the changes that you've made?  So of the three basic tenets of White Oak Pastures, the three things that we strive  for is butter and butter animal welfare, butter and butter rechargeable land management practices,  and more and more enrichment of this rural community. Those are the three basic tenets.  The first one was animal welfare. But today it's not, we're doing butter and butter  
**[0:19:44-0:19:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:19:44):**  every year. But I think we've done about all we can do. We thought what we believed was  good animal welfare, we realized was not good animal welfare. So we changed things. I don't  think we're going to get much better at it than we are right now. We will continue to  focus on it. But that's an accomplishment that's more in the rearview mirror. The next  tenet that I embraced, and it's still my passion, is regenerative land management. And that  
**[0:20:12-0:20:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:20:12):**  is truly my passion today. And I guess I think if I have learned some things that I won't  share with others, it has to do with the regenerative land management. It's practices that badly  need implementing in this country, probably all over the world. Great, great damage, great  degradation has been done through the industrial farming methods. And we figured out how to  reverse that. And it's a lot of fun doing it. The changes to the community, as I mentioned  
**[0:20:46-0:20:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:20:46):**  earlier, were unintentional and they're very pleasant. And this should be done, this should  be a white oak pasture re-enriching a bluff to Georgia in every agricultural county in  the United States, or two or three of us. And that'll come just naturally if the right  things are doing for the land and the army. One of the things that's a really pleasant,  sort of almost accidental to start with outcome, associated with the regenerative grazing that  
**[0:21:15-0:21:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:21:15):**  you're doing, is carbon sequestration. And clearly, over time that's become a really  important outcome that you've measured and monitored, and that you're making sure that  you're drawing down as much carbon as you can, because it's become so important to the  world. And I'm just wondering how you've gone about analyzing that, how you've gone about  measuring it, whether it's something that you've been monitoring for many years, and  
**[0:21:40-0:21:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:21:40):**  just what kind of data it is that you're pulling together.  Thank you for that question. And I want to preface it by saying that we're very proud  of the carbon sequestration that we have done and are continuing to do. But I do want to  warn listeners that I don't want this change in farming method to be all about carbon.  It's important. It's very important. But there are so many other benefits that come from  
**[0:22:08-0:22:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:22:08):**  this sort of production practice that we just get bogged down in carbon. So the improvement  to the water, to the oceans, to the groundwater, the oceans, to the community, on and on and  on. Just so many benefits that let's just don't let it be all about carbon. That's number  two. Number two is I really get tired of hearing scientists bicker about how to measure carbon.  I mean, I don't know how to measure carbon. I know how to sequester carbon. We figured  
**[0:22:42-0:22:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:22:42):**  it out. They're still figuring out how to measure it. And their schools of thought is  very polarized. And they bicker and quibble all the time. And it really wearies me. I  don't need it. I can see the benefit. I can see what my fields look like compared to my  neighbor's field 10 feet away at 50 miles an hour driving down the road. I can go out  and take a spade full of soil and turn it over. And the difference is not quite black  
**[0:23:13-0:23:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:23:13):**  and white, but it's red and very dark green. The land changes color. When there's a big  rainstorm, which we get in the Gulf Coast, the United States quite often, the runoff  from my land, there won't be much runoff. And if it is, it's very clear. Off my neighbors,  it looks like a strawberry milkshake and it's flooding from there. So, you know, carbon  is important. I'm very proud of the fact we sequester carbon. Very proud of the fact we've  
**[0:23:42-0:23:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:23:42):**  got a scientific study, third party, done that shows we sequester carbon. But the argument  is endless on exactly how to measure it.  We've got a slightly more practical question here that came in from Twitter from a farmer  for you, Will. And it just says, do you know a good way to build topsoil on top of the  soil that you've already got? So for farms that have really shallow soils over bedrock,  
**[0:24:08-0:24:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:24:08):**  you know, where subsoiling isn't really possible, do you have any tips for how to how to create  additional new topsoil?  I think the Soil and Regenerative Farm management applies in both cases. I think we do build  deeper and deeper soil, even as we're changing the subsoil. The changes we're talking about  is cease cultivation, cease use of chemical fertilizers, cease use of pesticides and bring  
**[0:24:33-0:24:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:24:33):**  in animal impact. And the animal impact needs to be high impact, animal impact with a very  long recovery period. And that will build, it will change the subsoil, but it will also  make the topsoil deeper and deeper and deeper. You know, the argument is made that by many  scientists and I disagree with it that you can only improve soil for so long, it reaches  a saturation point and it's not going to be any more carbon in that soil. And I do understand  
**[0:25:03-0:25:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:25:03):**  the saturation point. But I think what they fail to understand is the soil will get deeper  and deeper and deeper. We've seen that in our own country where virgin soils were broken  and this topsoil was very, very, very deep and it became more and more shallow as time  went on. Well, the same forces of nature that built that deep topsoil can rebuild that deep  topsoil if we humans will quit doing the things that destroy it.  
**[0:25:29-0:25:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:25:29):**  What kind of a recovery time do you have on your own pasture?  That is a highly good question, it's highly situational. In a very brutal environment  like you would find in a desert kind of an area, arid area with not much rainfall, not  much humidity, you may not be able to graze the same land. It may take more than a year.  I'm in the coastal plains of Georgia, 50 something inches of rain a year. And depending on the  
**[0:25:58-0:26:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:25:58):**  time of year, six weeks, maybe eight weeks is more than enough recovery time.  As a kid, I was a big fan of the Dukes of Hazzard and so I was very taken by your description  of yourself as a good old boy. I'm just wondering if you could tell me why you think that more  of the good old boys around you in Georgia don't follow your lead?  Probably because they're good businessmen. The farmers who have survived, I should say  
**[0:26:23-0:26:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:26:23):**  that in my part of the world here, farms have gone from being three, four, five hundred  acres farms to being several thousand acre farms. So it was a survival of the fittest  in terms of who is what farming families have survived through the last 50 years or so.  The ones that are out there today are good business people. They didn't get there by  accident. They didn't survive through accidental means. The commodity farming business has  
**[0:26:54-0:27:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:26:54):**  become a very low return business, but it's also a much lower risk business. The weather  risk is mitigated somewhat by having bigger and bigger equipment that can be planted and  harvested much more quickly. Irrigation is for droughts, an arsenal of different pesticides  to use in the event of some pest. The government programs that put floors under price drops.  The ability to hedge on the commodity board, federally subsidized crop insurance, and go  
**[0:27:33-0:27:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:27:33):**  on and on and on about different tools that have been provided through the economy or  through science that takes risk out of production. None of these people are doing super well  financially because it's a low return, low risk business. But the question was, why are  they not coming in this direction? The answer is, this is a very high risk business. There's  a lot that can happen to go wrong in our business model. I'm not an evangelist. I'm not pleading  
**[0:28:04-0:28:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:28:04):**  with people to change the way they farm. I think it would be good if they did. But because  I am a good old boy, I get it. I understand.  What do you think other farmers around you think of you? Obviously within your business,  the promotion that you do is to an extent, it's sort of setting yourself above in terms  of farm animal welfare, carbon sequestration, environmental outcomes. Do they feel that  
**[0:28:26-0:28:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:28:26):**  the existence of your business is in some way an insult to their own? Or do they just  see you as a businessman that's doing something different?  Well, first of all, I will say this. You said setting myself above them. I don't set myself  above them. I set myself apart from them. There's a very real difference in that. Because  I don't set myself above, but set myself apart, I'd like to think there's not a tremendous  
**[0:28:52-0:29:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:28:52):**  amount of animosity from the people who know me. Now, there is a tremendous amount of animosity  on the part of big multinational food companies who really resent people like me, not just  Will Harris, but the people like me who do lift up the negatives of that industrial monocultural  commodity system. And that's a palpable thing, I feel. And it's concerning.  For those farmers that you've described as excellent at what they do, working in the  
**[0:29:32-0:29:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:29:32):**  conventional systems who are businessmen, who don't want to take those risks, I wonder  how you think farmers like that might be persuaded to move in the direction that you have. And  there's a new Secretary of Agriculture in Washington. And what would be your message  to him? Well, let me ask what would bring about change.  And I'll start out by telling you what will not bring about change. And then I'll tell  
**[0:29:55-0:30:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:29:55):**  you what will. What won't bring about change is government regulation, because there are  so many lobbyists with so much money representing the big multinational food companies that  there will not be meaningful change from the government, from Washington, DC. Another thing  it won't be is it won't be big multinational companies who make billions of dollars selling  highly processed food that comes from these monocultural industrial farms. Change won't  
**[0:30:25-0:30:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:30:25):**  come from them. It's like change didn't come from the tobacco companies when cigarettes  were found to be carcinogenic. It won't come from farmers who just say, you know what,  I think I will just change what I do because it's the right thing because they can't afford  to. It won't go over two or three other things that people look to that will not cause change.  If we have meaningful change, it will be because consumers educate themselves and demand it.  
**[0:30:51-0:30:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:30:51):**  Wendell Berry, a role model man, and he says something like consumers vote with their dollars  on how they want the world to be. And that's much easier said than done because these consumers  are intentionally, hopelessly misled by big, northern national food corporations by green-washed  product. This don't change the way we produce food. This just change the way we talk about  it. The food labels are so intentionally, intentionally misleading that it's hard for  
**[0:31:25-0:31:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:31:25):**  consumers to educate themselves to make the difference that they have to make if they're  going to do this. Fantastic. That's really interesting. It's  a great way to end and that's all we got time for. I'd like to thank my guest, Will Harris,  the man and the brain behind White Oak Pastures. You can find out more at whiteoakpastures.com.  If you've enjoyed listening, please come back and listen to more. Tell your friends, like  
**[0:31:49-0:31:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Will-Harris-ep62ah#t=0:31:49):**  us, review us and share our links. Farmgate is a partnership project for Farmwell and  FAI Farms. We're funded by San Calpa and you can join the conversation on Twitter by searching  for Farmgate Podcast. I've been Finn low Kustein. Bye for now.  