### Farm Gate  (2022-01-13)
**[0:00:00-0:00:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to Farmgate. I'm Finlow Kostain, the chief executive of Farmwell and founder  of the Food and Global Security Network.  The war in Ukraine has sparked a food price crisis, with devastating impacts being felt  around the world. But while Russia lit the touch paper, this crisis was predicted and  could have been avoided.  
**[0:00:22-0:00:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:00:22):**  I'm joined for this programme by Jennifer Klapp, Finlay Win and Margot Gibbs. Jennifer  is an expert for Brussels-based i-PES Food and is the Canada Research Chair in Global  Food Security and Sustainability at the University of Waterloo in Ontario. She's also vice-chair  of the high-level panel of experts on food security and nutrition of the UN Committee  on World Food Security.  
**[0:00:43-0:00:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:00:43):**  Margot and Fin are food system reporters for Lighthouse Reports, a non-profit investigative  journalism group which is based in the Netherlands.  Welcome all. Jennifer, let me come to you first. What role has the Russian invasion  of Ukraine played in driving this food price instability?  Yes, well, of course, the Russian invasion in Ukraine is playing a huge role in driving  
**[0:01:04-0:01:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:01:04):**  food prices higher in recent months. The initial attack of Russia into Ukraine led to huge  spikes in wheat prices on world markets. And the different specific dynamics of the battles  have actually correlated quite closely to changes in prices of wheat, for example. But  it's important to note as well that food prices were already rising and had hit record levels  even before the invasion. The FAO in January, their food price index indicated that food  
**[0:01:31-0:01:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:01:31):**  prices were as high, if not higher than they were in the 2008 food crisis. And this was  a product of COVID-19, which disrupted supply chains, general inflationary pressures as  well, following a decade of easy money policies like low interest rates. The invasion of Ukraine  really turbocharged what was already a really bad situation for world hunger by pushing  prices higher and cutting off access for the world's poorest and most marginalized people.  
**[0:01:56-0:02:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:01:56):**  Could it have been avoided? I mean, obviously, we can't talk about the Russian invasion.  Yes, it could have been avoided, but the food system didn't need to have reacted the way  it did to this particular situation. If food systems had been less concentrated, if they'd  been less rigid, and if they'd been more resilient, the impact of this crisis would have been  less severe. The problem is that the food system has a lot of inbuilt weaknesses that  
**[0:02:18-0:02:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:02:18):**  made the crisis far worse than the underlying conditions of supply and demand on world markets  would have normally suggested.  So we'll go into some of that detail a little bit later on, and thanks so much for that  summary at this point. Just sort of thinking about Russia and Ukraine specifically and  their role in relation to this food price crisis. It's well documented that in 2010,  
**[0:02:38-0:02:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:02:38):**  the Arab Spring was sparked, at least in part, by skyrocketing bread prices, a staple food,  for example, in Egypt and Tunisia, and that that price surge was in part due to harvest  failures at that time in Russia and Ukraine. So what impact is this current crisis likely  to have around the world?  Yeah, well, the current crisis, as we know, it's still unfolding and new dynamics are  
**[0:03:00-0:03:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:03:00):**  emerging every day. So we're watching in real time the dynamics unfold. It's certainly possible  that this crisis will have similar kinds of political dynamics that occurred in the Arab  Spring over a decade ago, and already we're seeing tensions in the Middle East and North  African countries. These are countries that especially rely on wheat from the Black Sea  region for their main wheat imports. But it's not just the countries that rely specifically  
**[0:03:23-0:03:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:03:23):**  on wheat from Ukraine and Russia that are being affected. World prices for wheat, as  well as other agricultural commodities, for example, rice, maize, and soy are also seeing  record volatility right now. It's partly due to substitutions on the market, but also general  panic about world food supplies, which is leading to higher prices in all countries  around the world. And this sort of increased prices obviously affects people's ability  
**[0:03:47-0:03:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:03:47):**  to access food, the cost of living is rising, and so are tensions rising. So what we're  seeing is a really toxic situation. In many countries in sub-Saharan Africa, for example,  where countries are highly dependent on food imports, their import bills are rising really  sharply right now. And this is combined with debt crises, deteriorating currency values  in those countries, which really means much higher prices. So right now the UN estimates  
**[0:04:12-0:04:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:04:12):**  around 45 to 50 million people are on the brink of famine right now, and that's not  a good situation.  World Finance, it seems to me that there is much more conversation about this within richer  nation countries' media and communities than there was back in 2007, 2008, back in 2010.  And I wonder if it was anticipated that poorer communities in all countries, including richer  
**[0:04:36-0:04:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:04:36):**  nations, were likely to feel the impacts of this particular crisis. Was that anticipated?  Yeah, it's a great question. I think we've had weird dynamics in recent years. At the  beginning of the pandemic, you may recall, food prices actually fell pretty sharply at  the beginning of that crisis. But it was a crisis of access, not prices at that time,  and then prices started to creep up gradually as the pandemic unfolded. And so people who  
**[0:05:01-0:05:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:05:01):**  are marginalised, low-income, within all countries have been having difficulty accessing food  for several years. And so I would say, yeah, governments have been aware of this problem,  and then the crisis in Ukraine just really put that problem off the charts.  So it's very much a combination of the invasion plus Covid, plus the underlying factors that  we're going to talk about in more detail. Margo, the Hunger Profiteers, the investigation  
**[0:05:27-0:05:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:05:27):**  that you, Thin and seven other reporters co-authored for Lighthouse Reports, is centred on the  role that financial speculation has had in accelerating price instability. In the report,  you say that following the invasion, international banks began profiling ways for retail investors  to bet on rising food prices. What was happening? As Jennifer was explaining, the grain belt  of the UK and Russia is very important to global food production. And I think everyone  
**[0:05:53-0:05:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:05:53):**  agrees there might have been price increases following the invasion of such an area. Where  some people see a potential human tragedy, others see an opportunity. And there were  many examples of this after the invasion. But one thing we found was this listicle published  by JP Morgan, which is five commodity trading ideas to hedge against inflation, in which  they suggest that investors try and cash in on food price increases by investing in futures  
**[0:06:18-0:06:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:06:18):**  contracts for goods like wheat, corn and soy. And what we saw, what we measured was that  this, this kind of investment had happened on a really significant scale. So we recorded  more than a billion dollars being invested in these two niche funds, which bought wheat  futures. And those two funds alone had bought wheat futures equivalent to around half the  UK's annual flower use. And then we saw on a kind of macro scale, this kind of buying  
**[0:06:46-0:06:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:06:46):**  activity in the futures, agricultural futures markets actually had reached record levels.  And what happens when a load of people try and buy something is that the price goes up.  These investments had increased futures prices, and futures prices are used as the basis for  cash contracts. So these investments had a real concrete impact on the price of these  essential foods.  
**[0:07:07-0:07:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:07:07):**  So what impact has this type of speculation had on the ground?  This type of speculation that we're talking about, which I think, you know, experts like  Jennifer and others have called us as excessive speculation, right? So this is speculation  that goes way beyond the market fundamentals of demand and supply. So it's having an impact  on two levels. So you've got the level of the commercial users like farmers, millers,  
**[0:07:31-0:07:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:07:31):**  etc, as well as on ordinary people. I'm going to leave it to Margo to talk about the impacts  on the commercial users, I'm going to focus on the latter. So what excessive speculation  has done is contributing to the food price rises that we're seeing all over the world  that Jennifer talked about, this is happening, particularly in import dependent countries,  you know, you and I will probably be fine. But the increased prices are devastating for  
**[0:07:59-0:08:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:07:59):**  many poor people, because they spend a huge percentage of their incomes on food. So for  them, even a 1% or a 5% increase in the cost of bread, or pasta, or potatoes could push  them over the edge. But here, we're talking about prices rising by double digit percentages,  yeah. And in some communities, prices have either doubled or tripled. What this means  is that people are having to cut back on either the quality or the quantity of the food that  
**[0:08:29-0:08:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:08:29):**  they consume. And in many cases, both are happening. Yeah, we spoke to ordinary people  in Egypt and Lebanon for investigation, they're struggling to feed themselves and their families.  And if this situation becomes chronic, we're then looking at malnutrition that is going  to have long term intergenerational impacts. The last point I want to make is the price  rises are threatening humanitarian efforts as well at a time when they are most desperately  
**[0:08:56-0:09:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:08:56):**  needed. So I was at an event quite recently where the chief economist of the World Food  Programme said that their costs are now 44% higher compared to pre-COVID times. And as  we know, the WFP supports some of the most vulnerable people in the world. These are  people who are on the verge of starvation. Now increase in food costs for them means  that the agency will either have to cut rations or help fewer people. And these are the real  
**[0:09:23-0:09:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:09:23):**  concrete impacts on the ground. I'm really interested in the way in which this food price  crisis is being felt so keenly by people not only in the developing world, but also by  people that we would normally think about in richer countries, poor communities in the  UK, for example. I'm seeing levels of poverty that haven't existed since the 1970s. Now  you talked about the difference between speculation and excessive speculation. And I wonder if  
**[0:09:50-0:09:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:09:50):**  the investment community has been caught out in some way this time around that they were  doing what they do, but they weren't expecting the impact to be quite so great as it has  been.  Well, I'm not sure, you know, to be perfectly honest with you, I think we've been here before  2007, 2008. We've been here 2010, 2011. We keep thinking things were going to change  
**[0:10:10-0:10:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:10:10):**  and it hasn't. And I think, you know, we can of course talk about the failures of the investment  community and we should, but I think we also need to talk about the failures of governance,  of our governments in failing to regulate. These things don't happen out of a vacuum.  The investment community will not be able to behave in a way that they have been if  there were stricter regulatory frameworks that will, you know, restrict them from being  
**[0:10:37-0:10:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:10:37):**  so laissez faire with other people's money and other people's ability to feed themselves.  Just as an example, right, Margo just now talked about this whole debate and argument  over whether excessive speculation have played a role and, you know, in the industry still  contesting that, oh, no, excessive speculation didn't play a role in the 2007, 2008 crisis.  And that has been used as a justification over the past 12 years not to do anything.  
**[0:11:06-0:11:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:11:06):**  Whereas I think a lot of people and I would say both myself and Margo and Jennifer and  other scholars have argued that we need to look at food when it comes to trading food.  We have to look at it differently because we are talking about the basis of our existence  on this Earth. It's not the same as any other commodities. And when it comes to talking  about it and one of the researchers that we interviewed from University of Bonn, I'm going  
**[0:11:33-0:11:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:11:33):**  to quote him because I think he said it in a way that best explains it. You know, scientific  literature has always been about proving something that exists. But considering that global food  security is at risk, we should flip the burden of proof. And so what we should be doing,  we should be asking the financial industry to prove that excessive speculation is not  driving food prices, rather than us having to prove that excessive speculation is driving  
**[0:12:01-0:12:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:12:01):**  food prices.  WES It's interesting, you've mentioned there the  food price crisis of 2007, 2008. We've referred to it a few times. Could you just remind us  what happened then, where that crisis came from? And why has it not been addressed? And  what should happen now?  
**[0:12:16-0:12:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:12:16):**  JANET The food price rises that we're currently seeing  at this point, you know, this is the third major food price crisis that we have seen  in the past 15 years. In 2007, 2008 crisis, international prices of maize, rice and wheat  rose dramatically. I mean, prices of maize rose by 70%, rise by 180%, and wheat by 120%.  Now, some estimates show that at least 40 million people were pushed into hunger as  
**[0:12:47-0:12:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:12:47):**  a result. And we came out of that crisis, there was some political will to want to do  something about this. And I think we need to go back perhaps a little bit, a few decades  back to see how this failure came about. It's a history of failures. And in fact, Jennifer's  written about this. It started with the loosening of rules on limits to speculation in the 1980s  and 90s. And then in 2000, there was deregulation. What it did was enabled huge amounts of capital  
**[0:13:18-0:13:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:13:18):**  to flow into commodity markets without any limits. Yeah. And this happened through these  new investment products, like commodity indexes that were set up by banks. And this hyper  financialization of food, sort of contributed to this food price crisis that I was mentioning  and this impact. So suddenly, politicians started to realize that this was a problem,  and that perhaps excessive speculation needs to be curbed. There was political will. And  
**[0:13:45-0:13:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:13:45):**  there was a lot of calls from, you know, scholars like Jennifer, as well as civil society and  eight groups like Oxfam, for what they call strict position limits, which is essentially  the limits on the number of contracts that a single firm can hold. But there was so much  lobbying from the financial industry to water down the very, very strict rules. And in fact,  you know, in the United States, industry groups took the regulator to court to stop them from  
**[0:14:14-0:14:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:14:14):**  introducing these rules. And what has happened since then was that the situation in terms  of regulation has worsened, because regulatory bodies on both sides of the Atlantic have  further weakened the rules. Just two years ago, in 2020, both the Europe and the US introduced  new rules that raised or lifted these position limits. They also introduced new loopholes  that benefited the exchanges, the index funds, you know, financial intermediaries and money  
**[0:14:45-0:14:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:14:45):**  managers. And this is where we are now. And I think this is personally to me, one of the  biggest tragedies is that we could have prevented this, you know, we may not have totally avoided  this because of the many different factors, you know, COVID, the war at play, but we could  have blunted and dampened some of the impacts if something was actually done after the 2007-2008  crisis.  
**[0:15:10-0:15:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:15:10):**  Thanks so much, then. It strikes me that in the same way that the investment community  was talking about ways of cashing in on the crisis in Ukraine, that actually the resulting  crisis in food price increases perhaps creates an opportunity to try and achieve that regulation,  a tightening of that regulation that is obviously so needed. Margo, the last section that I  want to sort of look at around this speculation is around a quote from the financial lobby  
**[0:15:36-0:15:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:15:36):**  group ISDA, which was in the report that you wrote. They say that fundamental misperceptions  exist about the connection between speculation, derivatives, and volatility and price increases  in commodities markets. In fact, they say derivatives are vital tools to enable firms  to manage the risk associated with volatility and prices. Are they right?  They're absolutely right about the fact that derivatives are meant to be tools for risk  
**[0:16:02-0:16:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:16:02):**  management, but that function is actually broken by the kind of excessive speculation  we recorded by financial firms. So how it's meant to work is that buyers and sellers of  grain, so millers or farmers, can ensure against the changes in price by buying or selling  contracts on the futures markets. Now, traditionally, speculators can play a useful role in this.  If they are there in the markets to a limited degree, they provide enough buyers and sellers  
**[0:16:29-0:16:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:16:29):**  for these commercial players. That's what was called in the terminology, they provide  liquidity. But when you get a huge amount of capital flowing in just one direction,  it's essentially just chasing a price or looking for a, as they call it, safe place for money  in times of inflation. In other words, it's not trading, which is based on market fundamentals.  It's just chasing the price. Now that increases spikes and troughs. And that increased volatility  
**[0:16:57-0:17:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:16:57):**  actually makes the markets completely dysfunctional to their core users. And that's what we saw  after the invasion. So the massive price spike meant that some farmers couldn't sell their  summer harvest because grain elevators didn't trust the futures price. They thought that  futures price was wrong. And secondly, that price spike also pushed up what's called a  margin calls for commercial firms like millers who typically hold short contracts. Now that  
**[0:17:24-0:17:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:17:24):**  increased price for the margin calls, even in the short term, has an effect on the cost  of doing business for millers. And obviously, that's in some way going to be factored into  the eventual price paid by regular consumers.  So clearly investment houses, financial markets in general need to have flexibility in order  to be able to manage their own business. But at the same time, that regulation is necessary  
**[0:17:46-0:17:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:17:46):**  in order to stop it from going too far in one direction or another. So getting the balance  right must be really difficult. And I guess this is where the conversation has taken place  between the financial sector and governments. Where do you think we're at now? Do you think  governments are sympathetic to more regulation at this point?  What's promising is that the current head of the US regulator, the Commodity Futures  
**[0:18:10-0:18:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:18:10):**  Trading Commission, he was one of the former commissioners who descended from the 2020  rule, which was essentially full of loopholes and in fact, raised certain position limits  for agricultural commodities. So I think there is at least some promise that there are people  in relevant positions of power who recognize that this is a problem. So I think there is  some potential there. But what we saw in 2008 is that public pressure and public campaigns  
**[0:18:38-0:18:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:18:38):**  were incredibly important to getting politicians to take notice.  Thanks so much for that. And then, Margo, thanks so much for that detailed sort of explanation  of what's been going on within the speculation markets. Coming back to you, Jennifer, this  war is a shock layered on top of a global food system that has major inbuilt weaknesses.  In the recent IPES Food Report, Another Perfect Storm, you and your co-authors address four  
**[0:19:04-0:19:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:19:04):**  key weaknesses and speculation prone grain markets is one. But what are the other three?  The other three are problems in the food system that exacerbate the kind of speculative problems  that Sin and Margo were just speaking to. The first one is a problem of import dependency  combined with extreme concentration. And this is a double layered problem. The first kind  of aspect of it or the first kind of dependency is a dependency on imported staple crops.  
**[0:19:31-0:19:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:19:31):**  Increasingly, human diets revolve around just three crops for staples, wheat, rice and maize,  which make up around half of human diets around the world. And while many countries produce  their own staple crops, most countries don't produce enough to cover their needs because  dietary patterns have become more and more reliant on these three staples. And so they  need to resort to basically importing these staples. Part of the problem here is that  
**[0:19:56-0:20:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:19:56):**  in recent decades, countries have become really specialized in what they produce. And so many  countries have shifted into producing export crops that are not food crops while importing  these staple crops. And the second layer of that problem is a dependency on just a few  countries that are able to produce enough of those staple crops to export them globally.  So what happens is when a few exporters go out of commission, like happened when Ukraine  
**[0:20:20-0:20:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:20:20):**  was invaded by Russia, it led to huge gyrations on the markets. And this is because just seven  countries plus the EU account for over 90% of the world's wheat exports. And at the same  time, only four countries account for over 80% of the world's maize exports. And so,  you know, when we look at the fact that Russia and Ukraine together account for around 30%  of the world's wheat export market and over 15% of the world's maize market, and we can  
**[0:20:47-0:20:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:20:47):**  add, they also contribute to 60% of the world's sunflower market. It just unleashes huge panic  because of this rigidity of the reliance on just a few players. And then you add to that  the fact that just four firms, what we call the ABCDs that refers to Archer Daniels, Midland,  Bungee, Cargill and Louis Dreyfus, they account for over 70% of the world's grain trade. In  other words, the commercial trade is controlled by just a few companies. That's a highly,  
**[0:21:13-0:21:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:21:13):**  highly concentrated market. So a disruption like Ukraine coming out of that situation  where 20 million tons of wheat they're saying right now is stuck in Ukraine and in warehouses  not able to reach markets, this can cause enormous problems. And what we're seeing is  these four companies that control that trade are seeing record profits right now. And part  of the reason links to what Margot and then we're just talking about, they are considered  
**[0:21:37-0:21:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:21:37):**  commercial operators because they are trading in grain, and they're playing the future market  all the time. So even if they were just doing run of the mill hedging of their own risks,  they had a huge windfall profit when wheat prices soared by over 50% in just the space  of a few days back in March and prices are still really high. Import dependency and the  concentration of these markets is really important flaw, I would say, in the food system that  
**[0:22:02-0:22:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:22:02):**  makes it less resilient. The other two flaws beyond the dependency and the speculation,  one is the path dependency of food production systems. Agricultural production systems,  especially over the past century, have become increasingly locked in and really hard to  shift. We're seeing high specialization of commodity crops, large industrial farms that  depend on synthetic fertilizers, fossil fuel energy, genetically modified seeds, and often  
**[0:22:29-0:22:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:22:29):**  commodity buying companies, the ABCDs I just talked about, they have contracts with farmers  to deliver certain amounts of crop and certain crops for those markets. And there are huge  power differentials between these powerful companies and producers. And so it leads to  a situation where it's really hard to shift in response to a shock like the invasion of  Ukraine that disrupts the markets. We're kind of locked in. And then the other major issue  
**[0:22:56-0:23:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:22:56):**  that we discuss in the report is the vicious cycles of conflict, climate change, poverty,  and food insecurity. Again, this makes adaptation to shocks extremely difficult, especially  for the world's poorest people in the most vulnerable situations. I already mentioned  widening economic inequalities is a huge problem here, combined with smallholder farmers facing  climate vulnerabilities as the climate is changing. We recently saw India facing enormous  
**[0:23:24-0:23:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:23:24):**  increases in temperature that have affected their crops directly. This affects people's  incomes. And then you layered into that is this problem of conflicts. There are 40 active  conflict zones in the world right now. The UN estimates 60 percent of the world's hungriest  people actually live in conflict zones. And so we have this real problem where many people  are on the brink of famine and caught in this vicious cycle. So all of these factors together  
**[0:23:49-0:23:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:23:49):**  have really created a really – that's why we call our report Another Perfect Storm.  It's Another Perfect Storm, but we should have avoided it because as Finn and Margot  already mentioned, we had a perfect storm not that long ago in 2008-09 crisis. And we  knew about a lot of these problems. I mean, the specific details are different in this  case because of the war in Ukraine, but many of the underlying factors are identical and  
**[0:24:14-0:24:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:24:14):**  we failed to do anything about it.  Thanks so much for that. We're going to come to those vicious cycles in just a moment,  but let's go back to those first two in particular. Food imports and production system dependencies.  What in particular can be done to address these?  Yeah, well, I'm glad you asked about these together because in my view, the solutions  
**[0:24:34-0:24:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:24:34):**  we need address both of these problems. And the problem of food import dependencies and  production system dependencies and rigidities are really examples of how food systems are  frail, rigid and unable to respond in the face of shocks. And so what we need to do  is improve food system resilience to basically create capacity within food systems to respond  to shocks and to create that kind of capacity. We need to actually make food systems more  
**[0:25:02-0:25:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:25:02):**  diverse and to create more what we call in systems theory, more redundancies or more  slack in the system that can pick up where shocks happen and increase the ability to  respond. I mean, if you think about like a tight rubber band and it's tight as it can  be, you could say, oh, that's sufficient because you're using less rubber band. You actually  need more rubber band to be able to respond to shocks or it will break. And so that's  
**[0:25:25-0:25:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:25:25):**  what we need in food systems. And I know, you know, that sounds really nice. Oh, we  need more diversity. Well, what it means is that we need more countries producing more  of the food that they consume at home themselves. In other words, to reduce the food import  dependencies when shocks happen so that it's not a crisis means more countries producing  more of their own staple foods. And I want to stress here that that doesn't mean autarky.  
**[0:25:50-0:25:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:25:50):**  Oftentimes people who are against this improving food self-sufficiency say, oh, that's autarky  and that's a recipe for disaster. Of course, autarky is a recipe for disaster. We only  need to look at North Korea and the repeated hunger crises there. But what we need is a  greater – just greater production capacity in all countries, especially where it's ecologically  possible alongside the global trading system that can, again, the global trading system  
**[0:26:15-0:26:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:26:15):**  can help create some of that slack in the system. What it means is more diversity of  these kind of trading systems. We need more diverse production systems as well. That's  a second key element here. We need ecologically sound and climate resilient food production  systems that are less reliant on intensive energy inputs like synthetic fertilizers and  fossil fuels. This would help to insulate food production systems from the disruption  
**[0:26:39-0:26:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:26:39):**  in the global energy and fertilizer markets that we're seeing right now. And we haven't  talked that much about the fertilizer situation, but it's equally impacted by the Russian  invasion in Ukraine because of Russia and Belarus being such large exporters of fertilizers.  And these have been subject to huge trade disruptions and prices are spiking as well.  And third, we also need more diversity in terms of the crops that are produced and basically  
**[0:27:03-0:27:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:27:03):**  the diets that we all eat. We need to move away from just a handful of staple crops that  we rely on for our diets. And many of those staple crops I would add are ultra-processed  and people are relying on these sort of like highly processed unhealthy diets. We need  to move towards more diverse diets to reinvigorate the growth of more traditional and ecologically  appropriate crops in different countries around the world, which are more nutritious in many  
**[0:27:29-0:27:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:27:29):**  cases anyway. Countries that are relying on wheat imports when they can't even produce  wheat ecologically within their own regions need to think about, okay, what are the traditional  staple crops? Maybe it's millet, maybe it's cassava, maybe potatoes, other kinds of foods  that we need to bring into our diet. So diversity is really the key. And then I would just add  there that we need a bit of a backup if all else fails, the development of regional grain  
**[0:27:53-0:27:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:27:53):**  reserves. We call for this in the IPES report because we know that there are a lot of grain  in storage right now around the world. Prices are spiking, what we call the stock to use  ratio. In other words, the amount of storage compared to what's used, it's maybe a bit  tight right now, but it's not nearly as tight as it was in 2008. So the prices are even  worse now, but we actually have a lot of grain in storage. And in that kind of context, it  
**[0:28:15-0:28:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:28:15):**  makes sense for regions to set up regional grain reserves so that there is a backup in  these kinds of crises to tide them over through these kinds of disruptions. And that would  lessen the volatility on markets. So that's, sorry, I gave you a lot of different things  there, but it's like diversity, diversity, diversity in different ways.  Mason. I was going to say, diversity is a key word there. You know, diversity, you know,  
**[0:28:39-0:28:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:28:39):**  from the ground up in terms of what's actually produced and diversity in terms of, you know,  the type of markets, the way that things are traded. And it's not about eliminating global  trade. It's about creating mechanisms within there, like those regional reserves that you  just talked about there, so that global trade is more resilient. But presumably at the same  time we're talking about perhaps less global trade because we need to have more short supply  
**[0:29:02-0:29:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:29:02):**  chains, more local supply, community supply as well. And looking to the future and perhaps  sort of, you know, coming back to that idea about vicious cycles and in particular to  the accelerating ecological crisis, and by that I mean climate and biodiversity loss,  soil loss, erudification, what needs to be done to create greater resilience in the food  system to those ecological shocks, which are already there, which are going to only get  
**[0:29:30-0:29:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:29:30):**  worse in the coming decades. And what does the global community risk by failing to address  those weaknesses? Right. That's a great question. And it's  really important because the climate crisis, the ecological crisis more broadly is the  backdrop to this entire crisis that we're in right now. And ecological resilience with  in food systems really picks up on the kind of diversity I was just talking about. But  
**[0:29:53-0:29:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:29:53):**  to get a bit more specific in terms of production systems, there are methods of production such  as agroecology that are built on the principle of diversity that don't require synthetic  inputs and that work well with more local and regional markets that you mentioned. And  this type of production system, which we point to in the IPES report, and this also is a  theme that has been advocated by the high level panel of experts on food security and  
**[0:30:19-0:30:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:30:19):**  nutrition of greater attention to agroecology. It has the potential to reduce greenhouse  gases associated with food systems. In fact, it can be carbon absorbing and contribute  to greater biodiversity because it's built on that principle of diversity. And the risk  of not moving towards more ecologically resilient food systems, it's huge. If we don't start  today to move towards transforming to more diverse and ecologically sound food systems,  
**[0:30:45-0:30:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:30:45):**  we will continue to lurch from crisis to crisis, as we've done over the past decades, as  has been eloquently pointed out. This is the third major crisis in 15 years. But at the  same time, we see the business lobby and powerful governments and even powerful economic agencies  at the global level. They're advocating a bit of a doubling down on intensive production  and global trade systems in the face of this crisis. And I think that is a mistake. This  
**[0:31:11-0:31:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:31:11):**  was the kind of response we've seen over and again over the past 70 or 80 years. And it's  a recipe for continued fragility in food systems and continued crises occurring. And the reason  it's a problem is because it only entrenches some of the underlying structural weaknesses  of food systems without leading to greater diversity. And if we look at the face of it,  food production has actually been rising over the past 50 years, yet hunger has also been  
**[0:31:39-0:31:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:31:39):**  rising, especially in recent years as systems have become more and more specialized and  more and more concentrated. And so the problem isn't that we need more food to be produced.  The problem is that not everybody can afford it because of widening inequities and growing  concentration and fragility in food systems that undermines resilience, be it due to conflict,  as we're seeing now, climate change, which is in the background, and a pandemic, which  
**[0:32:02-0:32:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:32:02):**  is ongoing, or other disasters. The plan should be, as I said, to begin today to transform  food systems to be more sustainable and resilient so that we don't have to rely on rigid and  fragile systems that are prone to frequent crises.  So the risks, to put it bluntly, are that all of the impacts that we're seeing today,  we could see again only more so. And that's not just driving food price crises in the  
**[0:32:29-0:32:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:32:29):**  future, but the impacts of those crises, which come down to not just food security, but security  in terms of conflict and potential wars in the future. So there's a huge vested interest  in getting this right and addressing it head on really quickly.  Exactly. We need to do that. And at the same time, we need to make short-term responses  that speak to the current dynamics of the problem without undermining our ability to  
**[0:32:53-0:32:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:32:53):**  make those long-term transformative changes.  So let's come to those short-term solutions, if you like, because the problems that we've  discussed today are largely structural and they clearly can't be fixed overnight. So  what should be happening right now to try and reduce this period of instability, which  is, as we've discussed, clearly having such an impact already on poorer communities around  
**[0:33:14-0:33:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:33:14):**  the world?  Yeah, I'm glad you asked this question. Obviously, it's extremely important because a crisis  is a crisis and it needs an urgent response. And the things that can be done urgently without  undermining long-term transformative change in food systems are in a way simple, but they  require a lot of political will on the part, especially of wealthy governments. But in  
**[0:33:34-0:33:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:33:34):**  the short run, the response really needs to be getting funding and financing to low-income  countries and low-income people whose access to food has been cut off by this particular  crisis so that they can afford the food they need. As was mentioned earlier by Margo, this  even short periods of undernutrition can lead to long-term consequences. So we need to keep  that in mind, that urgency of getting funding to people so they can get the food they need,  
**[0:33:59-0:34:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:33:59):**  prices have increased because of these various dynamics we've talked about. And so humanitarian  assistance, loans and debt cancellation, social safety nets within countries can really make  a difference for people, not just today, but for their long-term future prospects. That  needs to happen. Other things that need to happen, while I was critical of the trading  system as it exists today, the sort of overreliance on the global markets, shutting down those  
**[0:34:26-0:34:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:34:26):**  global markets right now would also be problematic. It needs to be a transition that takes place  carefully and thoughtfully, moving from that dependence on global markets to less dependence  on those global markets. And so we're seeing right now some governments panicking about  whether they can feed their own people because food prices might rise domestically and they're  closing their borders. They're refusing to export grains or imposing other kinds of restrictions  
**[0:34:54-0:35:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:34:54):**  on trade. And that can lead to spikes in prices because it encourages the traders that Margo  and Thin were talking about to speculate more on markets because it plays on fears of shortages.  And so we need to encourage governments to refrain from those kinds of restrictive trade  policies at the moment, while at the same time move global negotiations forward on a  more equitable set of trade rules. Governments can also consider a moratorium or a reduction  
**[0:35:23-0:35:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:35:23):**  in the use of food crops for biofuels and also reduce the grain that's going to livestock.  It's a very inefficient use of grain that goes to rearing livestock. And if we all shift  diets to eat more, a more diverse diet and less meat, for example, this can relieve some  of those short term pressures on the grain markets. And same with biofuels. I mean, I  know the US is considering increasing the amount of grain that can go into biofuels  
**[0:35:52-0:35:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:35:52):**  right now to ease energy prices, but that's causing problems in food markets. And so we  need to have this thoughtful consideration of how much of the world's grain, a huge portion  of it, is going to biofuels and livestock rearing. And also, I just wanted to say something  about what's been happening in the last couple of days. There's an attempt to get the 20  million tons of grain out of Ukraine. The UN secretary general has been proposing a  
**[0:36:16-0:36:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:36:16):**  deal with Russia that Russia should provide humanitarian corridors to ship that grain  out of Ukraine in response for, well, Russia wants sanctions relief. They want specific  sanctions relief. The UN is sort of suggesting maybe the sanctions relief would be removal  of sanctions on fertilizer exports. I don't know if Russia is going to go for that. But  there is a risk that those 20 million tons of grain are going to go to waste. They could  
**[0:36:38-0:36:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:36:38):**  rot. They could be bombed. It's a situation where it's just a tragedy that that much grain  is sitting in warehouses and can't get out of the country. So those are some of the immediate  things that can be done to ease the crisis at the moment. But it needs to be done in  coordination with those longer term shifts and transformations in food systems that I  mentioned earlier.  
**[0:36:58-0:37:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:36:58):**  Mason Thanks so much, Jennifer. It's really interesting  to hear not just those big structural weaknesses and those big changes that need to be dealt  with over the next few years, but also those shorter term mechanisms that can make a real  difference to people around the world right now. And of course, at a micro level, we've  had the response to the COVID pandemic where a lot of people have suddenly started to value  
**[0:37:20-0:37:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:37:20):**  local food and community farming and farm shops and that sort of thing in a way that  they haven't before. So perhaps the combination of this food price crisis and COVID and these  other things that we've been talking about creates an opportunity for us to shine a light  on this and start actually making some change. That's all we've got time for and fascinating  insights from everyone and thanks so much for joining us. I'd like to thank my guests  
**[0:37:46-0:37:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-food-price-crisis-e1jsoti#t=0:37:46):**  Margo Gibbs and Thinlay Wynn from lighthousereports.nl and Jennifer Clapp from iPES Food. If you've  enjoyed listening, please come back and listen to more. Tell your friends, like us, review  us and share our links. Farmgate is funded by San Calpa and you can join the conversation  on Twitter by searching for Farmgate podcast. I've been Finlow Kastain. Bye for now.  