### Farm Gate  (2022-24-10)
**[0:00:00-0:00:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to Farmgate, I'm Finn Loke stain, the chief executive of Farmwell and  founder of the Food and Global Security Network.  In this program, I'm talking to Rob Percival, author of the meat paradox.  Modern humans are not wild animals, and yet we still kill other sentient creatures and  eat them in their billions.  
**[0:00:24-0:00:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:00:24):**  Rob charts our relationship with meat from the scavenging of carcasses on an ancient  savannah to the industrialised systems that produce much of the meat that we consume today.  He finds that emotional conflict has challenged human consciousness for many thousands of  years, guiding the creation of sometimes elaborate rituals and traditions.  Today, the persistence of this ethical dilemma can be profoundly polarising, confusing urgent  
**[0:00:51-0:00:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:00:51):**  decisions around land use, food production and the restoration of ecological security.  Rob Percival, welcome to Farmgate.  Thanks, Finn Loke, good to be here.  First of all, congratulations, it's a fantastic book, lucid and compelling.  You take us through a really quite thrilling sweep of archaeology and ethics.  
**[0:01:11-0:01:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:01:11):**  Perhaps you could start by explaining what at its heart you mean by the meat paradox.  When it comes to meat consumption, we often say one thing and do another.  Most of us say that we care about animal welfare, but it's low welfare, intensively farmed  meat, and chicken in the UK in particular, that makes up the bulk of our diets.  One in three of us report that we're eating less meat, citing concerns for animals or  
**[0:01:35-0:01:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:01:35):**  the environment.  We say we're going flexitarian or veggie or vegan, but the data shows actually no decline  in overall consumption.  The average person in Britain is consuming more meat today than 10 or 20 years ago.  And in the past decades, scientists have begun to examine these seeming contradictions, mapping  
**[0:01:50-0:01:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:01:50):**  out the psychological tensions and forces from which they seem to arise.  And this research has been carried out under the banner of the meat paradox.  It's a term taken from social psychology.  And it suggests that our relationship with animals is far more contradictory and conflicted  than we commonly believe.  
**[0:02:09-0:02:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:02:09):**  And the crux of this conflict seems to lie in the fact that we're inclined to empathise  with these animals, the animals we consume.  And this poses a significant dilemma when it comes to killing and eating them.  And all sorts of fascinating and disturbing consequences flow from this dilemma.  So, we care about the animals, and yet we still think that it's okay to kill them.  
**[0:02:30-0:02:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:02:30):**  I'm interested in what you were saying there.  And we've seen this rise in veganuary and other sort of anti-meat, I suppose, fads of  one kind or another.  And yet, as you say, consumption of meat is increasing overall.  Do you have any sense of why that is?  
**[0:02:45-0:02:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:02:45):**  Is it just that the population is increasing and the meat eating is sort of increasing  exponentially along with that?  Or what is it?  Research that's been conducted into this fundamental tension suggests that it can create a sort  of split between what we think we're doing and what we're actually doing.  
**[0:03:00-0:03:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:03:00):**  So we're quite good at self-deception, at denial.  We persuade ourselves that we're eating less meat.  And we might have changed our diets in some respects, but overall, we're still consuming  as much as we were before.  Some of us have been moved by the polarity of the debates, the divisiveness of meat into  
**[0:03:16-0:03:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:03:16):**  a sort of entrenched position of carnivory and consumption.  Some of us are deliberately eating more to sort of stake our claim on identity as non-vegans.  The book begins and ends with Delauenmensch, the lion man, a foot high sculpture that was  made 40,000 years ago from a mammoth's tusk.  It's there at the beginning, it's there at the end, it's there in the middle.  
**[0:03:38-0:03:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:03:38):**  Why is it so significant?  Well, when I set out to write this book, I was really interested in what we've just been  discussing, the contemporary status of meat in our society, where social narratives around  animal foods have become so polarized.  But it seemed became clear to me that the meat debate isn't entirely modern or distinct  
**[0:03:55-0:03:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:03:55):**  to our society.  In every society, meat and animal foods are among the most celebrated, the most important.  The animal consumption is also subject to the most stringent taboos.  It's folded in complex rituals and narratives.  And there's no society actually in which animal consumption is unproblematic or free from  
**[0:04:12-0:04:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:04:12):**  tension.  There's no society that straightforwardly eats all the animals that are available to  them just choosing the most nutritious.  You know, we eat cows but not horses, pigs but not dogs.  And strict divisions are always found between food and non-food animals.  
**[0:04:25-0:04:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:04:25):**  And some anthropologists believe that underlying this complexity and contradiction is a sense  of dissonant emotion, moral anxiety at the prospect of killing.  And I grew curious as to how deep this anxiety might reach, you know, for how long have we  been fretting about meat?  How long have we been conflicted?  
**[0:04:42-0:04:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:04:42):**  When did we begin to empathize with the animals we consume?  And to cut a rather long story short, the earliest material evidence for this change  dates to around 40,000 years ago, when our ancestors began to craft sculptures and images.  And the lion man is one such piece.  It's the earliest known figurative sculpture in the archaeological record among the very  
**[0:05:00-0:05:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:05:00):**  first works of art.  It's a hybrid figure, part human and part lion, geometric marks scored into his arm  and his feet or paws are seemingly suspended above the ground.  The figure plays a recurring and central role in the meat paradox in the book as the narrative  unfolds.  
**[0:05:16-0:05:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:05:16):**  And that's really interesting, isn't it?  That it's one of the first pieces of artwork, as you say, and it would have taken a lot  of time for somebody to build.  I mean, they're unlikely to have just sat there necessarily for hours and hours and  hours at the time, but they keep coming back to it, committing the time that it takes to  
**[0:05:33-0:05:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:05:33):**  make something like that.  And it's one of the first pieces of artwork.  It's a figurative piece of artwork and it connects humankind to the animal kingdom.  And you know, in terms of the psychology and the philosophy of what you're talking about,  that must be really pretty significant.  
**[0:05:49-0:05:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:05:49):**  Yeah.  I mean, this disability that we have to empathize with other animals is linked to an ability  to project ourselves into their body.  Imagine how they're feeling, see through their eyes.  These aptitudes are all tremendously important when you're hunting an animal, when you're  
**[0:06:05-0:06:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:06:05):**  trying to kill it in a traditional society that doesn't have complex technology.  You need to adopt the animal's perspective in order to stalk it.  So we became top level predators, you know, akin to lions.  But at the same time, we, through that same process of cognitive evolution, when we inherited  the ability to project ourselves in this way into the animal's shoes, into their hooves,  
**[0:06:27-0:06:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:06:27):**  we began to empathize with them and we also became highly conflicted.  And I present evidence in the book that this all seemed to happen at least 40,000 years  ago, but probably within our species, no earlier than the Homo sapiens.  It's interesting that understanding that you talk about being able to put ourselves in  other creatures' shoes or hooves, whether it's humans or whether it's another animal.  
**[0:06:51-0:06:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:06:51):**  And of course, one of the challenges, one of the dangers there is that it could lead  to an anthropomorphic relationship with those animals, where we start to see sensibilities  that perhaps don't actually exist.  And of course, this is at the heart of animal welfare science today is trying to understand  the unique behaviors of different species.  
**[0:07:10-0:07:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:07:10):**  And I want to ask you a question about that, because this connection with history and prehistory  is ever present throughout the book.  And much as you're clearly excited by this ethical scene that runs through the rock of  our relationship with food animals, you also challenge your own ethical choices.  And in the second chapter, despite eating meat yourself, you conclude that meat is murder.  
**[0:07:33-0:07:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:07:33):**  And that in itself is a challenging and perhaps anthropomorphic conclusion.  So why do you say that?  There's a really important distinction to be made here.  I do use this word murder.  I think it's an appropriate word, but I caveat its use.  
**[0:07:47-0:07:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:07:47):**  I say early in the book that I'm not trying to reach a universal conclusion.  I'm not trying to arrive at a blanket moral judgment.  I'm not making a categorical statement.  I'm reaching instead for a word to express the sense of moral anxiety, ethical distress  that can arise when we kill an animal for food.  
**[0:08:05-0:08:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:08:05):**  And I suggest that this killing can feel like murder, regardless of whether meat is murder  is true as a general statement, which it probably isn't.  And I'm borrowing this word murder not from vegan advocacy or animal rights activism,  as might be assumed, but from the tales and testimonies of indigenous peoples, traditional  hunting societies and anthropologists living with these communities have written at length  
**[0:08:27-0:08:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:08:27):**  about the profound dilemma associated with killing for food.  For animals are almost universally recognized in these societies as persons.  Animals are persons.  They're animal persons, often scarcely different to human persons, but they're killed and they're  eaten.  
**[0:08:43-0:08:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:08:43):**  And this poses a grave problem for what after all is it to kill a fellow person, but to  commit a murder and what is it to eat them, but to engage in cannibalism and the complex  and colorful rights and stories that characterize meat consumption in these societies for a  response to this fundamental dilemma, the risk that eating animals involves something  like cannibalism and murder, even when it's necessary.  
**[0:09:05-0:09:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:09:05):**  Let's come to that in just a moment, because there's a moment in that second chapter where  you confront this yourself, where you meet an animal person as you, as you put it then  make that decision for yourself that meat is murder.  Can you tell us about that?  So I am in the slaughterhouse and I'm in proximity in this incident to a cow as she's led into  
**[0:09:34-0:09:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:09:34):**  the stun cage and as the guys do their stuff.  And again, there's a really important nuance in how I describe this.  I'm not reaching a rational judgment that she's a person, I'm this cow.  I'm not trying to project a category onto her or determine where she sits in some sort  of moral framework.  
**[0:09:54-0:10:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:09:54):**  I'm simply describing the experience of looking at her and her looking at me in that moment  and unpackaging how that experience feels.  And I, later in the book, I draw on evolutionary science and cognitive neuroscience to explain  why animals strike us as persons, that they sort of impress upon us with this perception,  regardless of the stories that we tell about them, whether or not we think they're persons.  
**[0:10:19-0:10:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:10:19):**  And it's an inconsistent perception.  We don't always see them as such, but sometimes it's quite hard to deny that feeling, that  sense that you're dealing with a being here, which is similar in many important respects  to a human.  And there are consequences when you're then engaged in an act that involves taking their  
**[0:10:36-0:10:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:10:36):**  life.  In this conversation, you've been entirely fluent, very clear in your answers.  And when I asked you that question about your own personal experience, I could immediately  hear that there was an emotional response, that there was something different because  it was personal.  
**[0:10:53-0:10:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:10:53):**  And that confrontation with the sentience of another creature at that point immediately  prior to its death, well, you know, it was clearly an emotional moment for you.  And yet you continue to eat meat.  Is it something that you think other people should experience?  Should everybody that eats meat experience that moment at some point?  
**[0:11:15-0:11:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:11:15):**  So I'm not vegan.  I eat plants on a day to day basis, but I haven't entirely removed animal foods from  my diet.  And I think that that process of negotiation between values and ethical insights and dietary  behavior is what the book hopes to prompt in people.  
**[0:11:32-0:11:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:11:32):**  I think there is enormous value in reconnecting people with where their food comes from, getting  them out onto farms and having them witness and experience animal slaughter.  And I think that it's perfectly reasonable that we have a conversation at the end of  that as to whether we should eat animals at all.  I don't think that's a conversation we should hide away from.  
**[0:11:52-0:11:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:11:52):**  I think, but yeah, I'm all for confronting the complexity and being open to the fact  that maybe we've got it wrong and we should be changing the way we eat.  And of course, you're not just an author.  You also work for the Soil Association and your head of food policy there.  And so really at the heart of that role is this desire to reconnect people with their  
**[0:12:15-0:12:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:12:15):**  food and with where their food comes from.  Yeah, I think so.  So I'm quite clear that to address the climate and nature crises, we need to be farming in  a more agroecological or organic style.  And animals play a really important role in those systems, grazing animals, ruminant animals.  
**[0:12:31-0:12:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:12:31):**  But we do need to be challenging our presumptions around meat and even the presumptions around  higher welfare and what we take for granted in terms of the sort of more ethical end of  meat consumption.  And I think that reconnecting with where our food comes from, building relationships with  farmers and producers and getting children and folks from all kinds of backgrounds out  
**[0:12:52-0:12:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:12:52):**  on the farms is a key part of that.  Yeah.  It's interesting as you're saying that, that I'm sort of thinking about people eating plant-based  foods and the way in which actually extractive agriculture, whether that's in an animal setting  or a plant setting, is causing death of one kind or another.  
**[0:13:07-0:13:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:13:07):**  But of course the meat paradox and what we're talking about here is centred on the death  of animals.  And whether it's with a bolt gun in a slaughterhouse or an arrow in a rainforest, the killing of  animals seems to present a similar ethical challenge for human beings around the world  and throughout the ages.  
**[0:13:25-0:13:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:13:25):**  And in researching the book, you studied indigenous responses to the taking of life, as you mentioned  before, but you were particularly drawn to the rituals of the Tucano, a group of 20 tribes  living in the Colombian Amazon.  What do they do that's so special and what do you find so compelling?  So yeah, the Tucano tell a story about the world and their place in it, an extraordinary  
**[0:13:49-0:13:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:13:49):**  story.  These responses formed of this immense circuit of energy that flows through the biosphere.  The energy floods from the sun into the world, moving between life forms, surging around  this sort of cosmic coil.  But the quantity is finite and the flow needs to be carefully managed or the universe they  
**[0:14:07-0:14:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:14:07):**  say will be thrown out of balance.  And this means they have to tend to their environment and be attentive as to what they  eat and how they interact with the natural world.  And hunting is the most consequential activity that arises in this context.  For every time an animal is killed, there's a portion of the energy transferred from one  
**[0:14:25-0:14:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:14:25):**  part of the circuit to another.  And this can affect the overall equilibrium, they say, so they need to find a way of maintaining  the cohesion of the whole.  And it falls on the shaman to manage this process, having negotiated with a figure known  as Vai-Marce, a supernatural being commonly known as the master of animals or the animal  
**[0:14:44-0:14:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:14:44):**  person.  And the shaman drinks a psychotropic brew, a psychedelic tea, and in his trance he enters  the subterranean cavern where this figure resides.  And also in this cavern there are thousands of tiny unconscious animals that are curled  in fetal position, regenerating and waiting to be born.  
**[0:15:04-0:15:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:15:04):**  And if the shaman is successful in his negotiation, then a portion of these animals is woken up  and sent out into the forest to live where they could be hunted.  So the human community is provided with food.  But the arrangement comes at a really high cost.  The shaman has to pay with, to kind of say, with human souls.  
**[0:15:23-0:15:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:15:23):**  So for every animal given for humans to hunt and eat, a human soul needs to be given in  return to be transformed into an animal of the same species.  So for every animal that's taken, a human soul needs to be given.  So it's said that those who are given over to be reborn as an animal are those who have  mistreated the animals that they hunt, who have eaten more meat than they genuinely need.  
**[0:15:47-0:15:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:15:47):**  They will, at the end of their natural life, be taken to this underground den.  It might be folks from neighbouring tribes and to kind of feel that when they fall ill,  if they're stung or bitten by a snake, this might be a sign that they've fallen out of  balance.  So it's a hugely complicated and sophisticated narrative.  
**[0:16:07-0:16:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:16:07):**  But the effect of it, and the reason that I found it so impressive, was that it places  such a compelling curve on careless consumption.  It affirms the moral value of the animal eaten.  They're no less valuable than a human.  And killing is kept to a minimum.  
**[0:16:24-0:16:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:16:24):**  It's based on genuine need.  The hunter's forced to really reflect on whether he needs to take this animal's life when he's  stalking it through the forest.  For if he doesn't, he knows he's going to pay the highest cost.  And this strikes me, I think, as alien as it is, as far more impressive and effective  
**[0:16:39-0:16:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:16:39):**  than the story we tell about meat.  So when the Takano are trying to establish that natural balance and understand that natural  balance, that as much as anything, it's about allowing nature to take its course.  That if people become ill, then there isn't access to modern medicine.  And if people die as a result of a reaction to a sting, then that's seen as being part  
**[0:17:01-0:17:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:17:01):**  of that natural course of events, life for life, nature reasserting itself.  I think that would be a fair reflection of the crux of it, yeah.  And this sense running through the core of their cultural narrative that animal life  is as valuable as human life and that therefore one's dietary choices are of enormous consequence.  Thanks so much for that.  
**[0:17:20-0:17:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:17:20):**  It's interesting as well when we are able to look at indigenous knowledge and look at  the way that different tribal peoples around the world interact with nature and interact  with the choices that they make around killing.  Because often that's a link back to the way that ancient people would have managed those  same sort of philosophical questions as well.  
**[0:17:43-0:17:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:17:43):**  And the rituals and rites of the Takano seem almost to be attached by some kind of gossamer  thread to the lived experience of prehistoric humans where a dependence on and a deep understanding  of nature was essential to stay alive.  And I wonder if you could take us on a trip to the old stone age and to southwest France  where you visited a cave and in the darkness confronted Paleolithic paintings of ibex and  
**[0:18:10-0:18:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:18:10):**  bison created by some unknown artist but living still on the walls in your flickering torchlight.  What did you see and more importantly perhaps, what did you discover?  Yeah I think it's safe to say I became a little bit obsessed with these caves.  Humans have been studying them for the past century ever since we realized how old these  images are.  
**[0:18:32-0:18:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:18:32):**  And they're really an enigma.  We know that around 40,000 years ago communities across Europe began painting in dark recesses  deep underground and they painted animals primarily large herbivores such as bison horse  and oryx and deer.  And they painted with great devotion, they painted with hallucinatory intensity and with  
**[0:18:52-0:18:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:18:52):**  naturalistic realism.  And here's the thing, they maintained this practice painting in caves in a single coherent  tradition for almost 30,000 years for over a thousand generations.  And this is extraordinary, our cultural trends and tastes seem to shift every five minutes  but whatever motivated this art was evidently enduring and important.  
**[0:19:14-0:19:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:19:14):**  And the most plausible motivation I think and I discuss this in the book is that this  image making formed part of a ritual response rooted in the moral anxiety of killing.  It was here or around here that the meat paradox evolved, that we first became torn between  our eating and our empathy.  And we know that the artists would carry bits of animal into the caves with them, the teeth  
**[0:19:34-0:19:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:19:34):**  of horses to insert into the wall as though enacting some sort of restitution ritual.  There's evidence of song and dance and evidence intriguingly that the image makers were using  the sensory deprivation of the cave to induce an altered state of consciousness.  Scattered among the images there are geometric forms, these sort of abstract carvings and  recurring patterns and they match those created by volunteers who have been dosed with LSD  
**[0:19:58-0:20:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:19:58):**  or psilocybin by scientists.  And I explore this idea fairly directly in the book.  I visit a cave in the Pyrenees venturing half a kilometre down to this space known as La  Salon Noire, the Black Chamber, where there are ibex and deer painted in striking black  on the walls.  
**[0:20:14-0:20:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:20:14):**  And these images really need to be seen to be believed, they're tens of thousands of  years old, utterly beautiful, confounding and they speak I think of the origins of the  meat paradox, where this all began.  Jason Vale And when you talked about these in the book,  these paintings were sophisticated paintings.  
**[0:20:29-0:20:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:20:29):**  You could really get a sense of not just what the animal was, but how it moved and how it  seemed to feel.  Andrew Day Yeah, there are scholars of animal behaviour  have studied these images and noted that they are highly accurate, often in their depiction  of gender or distinctions of species and breed.  
**[0:20:49-0:20:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:20:49):**  A group of indigenous hunters was taken down into the caves, they'd come from North America,  but they immediately recognised nuances of behaviour and so on in the images.  So there's something about the real world infused in these images, but also evidence  that those who painted them were using the caves in a ritual sense to alter their consciousness  to perhaps as a sort of as part of a ritual aimed at a process of cathartic release, the  
**[0:21:16-0:21:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:21:16):**  release of dissonant and conflicted emotions and all of this traced back to the moral anxiety  of killing.  Jason Vale And there is a belief, isn't there, certainly  among some indigenous peoples that the wall between our own world and the spirit world  is thinner beneath the ground and that perhaps that's why these paintings are half a kilometre  
**[0:21:38-0:21:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:21:38):**  beneath the surface of the earth, because people are closer to the spirit world underground,  they're able to have a closer conversation with the spirit world and the natural world  at that depth.  Is that something that you came across?  David  
**[0:21:48-0:21:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:21:48):**  The images are often, they're sort of half formed of paint or ink and half formed of  natural features on the wall, kind of cracks and crevices and contours and so on, as though  the artists had seen the animal already sort of pregnant in the stone surface.  And there's this sense sometimes that the animals are coming through the wall from the  other side and at the same time, the walls have been touched and smudged, there are handprints,  
**[0:22:18-0:22:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:22:18):**  people are reaching out and touching the walls themselves.  So there's a sense that the wall is a kind of membrane between this world and the next,  the animals are rising through and the humans are reaching out.  And these images are the sort of point of contact, whatever that meant to the image  makers.  
**[0:22:34-0:22:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:22:34):**  Jason Vale You're drawing a picture there, not only of  a painting that exists in a moment in time, but a painting that continues to exist and  is perhaps part of a ritual that is ongoing.  These weren't just paintings that were created and then left, they were paintings that were  interacted with over a long period of time.  
**[0:22:52-0:22:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:22:52):**  David  These caves were not lived in, but folks visited them over a tremendous span of time.  There are images, you know, five, 10,000 years apart, sometimes in the same cave in terms  of when they were created.  So people came back repeatedly.  
**[0:23:08-0:23:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:23:08):**  And we can only assume that this process of image making was part of a broader bundle  of narrative and ritual, most of which took place above ground, but probably involved  some sort of dialogue between the human and animal worlds, the human community and the  community of animals, which they relied on for food and sustenance.  And some sense that at least I got standing in front of these images in the darkness,  
**[0:23:35-0:23:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:23:35):**  that the motivation was rooted in this same set of distant emotions, which still touch  us today when we reflect on the process or the act of taking animals life for food.  David  It's fascinating that it, you know, those paintings and the interactions with them existed  over thousands of years.  
**[0:23:52-0:23:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:23:52):**  And that shows the way in which art and philosophy was so embedded in our relationship with the  natural world and the spirituality of that.  And if we think about an art movement today, you know, the beginning of the 20th century  with expressionism and surrealism, futurism, you know, there were periods that lasted for  five, 10, 15 years if, you know, if they were stretched out, but this is across such a long  
**[0:24:15-0:24:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:24:15):**  period of time.  And that's, that's so fascinating that the art and the animal, the relationship with  the spirit world, the conversation, the ongoing conversation with the natural world, you know,  was embedded and existed for so long.  And it seems so recent that we've started to unravel that conversation and forget that  
**[0:24:34-0:24:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:24:34):**  relationship that we had with the natural world.  David  And the striking thing about these early works of art, if we can call them that, is that  animals are overridingly the main concern.  If you can travel to a hundred, 200 caves across Europe and find painted images, but  
**[0:24:50-0:24:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:24:50):**  you won't find any images of human life, of human society, of births or deaths or battles  of human settlements.  It's animals, animals and the relationship between humans and the animal world was the  primary concern in terms of, as far as we can tell, in terms of ritual and image making  and that, and that shift away from animals and humans being in dialogue with each other  
**[0:25:12-0:25:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:25:12):**  is really one of the key characteristics, I think, of modern society.  We've, we've forgotten that that relationship is the most important one to be managing.  And here we are today in a world of trouble as a result.  Rob, let's circumnavigate back to the present day. Many of us think about farming in terms  of it being an ancient contract where we look after the farm animals and keep them safe  
**[0:25:34-0:25:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:25:34):**  from predators and then give them a quick respectful death so that we in turn can eat  them. Now you point out quite rightly that no animal has ever actually consented to this  deal. So where did this idea come from of the ancient contract? And if it ever was true,  is it still true today?  Yeah, so I think just as the, yeah, Ticano tell this story about their world, this, this  
**[0:25:57-0:26:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:25:57):**  cosmic energy circuit, we tell the story as well to help us make sense of our relationship  with meat. And yeah, as you say, our story is that of a deal that we struck with domesticated  animals, an ancient contract, a contract which places duties on both parties. We provide  them with a good life and keep them healthy and protected from harm. And in return, we  say they give us their bodies. And various folks have given voice to this tale, perhaps  
**[0:26:21-0:26:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:26:21):**  most famously Michael Pollan in his book, The Omnivore's Dilemma. There's clearly, I  think some truth in it on a pragmatic level. Cultural narratives aren't plucked out of  thin air, they arise out of lived realities. And this is an apt description of what farmers  are doing day in, day out. But the story I think is also flawed and dishonest in some  respects. Three things I would say are wrong with it. The first is that the terms of the  
**[0:26:47-0:26:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:26:47):**  contract have become so highly skewed that routine abuses of animal welfare are framed  as part of the deal. I'm thinking in particular of these sort of enriched indoor farming systems  where animals are denied the opportunity to express their behaviour or step outside and  it's all under the banner of some higher welfare assurance label. As you mentioned,  secondly, there's there's a degree of implied consent. And one consequence of this, I think,  
**[0:27:11-0:27:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:27:11):**  is that there are no meaningful curbs placed on our consumption. We assume a form of blanket  entitlement. If you look again to go back to the Ticano, this hunter stalking an animal  through the forest, fearing he might be reborn as his prey if he acts carelessly or consumes  meat when he doesn't need to. I'm not suggesting we appropriate this idea, but we might reflect  on how lax our attitude is in comparison. There are no curbs placed, meaningful curbs  
**[0:27:35-0:27:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:27:35):**  placed on our consumption. And thirdly, this narrative of an ancient contract doesn't really  tell us why killing animals, even those from a humane farming system, might be morally  disturbing. It's pretty emotionally unintelligent as a story. And as a result, I think we fail  to engage with the ethical complexity of our diets. We simply look away. And this is what  psychologists working on the meat paradox have discovered, that we strategically mute  
**[0:28:02-0:28:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:28:02):**  our empathy, that we categorise animals in order to exploit some while caring for others,  that we downplay our estimation of the mind and sentience of food animals, that we seek  to dissociate the meat on our plate from the animal that provided it, that we deflect responsibility,  we deny the personhood of the animals that we consume. And the entire sort of edifice  of Western meat consumption is rooted in this denial and dishonesty. And that I think stems  
**[0:28:27-0:28:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:28:27):**  from this cultural narrative, which isn't up to the task. So I think we need to rethink  who and what we are and what it means to consume animals. And that starts with telling a new  story about our relationship with meat.  Wills H. Citty You talk about the way in which that contract  has been skewed and that it's become, you know, through that use of ever more intensive  
**[0:28:48-0:28:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:28:48):**  indoor systems for many of the species that we consume, that we're ever more out of balance  with nature. And would you say, therefore, that we, in order to restore this ancient  contract, that there is a need to learn from people like the Takano and other indigenous  groups around the world? And I guess something that regenerative agriculture is attempting  to do, at least in part, which is to restore that natural balance.  
**[0:29:13-0:29:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:29:13):**  James W. Miller I think there's value in learning about how  other societies navigate all these complexities. And I think there's value in challenging ourselves  to think through what a really, a truly ethical farming system would look like. You know,  we could ask, what would it take to begin to value animals primarily for their ecological  contribution and their individual dignity, rather than as commodities? You know, can  
**[0:29:39-0:29:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:29:39):**  we undo the commodification of animal life, even if animals are a necessary or helpful  part of our food system? What kind of life might we give to those animals if we did?  What length of life? I think the case could be made that it would be more ethical to provide  animals with a full life, a natural lifespan, rather than killing them prematurely. And  there's lots to unpick with that idea. It's not straightforward, but there might be something  
**[0:29:59-0:30:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:29:59):**  in it. What if we treated meat as a byproduct of the system rather than the purpose of production?  And what if we began to unravel this sort of tapestry of denial and dishonesty that  cushions us from feeling the sense of moral anxiety, which I think rightfully should be  part of our experience of eating meat?  Jason Vale Do you get a sense of, you know, we talked  
**[0:30:17-0:30:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:30:17):**  already about the thousands of years that, tens of thousands, even hundreds, that existed  when humankind was in relative balance with nature and managed that in various different  ways? How long has it taken us as a society to fall out of balance? Because, you know,  it seems to me that those phrases that you used around ecological balance, individual  dignity, that they probably existed until relatively recently. And even now there are  
**[0:30:45-0:30:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:30:45):**  farmers trying to restore that. And I'm thinking, you know, for example, of people like David  Finlay at the Ethical Dairy up in Scotland, where, you know, he is finding ways that calves  can stay with their mothers in his dairy until they would naturally wean. So that there is  a degree to which we're starting, just starting to bring back that individual dignity into  farming. How long has it taken us to lose it? And do you think it's realistic that we  
**[0:31:11-0:31:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:31:11):**  can put it back in?  David Finlay I mean, those are all big, really big questions.  I think, yeah, I think I don't want to romanticise indigenous cultures or the past, you know,  there are, I think you do find often in those cultures, both are striving for this sense  of ecological balance and to varying degrees, it's realisation. But we've been altering  
**[0:31:33-0:31:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:31:33):**  landscapes for better or for worse for tens of thousands of years. And animals have been  harshly treated and killed and exploited in all those societies, actually, albeit within  the context of some concern for animal ethics, however, that's packaged up. But I think our  society is unique in its industrialisation in the degree to which we have devalued animal  life, we collectively have an almost psychopathic relationship with farm animals and our indifference  
**[0:32:05-0:32:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:32:05):**  to the scale of suffering that's intrinsic to industrial production. And I'm thinking  particularly of chickens and pigs here. They're also cattle in various contexts and in other  countries, less so in the UK. So there's a lot that's gone wrong. And I don't know if  fixing it is a matter of regression. There's certainly lots we could learn from the past.  I think we need to unpick the present and understand the forces bearing down on us in  
**[0:32:33-0:32:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:32:33):**  the context of the climate nature crisis. Ask ourselves some fundamental questions.  Should we be eating animals at all? What role do animals play on the land and in our diets?  And how do we get from where we are now to something that's regenerative and ethical  as quickly as possible?  Now, that's all been quite heavy. And thanks very much for trying to answer that, as you  
**[0:32:58-0:33:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:32:58):**  say, those big questions. But Rob, in the book, you had an occasion when you had the  temerity to ask Patrick Holden, who's a good friend of this podcast, what he thought about  vegans. And I just wonder if you could tell us what was his reaction and then what about  you? What do you think of vegans and veganism as a movement?  Well, I mean, I think we need more vegans. Bring it on. I know that might be a controversial  
**[0:33:22-0:33:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:33:22):**  statement for some of your listeners, but they're listening. In the vegan movement,  we have a group of people who care enough about the ethical and environmental consequences  of their diet and their lifestyle to make radical changes, to go against the grain,  to try and align their actions and their values. And I'm all for that. The ethical commitment  at the core of veganism that we should prevent harming animals where it's possible to do  
**[0:33:48-0:33:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:33:48):**  so strikes me as pretty reasonable. And of course, that's how we should be living. But  I diverge from the vegan mainstream and how far I think that is attainable. I think we  should be farming in agroecological, organic systems and ruminant animals play a tremendously  important role in their systems at the moment. There are good reasons to be eating animals,  challenges in moving to an animal free diet across the population or risks even. And we  
**[0:34:13-0:34:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:34:13):**  need resilience in our food system and so on. So I'm not vegan. And I do recognise that  some vegan rhetoric can be abrasive or dishonest. You know, social media brings out the worst  in everyone. And I do challenge some falsehoods in the book. But I'm squarely of the view  that the vegans are not the enemy. They're trying to grapple with this meat paradox in  a more direct manner than most of us. They're people who care and are trying to do the right  
**[0:34:37-0:34:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:34:37):**  thing. And those of us who are non-vegan, I think should take their ethical challenge  seriously and recognise the denial and presumption that shapes our choices. So I'm all for the  middle ground and Patrick, sorry to circle back.  That's what I was going to say. There's a glitz in my eye and I'm really curious. Because  I've been on one of those days that you went on where you've got a group of people all  
**[0:35:01-0:35:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:35:01):**  sitting around at the Duchy farm and you know, the whole point of the day is to celebrate  and understand agroecology and the importance of livestock. And you say to him, what do  you think of vegans, Patrick?  Yeah. So I think his response came in two waves. There was a sharp intake of breath  and a thundering response and a firm response that we should be converting them back. And  
**[0:35:28-0:35:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:35:28):**  we, and that's an understandable statement in the context. We were, yeah, I was very  honoured to be there with Patrick and this group on a Duchy home farm. We were surrounded  by cows and this beautiful organic system. But then Patrick, you know, he then caveatted  that and said, look, he understands, he said the motivations and that actually vegans and  those who are aspiring for an organic and regenerative farm system have more in common  
**[0:35:52-0:35:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:35:52):**  than not. We do need to end industrial production. We are motivated by the same concerns. But  his line was that there are some animals that are part of the solution as well as some animals  which are part of the problem. And we need to be more discerning and differentiating  between the two.  And I don't want you to go further with that because as you say, you know, we want people  
**[0:36:11-0:36:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:36:11):**  to read the book and there's lots, lots more in there. And also I have to say, particularly  towards the end, some fantastic anecdotes that you have about Peter Melchit, who sadly  is with us no longer. Now, Rob, the conflicts that often exist that you referred to there  between vegans and omnivores alongside this now pervasive narrative that animal farming  is bad for the planet has reached a particularly high pitch. I mean, partly, you know, it is  
**[0:36:38-0:36:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:36:38):**  social media, but other things as well. Does this conflict prevent us at the moment from  making good decisions as a society about the future of land use?  Decisions about land use are based on all sorts of factors and financial considerations  and government policy are perhaps primary. So I'm not sure how directly the polarity  of the debate is shaping those decisions in relation to land use. But I do think the polarity  
**[0:37:03-0:37:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:37:03):**  clearly isn't doing us any favours and is edging us into a even deeper into an unsustainable  dietary pattern. We're eating more industrially farmed chicken than ever before. And chicken  is not only our favourite meat as a nation, it's the meat most commonly consumed by ex-vegans,  ex-vegetarians and it's an ethical and ecological disaster.  And it's the meat that often people don't think of as a meat.  
**[0:37:29-0:37:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:37:29):**  Right. So this is one thread that I pull on a couple of times in the book that there's  a hierarchy of moral concern in most societies with large mammals being of highest concern  and birds and fish typically being less important. And this does, I think, skew our diet and  the debate in the context of the UK and so on. We're far more concerned about cows than  we are about chickens, even though chickens are where the greatest animal welfare concerns  
**[0:37:56-0:38:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:37:56):**  are. There's enormous ecological footprint and ruminant animals can be integral to a  sustainable farming system. So there's certainly something that's gone wrong there. And this  sign of that things have gone wrong is, you know, there are lots of symptoms of it. We're  eating a highly processed diet, both plant-based and animal foods. We're confused about meat.  We've been told, sorry, confused about red meat in particular, having been told that  
**[0:38:18-0:38:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:38:18):**  it's unhealthy and sustainable. And the psychology of it all is edging us in an unhelpful direction,  I think.  It's part of your contention, isn't it? That meat is part of a healthy diet, that it's  the place that we can access so many micronutrients.  I think meat can be part of a healthy diet. I think most of us can be entirely healthy  
**[0:38:36-0:38:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:38:36):**  on a plant-based diet, but for some population groups that's more challenging or risky. There  are many people living in food insecurity who would benefit from eating more meat, more  animal foods because of its potential to deliver those important nutrients that are missing  from their diets. So there's a strong case on nutritional grounds for continuing to eat  animal foods. But I do think there are interesting tensions between that nutritional rationale  
**[0:39:01-0:39:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:39:01):**  and the ethical case for minimising or eliminating consumption.  Now, for me, the use of agroecology to restore natural balance and regenerate biodiversity  is a crucial argument for continuing to rear, kill and eat livestock. But this sort of agriculture  is still an exception. And I think that probably fuels that conversation between vegans and  omnivores where vegans are seeing images of intensive agriculture and chicken farming,  
**[0:39:33-0:39:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:39:33):**  for example. They're hearing stories about livestock and methane, which are often quite  misleading. And their conclusion seems to be that all animals, therefore all farming  is bad for the planet. And yet there is this very different way of doing things that in  an agroecological system, which is learning from and building on indigenous ways of living  in balance with nature, livestock are still critically important. But as I say, it's an  
**[0:40:04-0:40:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:40:04):**  exception. It's not the norm. Do you see a route back to a time in the future when the  sort of farming that we might reasonably think of in terms of that ancient contract that  we discussed previously is once again the norm?  I mean, I certainly hope so. I'm with you. I'm all for agroecology. I'm all for organic  regenerative farming. I think that's how we should be farming. And I think that's how  
**[0:40:30-0:40:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:40:30):**  we need to be farming in the face of the climate crisis, the nature crisis. And I think there's  broad consensus beginning to build around that vision, although there are huge barriers  to getting there in terms of government policy and trade policy and the finances and consumer  choice, all this stuff, which is part of the picture. So I think we need to get there this  decade. And I think those of us who are advocates for such a system need to both strongly advocate  
**[0:40:58-0:41:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:40:58):**  for the role of animals in such a system, but also recognize that this is a niche, that  there are concerns that those who are campaigning against animal farming have legitimate concerns  linked to the industrial style systems which exploit animals more directly. And there's  a middle ground to be found. If we want the polarity of the debate to be muted and a more  nuanced kind of conversation to come through, then we have to accept that there are legitimate  
**[0:41:26-0:41:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:41:26):**  ethical concerns around animal consumption. We have to be open to the conversation and  we have to encourage at the other end of the spectrum, vegans and animal activists to engage  more fully with the role that animals might play on the land and how they contribute to  agroecological flourishing and so on. So it's that middle ground I think we need to somehow  recover.  
**[0:41:46-0:41:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:41:46):**  Rob, thanks so much. I mean, we've talked about a lot in there, but there's so much  more in the book and I really urge people to go out and buy it and read it. It's a thrilling  ride. Fantastic. Thanks so much. I'd like to thank my guest, Rob Percival, author of  The Meat Paradox, available now from all good booksellers, either online or indeed in the  flesh. If you've enjoyed listening, please come back and listen to more. Tell your friends,  
**[0:42:13-0:42:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-meat-paradox-e1fh1t2#t=0:42:13):**  like us, review us and share our links. Farmgate is a partnership project for Farmwell and  FAI Farms. We're funded by San Calpa and you can join the conversation on Twitter by searching  for Farmgate podcast. I've been Fenlow Kastain. Bye for now.  