### Farm Gate  (2022-18-23)
**[0:00:00-0:00:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to Farmgate. I'm Finn Loke stain, the chief executive of Farmwell and  founder of the Food and Global Security Network. My guest today is Josiah Meldrum, a co-founder  of the hugely successful online retailer Hodmodods, which works with British farms to source top  quality beans, pulses and grains, particularly less well known foods like the fava bean grown  in Britain since the iron age, but now largely forgotten. Hodmodods prides itself on its  
**[0:00:32-0:00:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:00:32):**  relationships with farmers, all top quality agroecological and regenerative producers,  most of whom farm in the east of England. Welcome Josiah.  Hi Finn Loke, thanks for inviting me along. Now Josiah, we're going to talk about lots  of things, but let's start with Hodmodods. Where did it come from? How did it start?  It really started in my childhood and an interest in ecology and the world around us. And I  
**[0:00:53-0:00:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:00:53):**  think as I grew older and into my teens and early twenties, the realisation that people  are central to the world around us and that if we want to affect change, we have to engage  with people. And so I went from being an ecologist and my, in my first degree was ecology to  studying international development at the university of East Anglia and really thinking  about that kind of people, planet interaction. And after that, I worked at a small regional  
**[0:01:15-0:01:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:01:15):**  NGO on governmental organisation called East Anglia Food Link, which looked at connecting  people very directly with food and changing the way in which we engage with food, whether  that's through public procurement in schools and hospitals, or whether that's through kind  of community growing or farmers who are working to convert to organic agriculture. And while  I was at East Anglia Food Link, I met two friends and colleagues, Nick Saltmarsh and  
**[0:01:42-0:01:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:01:42):**  William Hudson, and we began working with Transition City Norwich. Transition Norwich  are part of the global transition network, which is all about how we address the climate  crisis and the extinction crisis and increasing scarcity of resources as our demand and consumption  patterns change. How we do that at the community level, what changes do we need to make? They  asked us whether we could map and model a sustainable food system for Norwich. It was  
**[0:02:08-0:02:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:02:08):**  a really interesting idea. You know, what would it take for Norwich to feed itself was  their fundamental question. How would we need to change how we farm and how would we need  to change what we eat? That was a fantastic thought experiment which grew into this huge  Excel workbook of land use categories, macro and micronutrient requirements, you know,  population movements in and out of the city, you know, how many people were you going to  
**[0:02:31-0:02:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:02:31):**  have to feed?  Jason Vale And that's really fun thinking, isn't it?  I mean, you know, there are so many cities and towns that aren't even remotely at that  stage even now.  Paul Anthony Yeah, I mean, we were inspired by some of  
**[0:02:46-0:02:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:02:46):**  the work that Kenneth Mellenby did, you know, Can Britain Feed Itself? And I think at the  time we were kind of really just interested in what this lower impact diet might look  like. And Norwich were fascinated, we were fascinated, it turns out it's possible. That  was the surprising thing in a way. But it's only possible if we really radically change  the way we engage with food and the landscape. One of the things that emerged from that was  
**[0:03:04-0:03:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:03:04):**  this requirement to grow more leguminous crops, those fantastic plants that have that relationship  with soil organisms that can fix nitrogen from the atmosphere and effectively make their  own food. And in doing so, create these very protein dense seeds, pulses, beans and peas,  things that we can eat, that by having those in the rotation and being able to reduce our  reliance on synthetic nitrogen would be really, really important. And I think the thing that  
**[0:03:32-0:03:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:03:32):**  became clear was that we just don't eat them in the UK. And we needed to address that in  some way.  Jason Vale So there's the theory, there's the kind of,  you know, I guess the backstory up to an extent, but, but Hodmer Dodge is a step on again,  isn't it from that work that you were doing with East Anglia Foodlink?  
**[0:03:47-0:03:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:03:47):**  Paul Anthony East Anglia Foodlink was initially a thought  experiment that then became some practical demonstration project. We set up a meal with  a baker in the city and took grain from the edge of the city and demonstrated that in  the right hand, you can you can make delicious bread from almost anything. We established  a small community supported agriculture scheme, mirroring the the market garden hinterland  
**[0:04:08-0:04:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:04:08):**  that would have surrounded the city that was really growing food for 150 families on nine  acres and still exists Norwich Farm Share. And the final bit was really this pulse connection.  How do we how do we change people's attitude and diet around pulses? We thought that was  going to be the most difficult element. We left it till the last minute, we did a few  months of essentially finding what was already being grown on farms, which were fava beans  
**[0:04:31-0:04:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:04:31):**  and peas, putting them into people's hands in Norwich and just getting their responses.  And it was incredibly inspiring because people loved them and they were fascinated, you know,  particularly the fava beans. Here's a crop that's been grown in the UK since the Iron  Age that for 2000-3000 years sustained us through the winter months. And yet most people,  I mean, really, most people probably still don't realise that it can be eaten these days.  
**[0:04:54-0:04:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:04:54):**  Unless they've watched Silence of the Lambs. Yeah, although. Yeah, exactly. I mean, that's  interesting because they're the fresh version. So that's the broad bean, which is green.  So we're quite used to this higher status bean, which has to be harvested fresh and  that emerged in the Victorian era. But we're not used to the dry bean that's harvested  dry at the end of the season is a store of nutrition through the winter months. And,  
**[0:05:17-0:05:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:05:17):**  you know, it's still really widely eaten globally. And I think one of the things that we discovered  early on, which actually fascinated us, is that UK farmers who produce probably a quarter  of a million tonnes of fava beans are sending a third of that, perhaps more, to Egypt, North  Africa and the Middle East, where it's still a really important part of the diet. But culturally,  they make a dish called fulmadame, which is a sort of bean stew, which they eat during  
**[0:05:40-0:05:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:05:40):**  Ramadan, but also just nutritionally. They have beans for breakfast and they have fava  beans and we grow a lot of them. It's quite extraordinary. But your decision to start  a business, so you've gone through the theoretical stuff, you've been involved in what is in  many ways a sort of a campaigning endeavour to look at, you know, the food and whether  it can be sourced and supplied to go into Norwich. But the decision then to actually  
**[0:06:04-0:06:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:06:04):**  go and do something about it and set up Hobnendods as a company. I mean, a lot of people are  quite happy to talk about these things, ruminate, proselytise, but actually physically getting  up and setting up a business. How did you go about doing that? And what do you think  central to its success? I think part of it was with a sort of sense  of frustration. So we'd ended this project with Norwich, with the transition group, and  
**[0:06:25-0:06:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:06:25):**  we'd had some funding to deliver that. And we were hoping that, you know, our exit strategy  from that project would be to hand it to a local Whole Foods wholesaler. They would take  it on and hey, presto, they'd be selling beans and it would be brilliant. No one wanted  to touch it because these beans were not part of a current narrative of food consumption  in the UK. There was a lot of work to do. And so the retailers and wholesalers that  
**[0:06:48-0:06:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:06:48):**  we might otherwise have expected to pick that up didn't want to do it. And we just became  really frustrated. And we spoke to farmers and said, you know, this is the sort of thing  that should be happening. And they would say, yeah, of course, but where's the roots market?  If we change what we're doing on farm, how are we going to sell these crops? And I think  we just realised that we needed to do it ourselves. I think that there was a degree of naivety.  
**[0:07:07-0:07:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:07:07):**  We had no idea what that would involve. And that was our huge advantage in a way. That  was our secret weapon was not knowing what we were doing, because it allowed us to be  very open minded about the whole process of placing what was effectively a new product  onto the market. And I think we had a leg up in that we'd been working with farmers  in East Anglia for 10 or 15 years prior to launching Hodmedod. And we had some good relationships  
**[0:07:31-0:07:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:07:31):**  with some people who were willing to take a chance on this idea because it was a tiny  and it still is. It's a tiny business. We're willing to take a chance on, you know, growing  some crops for us and trying to do things a little bit differently. And in a way that  that sort of was formative in our, in our whole way of operating the business, that  transparency, that connection to farm and that realisation that we would need to be  
**[0:07:54-0:07:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:07:54):**  really, really engaged very directly with production has become very important.  Jason Vale,  That connection with farmers, the relationship that you have with farmers seems to be entirely  critical to the success of the business. And so, you know, those, those years that were  sort of spent building up those relationships seems really important. What is it that you  
**[0:08:11-0:08:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:08:11):**  think makes a good business relationship work between yourselves as a retailer or wholesaler  and the farmers who supply you?  It's a tricky one. I mean, we are, we're not perfect. No one is perfect, but we're trying  to do our best. And we're trying to offer a kind of supportive environment or context  for farm production. So that means being very transparent about how we operate our pricing  
**[0:08:42-0:08:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:08:42):**  and what we can pay. It means having very upfront conversations with farmers about  what they need, you know, what does it cost to produce a particular crop? What are the  risks associated with it? If we want that crop grown long term, how do we share those  risks to enable that to happen? What we don't want to do is just become commodity traders  fishing around for, you know, the lowest price on the open market. What we really want is  
**[0:08:56-0:09:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:08:56):**  to help farmers develop new systems of production in which these crops which, which form part  of much more diverse rotations will be central. And in order to do that, that's an ongoing  process. It's not a kind of drop in one year and disappear the next. So we like to think  of us as part of a kind of relational network of supply rather than a very linear supply  chain. So instead of the farmer being at one end and then having some gatekeepers of value  
**[0:09:24-0:09:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:09:24):**  and knowledge, food manufacturers, wholesalers, retailers, and then the end customer in their  kitchen at home, we like to think of ourselves as a node in a network where there can be  a flow of information, knowledge and value in all sorts of different directions. Our  customers know who the farmer is that's produced what they're eating because their name is  on the pack. And we're also quite happy for them to engage directly with those farmers  
**[0:09:44-0:09:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:09:44):**  through social media or by other means.  Jason Vale,  I guess you're sort of answering this question, but I want to, I want to probe it a little  bit further. And obviously the concept of regenerative agriculture has become popular  in Britain over the last few years, but being a regenerative business, it's not about food  
**[0:10:00-0:10:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:10:00):**  production that stops at the farm gates. And I wonder what it is that you think that makes  Hodmodod's a regenerative retailer. I mean, would you even think of yourselves in those  terms?  Well, we do kind of, we like to think of ourselves more as an agroecological retailer because  I think agroecology, I think does go beyond the farm gate. And if you look at the food  
**[0:10:19-0:10:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:10:19):**  and agriculture organisations definition of agroecology, they have a lovely kind of 10  elements of agroecology. It includes things like social justice and equity and food culture  and things that support what's happening on farm. And we would see regenerative farming  as a function of agroecology. So that's what happens within the farm boundary. And then  beyond the farm gate, we would be applying some of these other principles around social  
**[0:10:44-0:10:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:10:44):**  justice and equity and really a systems approach to food. And I think there's a really interesting  thing about the emergence of regenerative farming in that it does tend to be bounded  by the farm's perimeter or the gate. People tend to think of farms very much individually,  individual journeys to change, but that needs to happen within a wider food system. And  I think there are some big numbers. We're very much aware in East Anglia of the huge  
**[0:11:09-0:11:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:11:09):**  area of our production and the detrimental effect that that's had on the environment  and often in the crops that produce detrimental effect that's had on our health and wellbeing.  And you know, the UK generally has every year around 5 million hectares of arable production.  We've got to transform all of that. We need to think beyond the individual farm about  the system that's going to support that change in happening. And maybe some of that support  
**[0:11:32-0:11:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:11:32):**  might come from government, although I'm fairly sceptical about that. A lot of it's going  to have to come from the market and an understanding that in order to foster and nurture this change  that we so desperately need to see, we're going to have to pay a little bit more and  not a huge amount actually, but a little bit more for our food.  You're sort of bringing us onto the idea of scale and scaling regenerative production,  
**[0:11:51-0:11:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:11:51):**  agroecological production, but I'm aware that, you know, the concept of agroecology has been  pretty well defined for quite a long time. Organic food production has been around for  quite a long time, but it's neither of these have ever been able to sort of break through  a glass ceiling that seems to evolve. There's always something kind of holding it back.  And so I want to ask you about the critical challenge of scale and how you think regenerative  
**[0:12:19-0:12:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:12:19):**  agriculture, which is the, you know, the new enthusiasm of a lot of people, how that can  scale and get through that glass ceiling that's held back so many other sustainable food movements  over the last 50 years or so.  Yeah, I think it's hugely challenging. Scale comes with all sorts of challenges and there  is, it's a question we're often asked, you know, how is Hodmodod going to scale up? How  
**[0:12:43-0:12:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:12:43):**  are we going to meet the requirements of farmers and how are we going to feed more people?  And I think for us, we tend to think of scaling out. How do we replicate? How does every region  have a Hodmodod for example? Because with scale comes a loss in those relational kind  of exchanges that we might have with our farmer group and it becomes much more transactional  necessarily because you have to deal with things in a more transactional manner if you're  
**[0:13:10-0:13:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:13:10):**  working at scale. And I think the scale is happening, but it's often invisible because  it is piecemeal. So it's very obvious to see change in a big transnational corporation  or in a large UK retailer because they dominate such a large part of the market. But actually  there's a lot going on on a smaller scale that's being multiplied and replicated all  across the UK that I think it feels to me is coming to some kind of critical mass. I  
**[0:13:36-0:13:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:13:36):**  don't know, 20, 25 years ago when I started working in food and food systems, it felt  like I pretty much knew everyone who was doing similar things, whether they were a farmer  or whether they were a campaigner or campaigning organisation. Now, every day, something new  and amazing is revealed to me through social media or through a connection and someone  saying, oh, did you know, have you seen? And it's amazing what's happening. And it does  
**[0:13:59-0:14:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:13:59):**  feel to me that there is real momentum emerging now. We have to be slightly careful, I think,  about corporate capture of the idea of regenerative farming. It's very flexibility and versatility,  which is its strength, also does leave it very open to being captured by a kind of a  greenwash effectively. We don't need to make any broader changes to what we're doing because  our farmers are practising no till or whatever it happens to be.  
**[0:14:23-0:14:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:14:23):**  We can come back to that element in just a moment. But you said two things at the start  of that answer, which perhaps seems slightly contradictory because you talked about the  idea of scaling out rather than scaling up. And then you talked about the idea of a Hodmodods  in every region of the UK. And I wonder quite what you mean by that last statement. Is that  that you see the Hodmodods brand replicating itself or you see a Hodmodod type business  
**[0:14:53-0:14:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:14:53):**  in every region of the UK?  I think very much the latter. I think we are a campaigning, purpose-driven business and  our route to market is both a demonstration of what change can look like, but it also  enables that change to happen. And I think Nick, William and I, I think Nick and William  would both agree that we spend an awful lot of our time on advocacy. And probably what  
**[0:15:14-0:15:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:15:14):**  we're interested in is a business that is of a sufficient scale to allow us to do all  of these things and affect this change. And that a big part of our role is making change  happening in other areas and in other businesses. So, yeah, I think it's unlikely that we'd  see lots and lots of Hodmodods under that brand, but we might see multiple businesses  doing similar things. And probably and possibly and hopefully those businesses would all be  
**[0:15:38-0:15:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:15:38):**  actively engaged with each other and would be sharing resources and ideas and possibly  exchanging harvests where, you know, in the South West, for example, they might be very  well placed to grow barley and we're better placed to grow peas, for example. So, it would  make sense for us to exchange those crops that we're growing. But, yeah, I think it's  unlikely that the Hodmodod itself will replicate and multiply.  
**[0:16:00-0:16:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:16:00):**  Do you think that there are that many talented and passionate people who could do what you're  doing?  I think Nick, William and I are very lucky in coming together with a very particular  set of skills, a lot of enthusiasm and dedication and a real sense of the urgency around which  change needs to happen. And that has driven us forward. And we have sort of helped or  
**[0:16:20-0:16:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:16:20):**  mentored other similar organisations, but they've had limited success for various reasons.  And I think I think our commitment is we work a lot of hours. And, yeah, so I think you're  right. There is an issue there around how that how that works. And I think there is  a degree to which, you know, explaining and communicating what's required. We've encountered  and overcome some of the main barriers. And I think there's lots to be shared there. One  
**[0:16:52-0:16:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:16:52):**  of our challenges is that we don't really have a huge amount of time to do the sharing.  Globally, there's all sorts of interesting things happening. We are sort of part very  informally of a kind of a network of similar businesses all across the globe. Most directly,  there's a business called Nordisk Rovara in Sweden, and they grew out of an NGO in a very  similar way to us and are doing very similar things. And we've taken our pharma group to  
**[0:17:17-0:17:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:17:17):**  visit them and they've come to visit us. And that's a really useful kind of fruitful learning  experience.  And of course, the way that I framed that sort of last pushback was around all the things  that you have to put in. At the same time, on the other side of that equation, I imagine  that it must be very rewarding to have got to where you are.  
**[0:17:35-0:17:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:17:35):**  It's really exciting. I mean, there are lots of little sort of small victories, as it were,  things that really keep us going. The first commercial harvest of lentils, having thought  initially that we'd never grow lentils in the UK. Seeing a trailer filling up with chickpeas  in Norfolk for the first time we think ever. Things like that are really amazing and thinking,  wow, change can happen. And I think the transition that we've seen from being a very small idea  
**[0:18:03-0:18:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:18:03):**  that we would talk to farmers about and they would be incredibly encouraging and supportive  of it in principle, but warn us that in practice it would be almost impossible. To the point  now where we're getting calls and emails from farmers every week who are really keen to  tell us about the changes that they're affecting on their farms, but also wanting to know how  they might be able to get involved and engaged. I think that's really exciting.  
**[0:18:25-0:18:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:18:25):**  Within that context, Josiah, do you think that you and this network of replicated, hot  mudod type businesses will ever be in a position to compete with and take over from major food  retailers like Tesco and Asda?  I don't know is the honest answer. I mean, I think, I mean, obviously we would love that  to happen. And we see those multiple retailers and the relationships that they have with  
**[0:18:46-0:18:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:18:46):**  primary production as fundamentally broken. They've delivered amazing things for people  in terms of, you know, accessibility of food and pricing, but it's come at huge external  costs which we don't properly factor in. They benefit from incumbency, they benefit from  historical planning, legislation, all sorts of different things that are going on. So  it's really difficult to see that shifting significantly. And they, you know, they control  
**[0:19:11-0:19:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:19:11):**  95% plus of our grocery purchases in the UK as consumers, which doesn't really happen  in the rest of the world. We're extraordinarily dominated by these big retail operations.  I would like to think that we can demonstrate what a different model might look like and  that possibly they might adopt some elements of that and that would be a positive thing.  I'd like to perhaps see that the planning policy and consumer preference might shift.  
**[0:19:37-0:19:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:19:37):**  And there is a sort of a new generation of very much more aware consumers who are not  perhaps dedicated to a big box retailer in the way that people once were and who will  shop around and who will make different choices and have different routes to the purchasing.  But yeah, it's a big question.  One of the businesses that was helping to serve that sort of other 5% was Farm Drop.  
**[0:20:00-0:20:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:20:00):**  And I suppose we should talk about Farm Drop in this context because it has recently been  forced to close down. And for those listening outside of Britain, Farm Drop, it was pretty  well known, well publicised. It was an online UK retailer that specialised in food deliveries  from smaller and more sustainable producers. Why do you think it failed, Josiah?  We worked with some great people in Farm Drop. We were a supplier to Farm Drop and they were  
**[0:20:23-0:20:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:20:23):**  really, you know, they were really dedicated to what they were doing. And they really believe  that their platform, their tech platform essentially could alter the relationship that we have  with food and the way that we come by it. But I think fundamentally they'd slightly  missed what it is that the food business does, which is it connects people physically with  food. And the cost of delivering that food is always going to be high. And there isn't  
**[0:20:45-0:20:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:20:45):**  really, in my view, there isn't a neat software solution that's suddenly going to fix the  food system, particularly if you're trying to compete with those other multiple retailers  with that incumbency, which was the Farm Drop model fundamentally. We've always been wary  of sort of drop shipping models, this idea that a software platform will generate an  order and you send it out directly to a customer and they take a small commission, or of online  
**[0:21:09-0:21:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:21:09):**  delivery models like Farm Drops, where they would take the product and deliver it to their  customers. Those things are hard to do. And if you're going to be a tech startup, which  Farm Drop perhaps aspired to be, you need to burn a huge amount of money in order to  carve out a niche within a really crowded and competitive marketplace. And I just don't  think they were ever going to be able to go toe to toe with Amazon or with the pre-existing  
**[0:21:34-0:21:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:21:34):**  multiple retailers. We were always, if I'm honest, nervous about  the model. We'd seen the amount of money that was being pumped in and the funding rounds  that they were going through. And we did struggle to see, based on what we knew about food retail,  how they would ever recover that debt. We were lucky. So we lost some money, but not  a huge amount. I know that there were a lot of producers for whom Farm Drop was a very  
**[0:21:56-0:22:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:21:56):**  significant customer, and particularly through lockdown and COVID, and that people were badly  affected by that.  It sounds like the way that the people who were behind Farm Drop sort of saw the challenge,  they thought that they could resolve that challenge. They could win in that marketplace.  But for you, your business growth has been much slower and much more organic. And because  
**[0:22:20-0:22:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:22:20):**  it has been slower, because you've built it up from scratch and your personal relationships  and ability to build relationships with farmers has been central to that, that that just creates  a robustness, resilience and longevity that can't be replicated by a technical platform.  Yeah, I think, yeah, so we haven't borrowed money externally. We've used bank loans and  we've used our own money, but we haven't gone out and looked for large amounts of money  
**[0:22:49-0:22:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:22:49):**  in order to scale the business rapidly and increase revenue and turnover. I mean, arguably  we could have done, and that would be a more usual model. But because the crops we were  working with often aren't particularly scalable, we've kind of worked to the way that agriculture  works. So if, for example, we're developing a new crop like lentils, we really need to  make sure that we grow demand in advance of supply, but that we can't grow demand excessively  
**[0:23:12-0:23:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:23:12):**  because then it just leads to disappointment. And I think we've done that. We've worked  very closely with the farmers who have often been very generous with the credit they've  offered us on purchases, particularly in the early years, and that really significantly  aided us as we grew the business. But yeah, we haven't done that super rapid growth, spent  a lot of money on marketing and advertising. We don't have, I suppose, as a lot of brands  
**[0:23:37-0:23:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:23:37):**  and tech startups would have, we don't have a clearly defined exit strategy around making  10 million quid in five years time. That's not the model. So we haven't been working  towards that point. Our model, our exit strategy is probably, and we hope will be employee  ownership at the end of the road, rather than selling out to some other bigger business.  Mason, now you talked about Greenwash earlier on, you mentioned the idea that you have a  
**[0:24:03-0:24:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:24:03):**  concern that, you know, regenerative agriculture could just be taken up by big businesses and  used almost as a brand, as something which is analogous with sustainability, which increasingly,  I think, you know, has become all things to all people. Now, even though Hodmerdodge is  by your definition, the tiny business, its success has given you the chance to influence  big name brands, to have conversations with those brands. What sort of brands and what  
**[0:24:31-0:24:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:24:31):**  do you say to them?  Hodmerdodge Well, all sorts. And some of them are quite  big, you know, they, they, they phone us up, we get the new product development teams from  businesses like PepsiCo or like Unilever, you know, who would come to us and say, you  know, we're doing X, Y, and Z with plant proteins. What can you supply us with? What's your advice?  
**[0:24:47-0:24:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:24:47):**  We want to understand it. We're not particularly interested in supplying them. We don't really  have the scale or capacity to do that. But we're happy to have that conversation. And  so, for them, we might be encouraging them to think about whole foods, whole pulses,  they're very interested in the fractions that you might be able to derive from a from a  soybean or a pea and reconstituting that and using it in snack products or alternative  
**[0:25:08-0:25:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:25:08):**  meat products or what have you. And we would say, well, you know, we do minimally process  whole foods, the best way to eat a pea is when it's a pea, not to try and break it up  and put it back together again into something else. And that's a difficult message for them.  And I think there's another fundamental message where if you're Pepsi and a big part of your  business is making brown sweet water, I mean, there is a fundamental question, which is,  
**[0:25:32-0:25:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:25:32):**  however much work you do on water resource management and sustainable sugar, and so on  and so on. Ultimately, you're making something that people don't really need. And that's  a quite difficult thing to confront. They do quite like it though, don't they? People  do quite like this. And surely the future needs to include some of the things that people  want as well as some of the things that people need. They do. But I think those larger businesses  
**[0:25:56-0:26:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:25:56):**  have to address what it is that they're making. And really, and I'm sure they probably are  internally. I mean, there are good people that work for these businesses, that sometimes  the behemoth of the entity in itself can be quite difficult to turn around. And, you know,  it'd be really interesting to know what their views on that are. But yeah, you're right.  We enjoy things. We don't necessarily, the things we enjoy aren't necessarily always  
**[0:26:19-0:26:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:26:19):**  best for us.  And at the end of the day, I suppose, you know, there are potentially things out there  that we haven't tried yet, which may well include, you know, the things that are on  your menu of items that you sell that a lot of people haven't tried yet. And the joy of  whole ingredients may be something that just a lot of people haven't realised they really  
**[0:26:41-0:26:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:26:41):**  want to enjoy.  Josiah, we've talked quite broadly about sustainable retailing and how to scale regenerative solutions.  Perhaps for a moment we can zoom in on British policy. When we left the European Union, there  was a remarkable opportunity to transform agricultural land use from the extractive  industry it's become to a regenerative profession, a community of thriving farmers and food business  
**[0:27:06-0:27:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:27:06):**  businesses of all sizes. I wonder, how do you feel about the future of British farming  at this point in 2022?  I think that whatever one's feelings about Brexit, it did offer an extraordinary opportunity  to re-look at agriculture, as you rightly say, in the UK and how we farm and what we  farm and what we want out of the landscape as well, collectively as a population. And  
**[0:27:30-0:27:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:27:30):**  obviously we want food, but we also want thriving biodiversity. We want some amenity use, all  of those things. And I felt kind of positive that we were going to get some of that through  some of the work that was going on around and just after Brexit. I have to say, I feel  like some of the political pressures are changing that narrative and we're seeing kind of a  dilution of some of those early optimistic kind of visions for a collaborative future,  
**[0:27:56-0:28:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:27:56):**  as you say, a thriving community of farmers and food businesses that work together. I'm  still positive. I do feel, you know, the clock is ticking and we've got commitments to net  zero. I still don't think they're radical enough. And I don't think that farming has  been broadly engaged enough around any of these issues. And for example, and I'm sure  everyone is well aware of this, but where was farming at COP? And where's the voice  
**[0:28:22-0:28:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:28:22):**  of farming in some of the big solutions that we might be able to offer up in terms of climate  change and biodiversity loss? You know, they're on our doorstep, they're under our feet. And  it would only take some joined up and careful policy in order to really incentivise and  accelerate change. I'd like to see government departments, for example, not just thinking  about their own territory, but thinking about the overlap between other departments, moving  
**[0:28:47-0:28:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:28:47):**  away from siloed thinking. So that DEFRA might talk to the Department of Health, for example,  about food and nutrition as well as farming, and that we might be engaging education and  DEFRA to look at how people value rural work and how we encourage people to think of this  as a fantastic, exciting employment opportunity.  And I suppose, you know, when you mention those different departments, I think increasingly  
**[0:29:12-0:29:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:29:12):**  there is a lot of work, particularly at NGO level, which is connecting the health outcomes  of food and food production. But as you say, there is still this kind of drain from rural  areas into the city. And very often, you know, those kids that have grown up and become students  and gone to the city to make their fortunes, then often don't come back and start working  the land. And for 20 years, farmers have been told that they're part of the problem rather  
**[0:29:37-0:29:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:29:37):**  than part of the solution. And, you know, one of the contentions of this podcast of  many of the people I talk to is that land use is the central thing that offers us a  solution, that offers us hope as we face the ecological crisis. And that story, as you  say, it's just not getting through at the moment.  No, I mean, it's never been that in a way, I think, since certainly since the Second  
**[0:30:00-0:30:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:30:00):**  World War and, you know, the post-war productivist paradigm, which saw yield as being the principal  objective of farming and a continued depopulation of rural areas and a devaluation of field  workers and farmers, you know, who became largely, I'm afraid to say, kind of seen as  factory floor operatives who would do what the seed companies told them in terms of drilling,  what the machinery companies told them in terms of machinery, you know, would sell into  
**[0:30:28-0:30:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:30:28):**  the markets that the grain traders advised and would be paid the price that the global  commodity traders had indicated and frankly lost their agency and lost their ability to  make decisions about the farm that they worked, the land that they knew and how to do things,  you know, in perhaps the best way. And I think we do need to get back to that. We do need  to give farmers a bit more agency and empowerment.  
**[0:30:51-0:30:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:30:51):**  That's where businesses like yours come in, isn't it? Because that's about recreating  that agency.  Yeah. So for example, with a project like the lentil production, we worked out, you  know, what the basic agronomy was and how best to grow lentils, when to drill them,  when to harvest them. But when we work with a farmer group, we don't, we don't send them  
**[0:31:07-0:31:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:31:07):**  out with a kind of agronomic package that tells them what to spray when and when to  do it. We ask them not to spray anything. Instead we say, you know your land, you know  your farm, how are we going to work out how to grow these lentils on your land? And that's  for the, for most of the farmers that we engage with, they love that, you know, it may only  be a five hectare area of lentils that they're growing, but what an exciting project to use  
**[0:31:29-0:31:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:31:29):**  all of their farming knowledge and skills from, from their engineering skills to make  sure they've got the machinery working properly all the way through to their knowledge of  plant science and soil science to harvest a crop that really hasn't been grown in the  UK commercially, certainly for a few hundred years. And that's brilliant. They jump at  that chance and that opens the door, I think for them to other possibilities. How can I,  
**[0:31:50-0:31:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:31:50):**  how can I move some of my other cropping area out of this commodity system? How can I look  at other routes to market for these commodities that are actually food and they're delicious  and we really need to revalue them.  Jason Vale Just staying on the more macro policy level  for a little bit longer. One of my concerns, you know, and, and, and as you know, as we  
**[0:32:08-0:32:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:32:08):**  discussed in those sort of first few years since the referendum, there was a lot of excitement.  There seemed to be a lot of conversations where government actually seemed to be getting  it, seemed to understand the importance of multi outcome land use. But one of my concerns  now is the government in Westminster, despite all that positiveness of those conversations  following the referendum, seems fundamentally to have bought into the idea of land sparing  
**[0:32:32-0:32:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:32:32):**  and the national food strategy, for example, that came out recently reflects this in what  it chooses to call zoning. But when land sparing has been shown repeatedly to be so hugely  inefficient and damaging, I wonder if you have any thoughts about why it is that this  dangerous resurgence of support is happening for this particular model of land use.  James Rylie I think for the most part, we need to be looking  
**[0:33:19-0:33:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:33:19):**  at land sharing approaches, for example, through through agroforestry, where you've got, you  know, nutrient cycling, you've got carbon capture, you've got soil health, and you've  got food production, and you've got space to coexist with with wildlife with the nature  around us. And I just, I think that kind of complex thinking when it comes into policy,  civil servants just find it incredibly difficult to deliver and politicians find it incredibly  
**[0:33:42-0:33:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:33:42):**  difficult to communicate. I don't know whether that's our fault as people that are working  in this sector. I don't know what we need to do. I don't know what the answer is.  Paul Edmondson One of the problems must be around the, I hesitate  to say the number of people that work in Defra, but there's certainly the number of different  departments that mean, as you were saying that, you know, there's a department that  
**[0:34:00-0:34:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:34:00):**  deals with carbon, there's a department that deals with animal welfare, a department that  deals with water. And that just inevitably creates this sort of siloed approach. Whereas,  you know, you go across to Wales and talk to the Welsh government, it's a much smaller  department where people can effectively talk across the room to each other. And in that  way, you end up with a much more joined up approach and a much better understanding of  
**[0:34:24-0:34:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:34:24):**  that multiplicity of functions that a single piece of land can deliver.  David Pembroke Yeah, I mean, I think it is a problem. And  I think, you know, the terrifying thing about about the land sparing model is obviously,  you know, which land is going to be spared? Who's going to spare it? How are they going  to be paid to spare it? Does it, is that the right land to spare? How are we going to measure  
**[0:34:42-0:34:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:34:42):**  that and what decisions do we make? And then what happens on the land we don't spare? Is  that just a license to pound it as we have done post-war for yield? Because I think that's,  that seems to be the model that's being kind of promoted in some quarters. And, and you  know, what sustainable intensification might actually mean for that land could be pretty  disastrous, I think. Jason Vale As we speak, there's a cost of living  
**[0:35:04-0:35:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:35:04):**  crisis and more and more people are struggling to cope with the everyday day to day expenses.  And against this backdrop, with fears about inflation and electoral fortunes, perhaps  inevitably tied to the flexibility people feel inside their wallets, can you ever see  a government taking action? David Pembroke  I hope so. I'd like to think so. Possibly not this government. I think, I think there's  
**[0:35:27-0:35:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:35:27):**  a big issue, isn't there? No, no government, no, no monarch or whoever it might have been,  wants to see bread rise. You know, that is where the revolution starts when people either  cannot access food or food has become too expensive. And I think making sure food is  cheap at the point of consumption is a big part of, as you say, government of electability,  and no one wants to go to go to elections saying we're going to make food more expensive.  
**[0:35:54-0:35:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:35:54):**  That feels like it's not going to happen. And not addressing that, and ensuring that  there is always this cheap food, whatever the quality of that food might be, means that  the bigger issues can get brushed under the carpet. And the biggest structural issues  are around inequality. You know, over the last 30 years, you know, the UK has become  increasingly unequal, and we are now one of the most unequal societies in the G7. We really  
**[0:36:19-0:36:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:36:19):**  need to, we need to look at that problem. And I don't feel that's coming through levelling  up. I don't feel that's coming through, you know, policies around access and inclusion  in education and schools. I think one of the questions that's really interesting that we  often get asked, and it feels like a real pushback from, from probably from people who  can afford to buy our beans and peas and other products, is that they'll say you're too expensive,  
**[0:36:43-0:36:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:36:43):**  you know, how are we going to feed the poor if they all have to buy your pulses? And of  course, our pulses are in fact, in an absolute sense, really very cheap, you know, a packet  of peas will feed four people a couple of meals. The real question ought to be why,  if we're paying the right price to our farmers, if we're paying our employees, our staff,  a living wage that they can, that allows them to do the things that they want to do and  
**[0:37:06-0:37:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:37:06):**  have the lives that they, they want to lead. If we're doing all of those things and yet  our food is too expensive, you know, what's gone wrong here? Why is it that people who  are employed by some of the biggest food manufacturers and retailers have to depend on food banks?  That's a ridiculous situation. And yet shareholder profits seem to be going up. I don't understand  how we've come to this place where people can't eat properly.  
**[0:37:27-0:37:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:37:27):**  You're talking there, you know, about this big scale of reform that's needed within the  economic system. And I'm sure many people listening to the podcast will agree that that's  absolutely required. This rebalancing of the economy is essential. But there's a question  of timing, isn't there? And I guess that's part of the ethical question here that we're,  you know, we're trying to deal with. And so just playing devil's advocate, when so many  
**[0:37:52-0:37:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:37:52):**  people are feeling such a squeeze on their living standards as they are today, post COVID,  at the time when energy prices are beginning to skyrocket, is now the time to focus on  internalising these negative costs of extractive agriculture, even though it risks price rises,  and an even greater impact on people living in or close to poverty.  I continue to think that if we address those structural problems within society, and that  
**[0:38:21-0:38:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:38:21):**  can be addressed politically, then the poorest will not be hit hardest by those changes.  And the fundamental factor is that the connected crisis that we face around climate and species  loss and so on, will affect the poorest both here and globally, the hardest. And if we  don't address them now, then we're going to be picking up much more of a mess in 10 or  15 years time. If we don't address the damage we're doing to our water system or to our  
**[0:38:48-0:38:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:38:48):**  air in terms of pollution, if we don't address climate change that is going to put very marginal  people at higher risk of morbidity, then we've got to, we've got a serious problem. So I  think if we can't internalise those externalities now, and if we can't work out a way of doing  that, that doesn't hit those people who are really struggling hard, then as a society,  we've got to take a look at ourselves. There are no news stories about the changes that  
**[0:39:17-0:39:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:39:17):**  we need to make in our pants of consumption and the way that we live and the impact that  that has on the world around us.  We're coming to the end of the programme. So just finally, let's go back to Hodmodod.  What next? Where do you see your business in five years time? What are your immediate  priorities?  
**[0:39:33-0:39:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:39:33):**  Yes, I mean, we've just talked about some pretty dark stuff, I think. Some of the biggest  structural problems that we face. And yeah, Hodmodod exists because we're, Nick, William  and I, we're just incredibly optimistic about what it is that we're trying to do. And we're  really excited about the potential for change. And we do think that if we didn't think that  this could work, we wouldn't do it. And so, I mean, the next five years is all about growing  
**[0:39:59-0:40:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:39:59):**  and developing our farmer network and the area of land that we're able to help them  steward and find a route to market for the crops that are grown from. To develop some  new crops, to add further diversity to farmers and plates and stomachs. And to just tell  that story to a much wider audience. I mean, it's incredible when we think that when we  started 10 years ago, pulses were seen as very much a kind of hair shirt, 70s foodstuff.  
**[0:40:25-0:40:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:40:25):**  And yet now they're getting incredibly trendy and fashionable, and there's a lot of interest  in them. And so I think in the next five years, that transformation will continue and accelerate.  And I feel very, very optimistic about what we can achieve within the space that we're  working. Fantastic. So big challenges around the world, big need for structural reform  at home and abroad. But Hobmer Dodge, your business is very much part of the change that  
**[0:40:54-0:41:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:40:54):**  we need to see. And in so many ways is a model for that kind of business to replicate around  Britain and in other countries with those wonderful relationships that you have with  your suppliers and the compassion that you have within the business for your staff and  the dedication, you know, for the industry that you're part of. It's been fascinating.  Thanks so much. But that is all we have time for. I'd like to thank my guest, Josiah Meldrum  
**[0:41:19-0:41:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-Hodmedods-e1eprhf#t=0:41:19):**  from Hodmer Dodge. If you've enjoyed listening, please come back and listen to more. Tell  your friends, like us, review us and share our links. Farmgate is a partnership project  for Farmwell and FAI Farms. We're funded by Sam Kalpa and you can join the conversation  on Twitter by searching for Farmgate podcast. I've been Finn low, Kastain. Bye for now.  