### Farm Gate  (2020-53-06)
**[0:00:00-0:00:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to Farmgate. I'm Finnlow Costayne. Today I'm joined by two highly  distinguished guests who are here to discuss COVID-19 and the crisis in food systems. Dr.  David Nabarro is Special Envoy of the World Health Organisation Director General on COVID-19  and Co-Director of the Imperial College Institute of Global Health Innovation at the Imperial  College London. Professor Melissa Leach CBE is the Director of the Institute of Development  
**[0:00:32-0:00:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:00:32):**  Studies. She is a member of the Brussels-based International Panel of Experts on Sustainable  Food Systems, otherwise known as IPES Food, and was lead author on IPES Food's recent  special report looking into COVID-19 and the crisis in food systems. Welcome to you both.  Melissa, IPES Food has linked the risk of zoonotic spillover with the need for more  resilient agroecological systems. And at the same time, David, you've said that the lockdown  
**[0:01:00-0:01:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:01:00):**  is an important opportunity for people to pause and collectively make sense of the world  that we find ourselves in. What sense can we make of this pandemic and what lessons  should human beings be taking away, do you think? Melissa, perhaps you kick us off on  this. I think the pandemic has exposed some very big cracks in the systems that we all  depend on, those that are important to our health, to our economies, to our environments  
**[0:01:26-0:01:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:01:26):**  and to food. And the crisis, therefore, is an opportunity for some quite fundamental  rethinks and resets. And as we've argued in the IPES Food report, a key area is our food  systems. And I think here we've known the problems that industrial food systems, the  dominant systems that we depend on around the world for a long time. There are severe  environmental problems. There are also problems of access and equity and of malnutrition and  
**[0:01:51-0:01:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:01:51):**  health. And many of these have become extra visible through COVID-19. Whether we're talking  about the zoonotic spillover, which I can elaborate on in a bit, but was at the root  of the initial outbreak, or through the health vulnerabilities that we've seen and the greater  infection rates that are seen amongst people with obesity and related conditions like diabetes,  or there are vulnerabilities in food supply in the context of lockdown and the way that  
**[0:02:18-0:02:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:02:18):**  border closures have interrupted some of these very long carbon intensive food chains. And  so what we've argued with IPES Food is that agroecological systems, an alternative paradigm,  if you like, actually offer ways forward to solve many of these issues. And the groups  that have been practicing and arguing for agroecology for a long time, which includes  indigenous peoples, grassroots groups, those linking into the food sovereignty movement,  
**[0:02:49-0:02:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:02:49):**  or indeed people doing their farming in ways that are much more rooted in relationships  between agriculture and ecologies, linking food systems and society in more equitable  and resilient ways, actually now is an opportunity to say these are the kinds of systems we need.  And therefore, the cracks revealed by COVID to enable us to reset and reorientate and  really embrace this rather different paradigm into the future.  
**[0:03:15-0:03:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:03:15):**  So there's a better understanding of nature and our role within it as a species that exists  within rather than outside nature. David, I wonder if you could comment on that and  what sense you think in this context we should be taking from the pandemic.  Thank you very much indeed. From my point of view, I sense a lot of things that are  similar to those that are described by Melissa and it leads me to ask, well, as we develop  
**[0:03:47-0:03:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:03:47):**  new ways of thinking about food and food systems, how can we shift from that new mindset to  actually doing things differently? And this report, the IPES Food report, does actually  come out with a number of suggestions. And I think that what I'm now working on is how  to build on those to actually get a collective effort or change. So I thought, number one,  perhaps we need to get narratives that put people and nature more centrally within thinking  
**[0:04:23-0:04:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:04:23):**  about the future of food. Secondly, perhaps it's important that those who produce food,  whether they are people owning assets like farms or fishing boats or people who are working  in the food sector, are more densely involved in the thinking through how to make food systems  more resilient and also beneficial. And thirdly, perhaps we need to take advantage of the fact  that COVID is exposing the cracks that Melissa just described to bring as many groups as  
**[0:04:56-0:05:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:04:56):**  possible together, a dialogue about what COVID means for them when it comes to rethinking  their food systems so that there is a collective willingness to shift. I'm more and more of  the opinion that without dialogue, we can't shift, but with dialogue, there's a real possibility  of significance happening.  One of the things that I'm struck by is that you've been a champion of the One Health approach  
**[0:05:21-0:05:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:05:21):**  for much of your career.  One Health brings together the thought and actions of veterinary health practitioners,  human health practitioners, environmental health practitioners, and potentially more  health actors, just simply to give them an opportunity to cross between disciplines and  be enriched by that experience. Now, I love that way of working and have always been somebody  
**[0:05:48-0:05:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:05:48):**  who believes that the most exciting shifts in what we are thinking about and doing come  from working at interfaces. But it's not everybody who likes that, and some prefer the comfort  of being within a defined discipline and in fact get quite nervous of interdisciplinary  working.  My own view, therefore, is that we have to continue to work to try to improve the way  
**[0:06:12-0:06:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:06:12):**  in which One Health actors operate together, recognising that they are tribally distinct  and finding crosswalks that are comfortable for everybody. That means constant effort.  I'd love to know what Melissa thinks about the challenges of getting One Health to come  to life.  Well, David, I would completely agree with that. And I was involved a few years ago in  
**[0:06:36-0:06:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:06:36):**  a very big One Health focus project. It involved 19 institutions across the world from medical  and veterinary and environmental and indeed social science backgrounds. And on the one  hand, it was the most positive experience because bringing those groups together around  real world problems in real places, and this was a study of the relationships between people  in ecology and diseases in around Rift Valley fever in East Africa, trachinomyosis in Zimbabwe,  
**[0:07:01-0:07:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:07:01):**  Lassa fever in Sierra Leone. Working together around real world problems was tremendously  exciting, but there was always a tendency for people to go back to their institutions  after the meeting, after the fieldwork and latch back into their silos. And I think that's  a function of the way our professions and our universities and scientific institutions  are structured and the incentives for people. I think we also saw a degree of politics actually  
**[0:07:27-0:07:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:07:27):**  in hierarchies in One Health. So it is very often the medical professionals who dominate  despite the fact that sometimes it's the vets who have more of a grasp on those real local  interactions. And then there's the social element, which is the background that I bring.  I'm an anthropologist at heart, which are so crucial for actually understanding how  One Health can work in a real world, which is a world of people and relationships and  
**[0:07:54-0:07:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:07:54):**  cultural understandings and knowledges that are informal as well as formal and are a crucial  part of grounding One Health in the real world in contexts that matter in those deep local  people ecosystem interactions, but ultimately are what we need. So on the one hand, I'm  absolutely with you on the need for dialogue. I think I would add to that dialogue the importance  of bringing in community members in diverse places around the world. They have to be part  
**[0:08:23-0:08:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:08:23):**  of that dialogue if One Health is to work for people in places. But I also recognize  that this is very difficult and it's quite political in a small peace sense. And that  really moving forward with this One Health agenda is going to require challenges to the  status quo and usual ways of doing things. But maybe COVID-19 gives us an opportunity.  Maybe again, it's a crisis which will open up some new spaces for some proper dialogue  
**[0:08:49-0:08:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:08:49):**  and collaboration, which I completely agree is what we need.  I wonder, David, what the role of the World Health Organization has been in the past looking  through this One Health lens and the degree to which in the past the WHO has been focused  on this zoonotic risk and engaged in the idea that agriculture in particular interfaces  with wild spaces and encroaches, intervenes in wild spaces and the risks that that raises.  
**[0:09:18-0:09:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:09:18):**  Thank you very much indeed. I want to start from what Melissa just said about how when  you're working to help people be comfortable with a behavior that crosses different disciplines  and crosses the organizational comfort of from one discipline to another, it requires  paying attention to the power relationships and organizing principles in these different  disciplinary institutions. You see, in my experience, the One Health approach works  
**[0:09:49-0:09:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:09:49):**  really well in local communities where people are dealing with human health, animal health,  environmental health issues at the same time, and they are having to actually shift from  one disciplinary mindset to another quite quickly.  My big area where I learned this was in Thailand when we were dealing with H5N1 avian influenza.  We saw that women poultry keepers often keeping say five to 50,000 hens were also very much  
**[0:10:23-0:10:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:10:23):**  becoming One Health practitioners in their own place and working with local health and  agricultural workers to do it. And I just want to continue to stress that this makes  sense local, but it gets much more complicated when you go away from the local into the institutions.  You mentioned just now the World Health Organization. Just let me just share with you a couple of  things on this. I work for the World Health Organization for a spell, but I also worked  
**[0:10:50-0:10:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:10:50):**  in food, which got me close to the Food and Agriculture Organization. And when I was working  on bird flu, I worked with the International Organization of Epizoea or the World Organization  for Animal Health, which is a slightly different entity as well. And what I learned through  this is that it's much tougher to be navigating the junctions between disciplines when you're  on the big apex institutions, simply because they act as places where disciplinary thinking  
**[0:11:18-0:11:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:11:18):**  is very strongly reinforced and incentivized. Whereas for One Health work, you need to work  outside that. So yeah, I think that in WHO, the One Health lens is useful, but it's at  the local level that the One Health lens is most useful. And I wouldn't want to suggest  that we should take the temperature on where the One Health movement is by what is happening  inside the big institutions. We should take the temperature by what is happening where  
**[0:11:44-0:11:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:11:44):**  people are actually doing the work. I hope that somehow.  There is this disconnect between local action, which very often is much more One Health focused.  It understands the different interactions that take place between peoples and communities,  between nature and animals. And then, as you say, David, when you get to global institutions  that through the way that they work, the governance and the disciplines that they need, it often  
**[0:12:10-0:12:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:12:10):**  feels that there is this attempt to control at a global scale when actually there needs  to be more empowerment.  Yeah. I mean, people like us who kind of work either in institutions or around institutions  have limited power to actually give power to others. But what we can do is create environments  within which connections are made, environments that are safe within which people can explore  
**[0:12:39-0:12:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:12:39):**  beyond their usual comfortable and secure zones, and environments within which they  can be rewarded with these more unusual ways of working. I see certainly that is my role.  And if I can do anything over the next few months, it is to try to do that.  So to bring people together from different disciplines to share information much more  effectively than perhaps, you know, we're used to doing it. And certainly that's your  
**[0:13:05-0:13:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:13:05):**  approach as well, Melissa.  Absolutely. I think there's also an opportunity to learn from below, as it were. I'm involved  in another project at the moment, which is about pandemic preparedness and response.  And we're arguing very strongly for a perspective that takes much more notice of the creative  innovations and solutions people are coming up with in their own communities, in their  
**[0:13:28-0:13:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:13:28):**  neighbourhoods, to prepare for and respond to the current COVID pandemic and others,  and to its economic and social fallout. And I think this applies absolutely to the One  Health paradigm as well. I think there are so many examples emerging around the world.  And part of the response is to try and make sure those are empowered and not blocked,  as they sometimes are, by government policies and restrictions in their particular countries  
**[0:13:52-0:13:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:13:52):**  and indeed are recognised and given the resources they need to flourish.  But I think there are also opportunities to learn across places and for bringing together  some of these experiences so that people elsewhere can learn from them. And there are some really  key networks emerging that have helped this. I mean, some of them, some of the important  ones existed prior to COVID-19, things like the Food Sovereignty Network or the Agroecology  
**[0:14:17-0:14:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:14:17):**  Movement and La Via Campesina, which is important, was important there. I think there are also  opportunities for some One Health localised networks to emerge and share experiences.  And this would also be a way to go. But I think it requires a humility often in countries  to be able to look to examples, perhaps from a very different part of the world, and see  what they might take from them. One of the things that's actually excited me about COVID  
**[0:14:42-0:14:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:14:42):**  19 is the way in which it's actually reversed the narrative that we're used to around health  environment interactions, where typically, if you look back over the past, whether it's  H5N1 or swine flu or SARS, we've seen an outbreak emerging in a far distant place out of Africa,  out of Asia and threatening global centres of power. COVID-19 has reversed that typical  outbreak narrative. And what we've got, of course, now is much higher infection rates  
**[0:15:09-0:15:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:15:09):**  in Europe, in the US, and many examples of creative response in African settings, in  Asian settings, and in little parts of Latin America. And I think this gives a really important  opportunity to try and challenge some of those big power dynamics about who learns from who,  about where the seeds of hope and seeds of transformation are going to emerge from in  the new mindsets, the new paradigms that we actually need to live well with nature and  
**[0:15:37-0:15:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:15:37):**  manage these complex relationships between health and ecology and people into the future.  And I see great calls for optimism in these creative solutions in communities, but also  the chance to network them up to support the grassroots movements, to amplify them and  learn from them everywhere.  Inevitable that kind of big institutions, whether it's international organisations or  
**[0:16:01-0:16:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:16:01):**  universities or even governments actually do act as a deterrent or even a blocker to  creative energy from local level percolating through and getting more to our collective  consciousness.  I'd like to think that they don't have to. I think they often do. But part of the shift  in mindset, in paradigm that we need, if you like, is to foster the kind of engaged science,  
**[0:16:30-0:16:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:16:30):**  engaged scholarship, which is actually working much more thoroughly in modes that are not  just interdisciplinary, bringing different disciplines together, but transdisciplinary  and engaged where one interacts and works with people in society, whether it's civil  society organisations, citizens, people in communities, progressive small businesses,  as well as actually those in the bigger institutions. And I see a lot of prospect for actually trying  
**[0:16:58-0:17:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:16:58):**  to build these transdisciplinary engaged alliances in taking forward some of these big changes  that we need. It does require a shift so that that kind of work is acknowledged and recognised.  But I see the signs of that actually beginning to come. We've got in the UK, we have a research  excellence framework, which often divides people back into their disciplinary silos,  but nevertheless, credits impact. And impact, I think it's increasingly recognised, is often  
**[0:17:26-0:17:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:17:26):**  achieved through these transdisciplinary engaged alliances. So that's beginning to come.  I wonder if with the time that we have left, we could just sort of focus a little bit on  how the global food system has responded and where the greatest strengths have been and  where you think the challenges are.  Well, I was going to defer because Melissa's just done this most amazing piece of work,  
**[0:17:46-0:17:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:17:46):**  but just three very quick things for me. One, I don't think that our current food systems  are really good at responding to rapid emergence of hunger and risks of malnutrition. And I've  sensed an awful lot of people went very hungry very quickly in the last few weeks. And I  think that will go on as long as this disease does lead to movement restrictions being imposed.  Secondly, I still think that smallholders have faced really difficult situations because  
**[0:18:18-0:18:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:18:18):**  of sudden collapse in their markets, particularly if they've got perishable food. And so therefore  shortening supply chains so that farmers can get closer to people in need must be a priority.  And thirdly, civil society is so important when you've got these kinds of really emergent  challenges happening. And it's just civil society has just not been adequately financed  to be able to respond to need. So I've seen three bad, bad areas emerging. OK, so things  
**[0:18:49-0:18:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:18:49):**  might be getting easier, but there's been an off and off distress in the last few weeks.  And surely that could have been avoided.  It seems to me that there has been a drive both from the marketplace and from governance  structures to push towards bigger is better, longer supply chains. And actually, you know,  the solutions that you're talking about there are about sort of reintegrating diversity,  
**[0:19:11-0:19:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:19:11):**  not only diversity, you know, in terms of nature, like we were talking about before  the importance of diversity in nature and agricultural systems, but diversity in terms  of the way that we bring food to people, the way that the marketplace works.  Diversity is incredibly important for resilience, which is what we're really talking about.  We need food systems that are resilient to shocks that can keep going and keep feeding  
**[0:19:33-0:19:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:19:33):**  people despite those shocks. And diversity of produce of systems is often a very, very  good buffer to vulnerability to shocks. So I would completely agree with that. I think  we've seen vulnerabilities definitely in those long, clunky supply chains which have been  vulnerable to transport restrictions and movement controls, but sometimes also to shorter supply  chains. And I think some of the closures of local markets that have gone on in many countries  
**[0:19:59-0:20:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:19:59):**  in the name of public health and of lockdown have been short sighted and damaging, damaging  to smallholders, damaging to people trying to market their produce and keep their livelihoods  going but also damaging to food access where people are deeply dependent on them. And I  think the needed to be and still needs to be more creative thinking about how you can  socially distance local markets and continue to enable them to operate effectively.  
**[0:20:22-0:20:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:20:22):**  I think social protection systems, which have been the bailout in many countries have been  vital. And I think this is a period where we've seen absolutely the value and importance  of the cash transfers to sort of hold support people's entitlements to food, which have  been vital, but they've often been under financed. And even the countries that have really gone  for this in a big way, like South Africa, with big state support have often found that  
**[0:20:47-0:20:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:20:47):**  the support has not been adequate and people are falling through the bottom. And then I  think the positive move we've seen here, I'd agree with David, is actually the community  solidarities and neighbourhoods who often have stepped out to feed their vulnerable.  And often it's within a community that you know who your vulnerable people are. Many  examples again, from all around the world of people helping to keep food going for each  
**[0:21:10-0:21:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:21:10):**  other, whether it's donations to food banks in the UK or neighbourhood distribution schemes.  And I think state support to these has been vital. Sometimes it's really been lacking.  Sometimes it's been positive. Two positive examples, very different places. One would  be Kerala, where in India, local women's groups who've been supplying people with food have  had a lot of local government support. Another very close to home down the road for me in  
**[0:21:33-0:21:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:21:33):**  Brighton where the Brighton and Hose Food Partnership, a long existing collaborative  between farmers, food suppliers, voluntary organisations and the local council, have  stepped up to keep food supplies going in COVID and have again formed a really good  partnership between civil society and local government. But a lot of this is about localisation.  And I think with COVID in many countries, we've seen an attempt to centralise response,  
**[0:21:59-0:22:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:21:59):**  whereas it's actually support to local responses through links between government and civil  society that offer us the best ways forward. Looking at the UK, the way that the food system  has been disrupted has seems to me to be much more linked to the amount of money that people  have available, whether people still have jobs, the increase in poverty that has then  meant that many more people are needing to turn to food banks and similar sorts of community  
**[0:22:25-0:22:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:22:25):**  based institutions. But actually, aside from the panic buying at the beginning, the food  has stayed on the shelves and it has kept flowing. And I wonder, first of all, whether  that experience has been played out elsewhere in the world, whether our experience in the  UK is relatively similar to other more developing countries, I suppose. And the other aspect  is that panic buying element was a real problem to start with and the role of the media in  
**[0:22:51-0:22:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:22:51):**  driving that panic. And I wonder if you'd be able to comment on how you feel the media  has behaved throughout this, whether it has been responsible in the way that it's communicated  the challenges we face.  Thank you very much indeed. Just to do quick things, because again, I feel Melissa has  greater knowledge on this than me. First of all, as I understand it in the UK and in many  
**[0:23:15-0:23:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:23:15):**  other countries, food has continued to flow from producers to consumers via retail system,  but at a considerable cost in that a large number of farmers have not been able to recoup  their costs of growing their food, whether it is crops or vegetables or animals, because  of the way in which the remuneration structure is operating. And we've got major outbreaks  of COVID in many food processing plants in, for example, North America and Europe, particularly  
**[0:23:50-0:23:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:23:50):**  meat and fish, but also vegetables. So the food's coming through, but at a cost, and  that cost is driving down prices and driving down the earnings of people working in the  system. I don't think that's right. I think that needs work. And secondly, just quickly  on the media, because I am totally focused on how we're all having to make sense in our  heads and in our hearts about this new phenomenon that's affecting all of us. And that means  
**[0:24:20-0:24:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:24:20):**  that we are hugely dependent, not just on reported information, but also on discursive  information. And I'm totally overwhelmed and positive and excited about the amount of debate  there is in the media. I appreciate some get concerned about what they call misinformation.  As far as I'm concerned, the more the better. And if people are having to work through conspiracy  theories and so on, so be it. It's part of life. And I think that's good. So I'm really,  
**[0:24:50-0:24:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:24:50):**  really in favour of and encouraging more and more and more dialogue about this. And I love  the way the media has just got fully engaged. Kind of, obviously, I wish there were more  things in certain outlets, but I don't control who's on the dealing with the editorial structure.  Goodness, delighted about the nature of the debate.  So embracing diversity in the narrative as well.  
**[0:25:12-0:25:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:25:12):**  Yes.  Yeah, completely. I don't think I've got very much to add to what David has said, actually.  I mean, I think to some extent it's been a surprise and the fears that in the UK drove  a lot of the panic buying that suddenly we would not have, I don't know, pasta and olive  oil on our shelves or even loo roll have not come true. And it's quite interesting that  
**[0:25:34-0:25:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:25:34):**  they haven't, because I think people thought they would. But I think it's, I would agree  with David that supply chains have been maintained, but at a cost, at a number of costs to workers,  to those involved in packing and so on. I think there's also been, it's also the maintenance  of supply to consumers in the UK has also been very much maintained by supermarkets  and it's been smaller retailers who have often suffered. And I hope very much that we'll  
**[0:26:02-0:26:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:26:02):**  be able to see those begin again to flourish, because I think we need a diversity of food  outlets and consumption choices as well. I think there's also been quite an interesting  move in the UK towards, obviously with the closure of restaurants and abilities to eat  in other places, a growing interest again in food and in cooking, which in some ways  has been positive and is something to build on. But it's also been quite class-based and  
**[0:26:31-0:26:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:26:31):**  quite unequal and the luxury of being able to spend one's lockdown period cooking creative  meals for one's family is quite a middle-class one. And it's not shared equally and it's  certainly not shared by those whose incomes have declined and they can't afford fresh  goods and foods and are having to turn to cheaper foods, which are often less healthy.  So I think we're seeing some big divides opening up in consumption and in equity of access,  
**[0:26:57-0:27:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:26:57):**  not just to food per se, but to good nutritious food, which is good for people's diets and  health into the future. And I think those are issues to watch very carefully as well  on the consumption, as well as the production and supply side.  Thank you. And David, just finally, this pandemic isn't going away anytime soon, is it?  No, virus is here to stay. It's quite likely that the world will have to learn to live  
**[0:27:20-0:27:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:27:20):**  with it for a number of years because the potential for eradication of the virus using  a vaccine is very low and there's no evidence that some kind of population immunity is going  to develop in the foreseeable future either. And so that means that every society will  almost certainly find that its ability to be able to live with the virus without having  considerable disruption to economic and social systems is going to be a determining factor  
**[0:27:49-0:27:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:27:49):**  on whether that society is able to compete in and contribute to the world of the future.  Thank you very much. We've only scratched the surface on so many of these issues that  we've touched upon, but thank you very much for sharing the time with us this morning.  And I hope that these conversations will continue both between yourselves and, you know, across  the wider community. So that's all we have time for. I'd like to thank my guests, David  
**[0:28:14-0:28:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:28:14):**  Nabarro, the special envoy of the World Health Organization, Director General on COVID-19  and Melissa Leach from the International Panel of Experts on Sustainable Food Systems, IPES  Food. Their websites are 4sd.info and ipes-food.org. If you've enjoyed listening, please come  back and listen to more. Tell your friends, like us, review us and share our links. FarmGate  is a partnership project for Farmwell and FAI Farms and we're funded by San Calpa.  
**[0:28:44-0:28:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/The-one-with-the-WHO--IPES-Food-egchdh#t=0:28:44):**  You can join the conversation on Twitter as usual by searching for FarmGate podcast. I've  been Finn LoKerstain. Bye for now.  