### Farm Gate  (2022-14-05)
**[0:00:00-0:00:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to Farmgate. I'm Fenlow Kustain, the Chief Executive of Farmwell and founder  of the Food and Global Security Network. Often when we talk about shortening supply chains,  there are a set of unspoken assumptions and personal biases that frame the conversation.  The idea of farmers selling direct to the public from their farm gate conjures, in my  mind at least, a semi-pastoral scene of happy people exchanging goods and payment. However,  
**[0:00:30-0:00:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:00:30):**  most people live in cities, urban conurbations and housing estates rather than in cottages  next to farms and country footpaths. How can we shorten supply chains to reconnect people  who live in a world of concrete with the healthy soil that's used to produce their food? How  can we bring food production into cities themselves, utilising more rough ground, forgotten spaces  and parkland to support volunteers and micro business opportunities for urban citizens,  
**[0:00:56-0:01:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:00:56):**  farmers and growers? I'm joined by Jeremy Isles from the Urban Agriculture Consortium  and Rachel Hammond from Edge. Welcome both. Perhaps we could start with an introduction  to your organisations and what they do. And Rachel, Edge is about designing and installing  edible and productive landscapes. What does that mean?  So we work with schools and local authorities, landscape architect and urban design practices  
**[0:01:20-0:01:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:01:20):**  to design and install food producing landscapes essentially, but also with a focus on biodiversity.  We can work with housing associations, working with residents, community consultations, looking  at how we can integrate food into a landscape. And then what we do is we tag on training.  So we train people about how to produce food in an efficient way.  So just help me out in terms of what you described there as a food producing landscape. In a  
**[0:01:44-0:01:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:01:44):**  housing association setting, what would that look like? Where would that food be being  produced? So often around blocks of flats or housing  estates, there's often bits of greenery and shrubbery and often they're not producing.  So it's thinking about turning that into something that's productive. So that might be purely  some black, red, white currant bushes instead of the standard cotoniasta that's usually specked  
**[0:02:07-0:02:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:02:07):**  around buildings. But often it's things like raised beds or some kind of plot system where  residents get their own piece of land that they can work, such as an allotment, but maybe  on a smaller scale. It could be some kind of orchard using the green space that's around  the building to produce food. Is that using sort of balconies and window  boxes and that sort of thing as well, or is that sort of outside the scope?  
**[0:02:27-0:02:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:02:27):**  Yeah, it certainly can be. We also talk about how we can use buildings better for producing  food. So it's certainly looking at the inside and the outside together.  And presumably there's a balance that needs to be struck between the food producing elements  and the recreational elements so that there's places for people to relax and play at the  same time as using land to produce the food. Yeah, absolutely. I mean, we don't, we're  
**[0:02:50-0:02:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:02:50):**  not suggesting that 100% of recreational ground is turned over to food, but a mix is certainly  a good idea and it engages different people. So whilst somebody might want to play football  or tennis, somebody else might want to be growing some vegetables or some herbs. So  it's a really nice way to bring people together around food and start that conversation and  just engage all ages. You know, it's really nice to kind of bring different age groups  
**[0:03:11-0:03:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:03:11):**  together often, very young and older people can work really nicely on gardens. And that's  something that we've experienced in the past. Fantastic. Now you've worked closely with  Cultivate Oxford to create a strong local food system and a network of growers. And  you've said that you were inspired by living for several years in Todmorden, the birthplace  of incredible edible. What inspired you? Yeah, it was amazing to live there. I was there  
**[0:03:34-0:03:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:03:34):**  for five years and involved in the project, growing food around the town. It's a small  town at the convergence of three valleys, you know, very difficult climatic conditions  and landscape because you've got steep hills that are traditionally only sheep farmed.  But they've started growing food around around the town in raised beds, at trees, orchards,  etc. The high school now produces a lot of its own food and keeps chickens. You know,  
**[0:03:57-0:04:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:03:57):**  I think integrating food and education in all of the schools is really inspiring because  you're getting people learning from a very young age about food production. But also  what I witnessed was a real impact on local economy. So not only was it producing what  they call vegetable tourists, people coming and visiting the town and therefore bringing  money and staying in B&Bs and visiting cafes and restaurants, but also local people setting  
**[0:04:20-0:04:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:04:20):**  up small food micro businesses. So I knew a couple of people that started keeping pigs  up on the hilltops and then selling that meat through the meat stall at the market. Somebody  started making ice cream from that using the honey from the bees that are kept in the churchyard,  you know, so all of these kind of knock on effects and sort of ripples out, building  economy around that town. And what's happened is that it's built an industry around food,  
**[0:04:42-0:04:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:04:42):**  you know, all of these knock on effects and different industries that have brought money  and income and jobs to the town.  Now, I don't want to put you on the spot, but do you have any sense of the population  of Tomoden, how big it is, and what proportion of that population would be involved in some  form of growing of food?  
**[0:04:59-0:05:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:04:59):**  Yeah, it's a good question. I know that the population was when I was there around 10,000.  That may well have changed since then. That was about 10 years ago. In terms of the proportion,  they do regular volunteering sessions. And I know that often they get 50 odd people turning  out for a volunteer session, which is pretty good, certainly compared to a lot of the volunteering  sessions that I've been involved in. In terms of the proportion, it would be a wild guess,  
**[0:05:23-0:05:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:05:23):**  but I would suggest maybe a good 20, 30% of the town are in some way involved because  they've just done such a cross spread. And if you include all the school children, obviously  that statistic improves greatly because every school in the town has food now on their agenda.  I think that's fascinating to hear about the number of people that are involved in the  project in Tomoden, because even when people live in the countryside, it's easy to be disengaged  
**[0:05:47-0:05:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:05:47):**  from the food production that's taking place all around you. So those are really quite  remarkable figures in terms of engagement. That's really exciting to hear. Jeremy, you  coordinate the Urban Agriculture Consortium. What's your background and what's the consortium  set up to achieve? Well, my background is a 40 year career in  the environmental sector, working for organisations like Friends of the Earth, Sustrans on cycling  
**[0:06:11-0:06:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:06:11):**  issues, London Wildlife Trust on urban wildlife issues. And then for 16 years, I was chief  exec of what was called the Federation of City Farms and Community Gardens. That's now  called Social Farms and Gardens. In 2016, I left the job at the Fed, as it's called,  and sort of went independent and a colleague and myself said, look, we thought there's  going to be a problem because of climate change in food resilience and the global supply system  
**[0:06:36-0:06:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:06:36):**  of food. The consortium arose out of detailed consultations with a range of partners. I  went around the UK meeting local authority people. I also went around meeting people  from local food partnerships. So if we take that as cross section, there's ourselves,  we're called Green Future Associates, there's the Permaculture Association, the Community  Supported Agriculture Network, Social Farms and Gardens, Open Food Network, and at a very  
**[0:07:01-0:07:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:07:01):**  local scale, an organisation in Sheffield called ReGather, who are in themselves a cooperative  growing, delivering food and through shops and stuff. I would say that from my work experience,  the consortium is a fairly unusual and unique way of working. It's pretty innovative. It's  very fleet of foot, no bureaucracy. We have a management committee, which is actually  called an oversight group. We meet about every two or three months remotely. But what it's  
**[0:07:25-0:07:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:07:25):**  enabled, and this is brilliant, it's enabled local organisations that have felt that they're  working in isolation to tag on to something, a new momentum at a national level. They can  say, and in Leeds, for example, the Leeds Food Partnership were able to say to the city  council, listen up, we're belonging to the Urban Agriculture Consortium, there's a bit  of a momentum growing here, why don't you come along and have a meeting. So this has  
**[0:07:49-0:07:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:07:49):**  all been done remotely. And I would just go back a little second. We started this in 2016.  Since then, we know what's happened. We've had COVID, we've had climate crisis being  sort of like exponentially recognised as well as being exponentially more disastrous. And  of course now we've had the invasion of Ukraine, which has all highlighted the instability  and insecurity of the global food system. So more and more people at a local level,  
**[0:08:15-0:08:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:08:15):**  at a community level and now at a local authority level, this is really critical, are beginning  to realise that local resilience is really important. And most of them have not got food  on their agendas. They might have transport on their agendas, they've got economics on  their agendas, they've got education, blah, blah, blah, but they don't have food.  And of course, food will come into each of those things that you've just mentioned.  
**[0:08:39-0:08:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:08:39):**  Indeed. So what we're finding, and this is really interesting, probably in the last 12  months, we've only been running the programme really since 2020. So we're only two years  in. When we started, we started in five northern cities, we didn't have any local authority  representation. Those partner organisations did, but they weren't brought in. We now had,  for example, a meeting just this week in the Midlands, East Midlands, it was on Zoom. But  
**[0:09:03-0:09:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:09:03):**  of the eight people who took part, two were from local authorities. One was from Nottingham shire County Council, and one was from Birmingham City Council. Birmingham is the second largest  city authority in the UK. So have Birmingham City Council sitting in a meeting going, my  God, this is exciting, you know, actually is really brilliant. Nottinghamshire, and  this is all coming through the Public Health Channel, are about to commission some work  
**[0:09:27-0:09:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:09:27):**  on the feasibility of setting up new farm businesses in Nottinghamshire County. Now,  that wouldn't have happened a year ago. And it's to do with the conjunction of all these  crises raising awareness of the issues around immediate food insecurity, and actually talking  about public health and resilience. When we've spoken before, you've talked to me about the  idea that 15% of food could be produced in the city for people in the city. Where would  
**[0:09:54-0:10:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:09:54):**  that be produced and by whom? Most towns and cities already have quite a lot of food production  going on. There's allotments, there's people's back gardens, there's already community gardens  and city farms, and there will be some micro businesses already out there. The initial  figure of 15% came from a report that was written in Bristol about 10-12 years ago now,  and it was called Who Feeds Bristol? And that research was done by a very prominent local  
**[0:10:18-0:10:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:10:18):**  food systems campaigner, a colleague of ours, Joy Carey, and she analysed where the Bristol  food came from and what the potential was. And that figure of 15% came from there. That's  if the City Council and the other institutions that have land, which could be the NHS, could  be universities, it could be schools and businesses, if the land was made available at some scale,  that 15% could be achieved. That figure was echoed in a study that was done by Jill Edmondson  
**[0:10:45-0:10:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:10:45):**  at Sheffield University, and she analysed what green space there was within the city  bounds of Sheffield. And she said, if all the vacant space was made available and was  turned into productive growing spaces, whatever they may be, that figure of 15% could be achieved.  Now what you've got to remember, and Rachel alluded to this in reference to Tob  you can grow 15% of everything everywhere, but as an overall parameter, you could say  
**[0:11:47-0:12:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:11:47):**  there was only a 50% return of food at Sheffield and needed a little bit of awhile to get from  the city to have as much green as they could.  Paul  I guess the thing about for us, and this actually is the close of the mind ofWW right now on  percent of the fruit that's used by the city is remarkable.  
**[0:12:20-0:12:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:12:20):**  Yeah, it's really exciting. And I specifically included only public space, so no private  gardens or kind of closed sites. So I included schools within that. And of course, each school  will be slightly different, but I was quite conservative with those estimates of the area.  And then a section of each, so I plotted all the public parks and green spaces around the  city. So this is all within the ring road of Oxford and took a portion of that to become  
**[0:12:44-0:12:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:12:44):**  a public edible forest garden that was designed specifically to produce top fruit and nuts  to have birds undergrazing, so for egg production. And then each of the rows of trees were underplanted  with fruit bushes and nitrogen fixing shrubs. And that design creates a row, the underplanting  was designed to be two rows per month of the year so that people can kind of go up and  down and pick it a bit like a pick your own or a supermarket. So each aisle was kind of  
**[0:13:12-0:13:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:13:12):**  a month's worth. And then obviously with the birds, you've got egg production and you can  incorporate these for honey. And then you could choose to include biodomes if that's  a sort of optional extra to increase production of things like mushrooms, herbs, edible flowers,  and more of the tropical fruits that we import, so citrus and other fruits that don't naturally  grow here.  
**[0:13:30-0:13:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:13:30):**  Rachel, key to your approach is the idea that urban spaces, particularly publicly owned  urban spaces, from schools and hospital grounds to other publicly owned land could be opened  up not only for voluntary food production, as you know, we'll quite often see, especially,  you know, those of us that have kids in school, there are bits of the school field that have  been given over to growing some stuff, particularly for educational purposes, but instead for  
**[0:13:55-0:14:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:13:55):**  the creation of micro farm businesses. So actually having these smaller businesses running  on that land, what really do you have in mind?  Rachel  Part of our ethos and the way that we run our practices is definitely about producing  more growers and encouraging small food business. And that could be anything from the use of  
**[0:14:13-0:14:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:14:13):**  urban buildings, so using balconies, rooftops, living walls, green roofs, to use the buildings  for producing food. Also the green spaces, wetlands, schools, and what we're talking  about really is fruit, nuts, veg, herbs, edible flowers, and potentially eggs if you can undergrazed  trees with birds. I'll give you an example. There's a business in Oxford which harvests  fruit from public trees, which are otherwise, you know, the fruit goes to waste, and that's  
**[0:14:41-0:14:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:14:41):**  juiced and then the juice is sold at a farmer's market. So that's a really good example of  a small local business that takes advantage of a currently raised product. But that could  be anything from somebody that has an orchard deciding then to undergrazed it with birds  and selling the eggs. It could be a small local beekeeper that starts to keep beehives  on, you know, community buildings or local buildings on rooftops or in gardens. It doesn't  
**[0:15:06-0:15:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:15:06):**  have to be on a grand scale, but what you end up with is this patchwork of small local  producers that all feed the produce into local food system. And so the idea is that with  a number of local food producers, you can then feed that urban environment, and then  it's replicated in the next urban environment. So whilst there's some exchange of produce,  because as Jeremy says, you know, you can't produce everything everywhere in the country,  
**[0:15:28-0:15:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:15:28):**  so you're going to have regional variances. But actually, you link all of that up and  there's exchange of produce as well as producing enough locally.  I'm fascinated by the idea because I think, and perhaps, you know, do correct me if I'm  wrong, but the impression I get is that an awful lot of the food production that's going  on in cities, standardly across the UK, for example, is voluntary, you know, as people  
**[0:15:50-0:15:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:15:50):**  on allotments. And so the idea of actually creating micro businesses while there are  some already there, actually, that's quite a step change.  Yeah, it is. And I think part of the problem where we've ended up is that a lot of this  is reliant on volunteer labour. And I mean, incredible edible Todmorden, and most incredible  edibles are a prime example of that, you know, we started out as an incredible edible Oxford,  
**[0:16:11-0:16:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:16:11):**  we've, we've transitioned, we're still not for profit, we do do some voluntary work,  but we've tried to make it a sustainable business related to food. And, you know, I think that's  really important to try and switch that away from volunteering. And actually, if you think  about how landscapes maintained, you know, you've got local authorities that go out and  mow lawns on verges 40 times a year, or whatever it is, you've got parks and gardens teams  
**[0:16:35-0:16:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:16:35):**  that maintain shrubbery, there's no reason why that couldn't be maintaining food. Part  of the issue is when you say edible landscape, people imagine, you know, rows of carrots  or something like that. We're not really talking about that what we're talking about is kind  of orchards, forest gardens, where you've got trees, shrubs, underplanting, it's a layered  system, it's minimal maintenance, you don't get a lot of weeding that you have to do,  
**[0:16:56-0:16:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:16:56):**  you don't then have to mow, but you get really high produce.  One of the farmers that we've spoken to previously on the podcast has managed to speak to other  locals who have a global desktop community that rather thanocusing at microgrid, not  trace that you can still talk about these tall mushroom trees, but I guess that could  keep people investing to make a good family.  
**[0:17:42-0:17:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:17:42):**  So it's interesting to refer to this kind of landscape thinking about Cameron and the  treebie way it really is. I thought it was really interesting to get part of. Like, you  say you know, schools gotta have places to collect food for the natural environment,  of hospital grounds and school fields being used for businesses to be run from. I wonder  if you've had conversations with hospital administrators or head teachers about this  
**[0:18:07-0:18:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:18:07):**  sort of thing and what their response has been?  Hannah  Mixed, as always. Of course, there are some interested people and often it's driven by  one passionate person. And unfortunately, if that person leaves, then you're kind of  left with something hanging in the balance. And that's happened quite a lot in our time.  
**[0:18:23-0:18:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:18:23):**  But also there are policies, you know, that sometimes actually prevent rather than not  encouraging actually preventing food production. So I can't give you the name of it. But there  is a policy around at schools where it prevents the growing of food in what should be recreational  area. So you know, there are barriers in policy, whilst we don't have anything that really  supports food production at the moment. Although I wanted to mention the Right to Grow campaign,  
**[0:18:47-0:18:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:18:47):**  which is an incredible campaign for at the moment, which is exactly that about local  authorities passing over land for food production. There are things happening, but there are  also policies working against us, which doesn't help, of course. And it needs somebody passionate  to drive that. And then of course, you've got the budget as a barrier as well, because  we talked to many schools, and we've worked with many different schools, and then finding  
**[0:19:07-0:19:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:19:07):**  budget to actually get this into action is often a barrier.  Toby  And of course, if you're hoping to get micro businesses operational on that site, then  they're going to need to have the confidence that that land is going to be available to  them for a number of years rather than them for a single season. And if that relies on  
**[0:19:24-0:19:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:19:24):**  the motivation of a single individual, then that's always going to be difficult. So perhaps  there is a need for central government to step in at this point and start engaging with  this and directing local councils to take a different approach. And it strikes me that  that's something perhaps that the Urban Agriculture Consortium would be able to help with, Jeremy.  Jeremy  
**[0:19:46-0:19:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:19:46):**  One of the things I'd like to comment on here that we could talk for a long time, just talking  about the use of land in anchor institutions, let's talk about hospitals and doctor surgeries.  Now going back to Todmaden, which is a great example, they had a real battle with the local  GP surgery, who had a modern building surrounded by a car park. Now, this is psychological.  Schools are surrounded by car parks, hospitals are surrounded by car parks, everywhere surrounded  
**[0:20:13-0:20:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:20:13):**  by car parks. Now, if you have that as your primary objective, we have to drive to work  because we live too far away from our workplace. We have to have a car parking space. That's  more important psychologically than anything else to those people. That is an indictment  of our whole system that we've allowed ourselves to be channeled in this particular direction.  So what they did in Todmaden is they went to the GP surgery and said, why can't we plant  
**[0:20:37-0:20:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:20:37):**  some edible plants outside the surgery? Wouldn't that send a good message? So that's a psychological  change that's got to take place everywhere.  For improving health and wellbeing quite apart from anything else.  And just to say to people, you don't have to drive to a supermarket to get food. It's  all around you. So going back to what you're saying, there's a couple of very interesting  
**[0:20:55-0:21:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:20:55):**  policy initiatives. One's called the Milan Urban Food Policy Pact, which was created  in about 2015, 2016, and cities all over the world are signing up to that. On top of that,  there's a Sustainable Food Places criteria for how you go through their system of accreditation,  which is run by the Soil Association. But then in COP26 in Glasgow, our partners in  an organisation called Nourish in Scotland worked really hard to create something called  
**[0:21:20-0:21:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:21:20):**  the Glasgow Food and Climate Declaration. Those are not government policy levels. The  Milan Urban Food Policy Pact is run by the Metropolitan Authority in Milan, and it is  asking local authorities to sign up. The Glasgow Food Declaration is asking local city regions  to sign up. Now their take is that it's a city region policy strategic level that will  make the change, not national government. So we're working, as I said earlier, we were  
**[0:21:47-0:21:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:21:47):**  talking to lots of places about the barriers that they're facing, and they all said we  can't engage with local politics. How do we do it? It's very confrontational. It's very  a bit of their risk averse. So we've set up something called the Policy Influencers Network  group or the PING, and that is an online forum for anybody from a food partnership and or  a local authority and or universities and or, you know, anyone really can come along.  
**[0:22:12-0:22:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:22:12):**  And it's an open discussion forum. It's not come along and beat up your local authority  officer. It's how do we unlock the barriers to local food production? Now, when we started  the PING…  Jason Vale And presumably, sorry to interrupt, but presumably  it's how do we empower those individuals who are within local authorities who want  
**[0:22:29-0:22:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:22:29):**  to make progress but are finding stumbling blocks themselves as local authority staff?  How do we empower them to be able to make the change?  Ian Marber Exactly. So what we've done when we started  the PING last year, with the first meeting, we had about 30 people in no local authority  offices. The most recent one we had 45 people of which 20% were or 25% were from local authorities  
**[0:22:50-0:22:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:22:50):**  across the UK, right from Scotland, Wales, right down to the south west of England. Now,  that's by sitting in the same space, they'd never be able to do it physically, they'd  never get permission to travel. Creating that on Zoom means that anybody from anywhere can  give up an hour of their day and sit in a meeting. They make connections not only with  local people from their local food communities, but they also make connections with other  
**[0:23:10-0:23:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:23:10):**  local authority officers who are trying their best to circumvent all the barriers. That  is priceless. So we've had in the last couple of meetings, we had the chief planner of Leeds  City Council talking about what they're trying to do to unlock the potential through by working  around the planning system. And the last meeting, we had a public health officer from Sheffield  City Council talking about how councillors put through a right to food motion in the  
**[0:23:35-0:23:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:23:35):**  City Council, but tagged on to the bottom of it was the stated aim of increasing urban  food production and protecting urban green space for local food production. Now that  is beginning to turn the tide. Going back to Rachel talking about how do you encourage  new entrants into this very difficult place. There are a number of farm starts as we call  them, and we're working closely with another agency, the Land Workers Alliance, to actually  
**[0:24:02-0:24:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:24:02):**  develop a training package for farm starters. Through our work, and I give all credit to  Land Workers Alliance, this is their baby really, through that work, we've now got five  organisations in the north of England looking to start up farm starts. What they're finding  is let's just do it. We'll try and negotiate for land with the local authority, but let's  just get on and do something practical on the ground.  
**[0:24:24-0:24:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:24:24):**  Rich Let me come back to you just in terms of this  vision of micro businesses on publicly owned land. And I wonder if you're aware of other  key barriers that are in place in terms of making this vision a reality and what your  approach is to unlocking land availability. Rachel  Yeah, so we've talked about policies a lot. Other barriers that we see are access to skills.  
**[0:24:46-0:24:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:24:46):**  So somebody might not necessarily know how to grow food in the most productive way. And  of course, access to land. Now, similarly to what Jeremy just mentioned, we've got a  food growers programme, which we run on land within the city, which gives people access  to our training on growing food and starting a micro food business, as well as them having  access to a plot of land which they can use them to grow food. And then we have links  
**[0:25:10-0:25:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:25:10):**  with other organisations who have surplus land in inverted commas, which is currently  costing them money to manage that those learners can then in a successional programme, then  go on to farm or manage to produce food that then enters the local food system. So we've  developed that programme specifically to teach people all the key skills about growing food  and then having access to land. And so that's really important within a city. And of course,  
**[0:25:36-0:25:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:25:36):**  that's then replicable wherever that wanted to take place. What's really important is  producing these growers who can grow food with care to the soil, with care to the environment  and producing really good quality produce that then enters the local food system.  Jason Vale,  Territory  
**[0:26:36-0:26:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:26:36):**  so vulnerable with our current food system that actually by producing more locally, you're  producing not only kind of personal resilience in terms of people earning an income, but  also that urban environment, whatever that is, is creating its own resilience, both economically  because people are in work and being paid for produce, but you are creating a value  around local food. And that's exactly what's been demonstrated in Togmeden.  
**[0:26:58-0:27:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:26:58):**  Jeremy, the challenge here is in creating meaningful opportunities for people to get  out and start producing food. And a lot of that comes back to the availability of land  and who owns that land. You have a proposal, I think, that would help to unblock that particular  challenge.  Jeremy  
**[0:27:30-0:27:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:27:30):**  at City Farms, we set up something called the Community Land Advisory Service. And the  point of that was to create models of occupational lease models that we could give to the local  people who wanted land to say, look, you can produce this, an agreement with a landowner,  which guarantees them this, this and this. And this is, these are the terms of reference.  But what you, as you said, quite rightly earlier on, you have to have 25 years access or five  
**[0:27:52-0:27:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:27:52):**  years, you know, you can't do it growing in a year, you've got to have a long term thing.  Community Land Advisory Service is still running a little bit in Wales, but they've sort of  run out of money. But one of the newer ideas that's coming up our agenda, and we're trying  to get some money to try it out is to use community land trusts to take land into common  ownership, if you like, and common management. Now, community land trusts, not something  
**[0:28:14-0:28:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:28:14):**  I know a lot about, because it's predominantly about housing, but this is tried and tested  model, which local authorities, local communities can use to take land from a local authority  portfolio and manage it for community good. Now, we're testing out with Bristol Community  Land Trust, the idea of that land trust also taking land for community food and their enterprise  food growing. We haven't got very far, but I'd say it's got some resonance and it's got  
**[0:28:40-0:28:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:28:40):**  some traction with the local authority. And we're also beginning to talk to the West of  England Combined Authority, which is four metropolitan authorities. And seeing if that  model might be something that we can prototype, if you like, in and around Bristol. Bristol  City Council itself has quite an interesting policy called the One City Plan. And that  has, as a stated objective, to create food growing opportunities in every council ward  
**[0:29:05-0:29:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:29:05):**  across the city. So it's not just in one place, it's everywhere. And going back to how this  patchwork of projects and produce might develop, Bristol is a great example. It's quite a big  city for 500,000 people. And then right in the middle of city, you've got a very dense  urban area, but you've got a park with a demonstration plot, actually built by, not by incredible,  but actually built by the City Council Allotment Officer right in the middle of the city so  
**[0:29:29-0:29:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:29:29):**  people can take produce from there. Going outwards, you've got a couple of city farms  within dense urban population areas, lots of allotments left over, well started probably  around the First World War. Going outwards, you've got various micro businesses, there's  one called Purple Pact, which does a veg box scheme. Going a bit further out, you've got  a project called Sims Hill and another one called Grow Wilder now. So it's a sort of  
**[0:29:50-0:29:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:29:50):**  biodiversity nature reserve, but with food growing. So it sort of crosses over all the  borders. If we could imagine what cities were like in, like 100 years ago, 1940s, all cities  were surrounded by market gardens, which fed directly into the city. And that's, in a sense,  all we need to do is re-replicate, recreate that, but using very efficient, modern regenerative  techniques, so sustainable growing, which actually regenerates the quality of the soil  
**[0:30:16-0:30:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:30:16):**  rather than depleting it.  Jason Vale, Head of the City of London, and of course, you know, through things like the  Policy Influencers Network Group, even if there's a struggle in one particular part  of the country to initiate a particular project, because there is this network and this sharing  of peer-to-peer information, it allows people to learn from each other to de-risk those  
**[0:30:34-0:30:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:30:34):**  challenges. It's a slow process to start, but actually will gain its own momentum, hopefully  over time, so that these things start to flourish at some point and pop up all over the country.  Ian Marber, Head of the City of London, and of course, I very much hope so. I mentioned  earlier on, I used to work to promote cycling. You could say, well, I remember very clearly  talking at an event in Cardiff years ago and saying, you know, it's like turning the super  
**[0:30:55-0:30:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:30:55):**  tank around. It takes two miles to slow the thing down, and then you've got to nudge it  around a corner. Well, this, the whole economic system that we're working in has been established  in since the 1950s and 1960s, the whole consumer paradigm, as it's called, and it's falling  apart quite clearly in front of our eyes. It's not fit for purpose. It's leaving people  without enough food to eat, even though they're working. You know, there's something pretty  
**[0:31:16-0:31:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:31:16):**  fundamentally wrong. Trying to patch it up is not going to help. So what we've got to  do is have a new mindset. Now, the analogy with cycling is 40 years ago, people thought  you were mad to try and promote cycling in an urban area. Now, the trajectory is that  everywhere will have to accommodate cycling and at the expense of the private car. In  our arena, this whole notion of breaking out of the global supply system and the supermarket  
**[0:31:40-0:31:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:31:40):**  domination of our lives is going to take a long time. If you like, we're pioneering a  system that hopefully will be in place in 20 years from now.  So let's go into that mindset change. And mindset change is something we frequently  talk about on this programme. But in this case, it's about urban landowners and local  government valuing the opportunities that urban food production brings. Now, we're familiar  
**[0:32:03-0:32:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:32:03):**  with the idea of natural capital, but being involved in a food producing community in  an urban area presumably creates social capital as well. And we've talked about some of this  already in the programme, but there's a value which presumably can be calculated both in  terms of providing better nutrition, but also improved wellbeing, social integration and  skills creation. So how do you go about demonstrating the social capital benefits to increase support  
**[0:32:29-0:32:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:32:29):**  of organisations like local authorities?  One of the fundamental problems that we have is that everything has to be capitalised and  justified in terms of economic return. Whereas I'd say it's pretty obvious if you have a  community project which engages people who take pride in their local area, who get to  meet people who do physical exercise outside whilst growing food and learning about natural  
**[0:32:51-0:32:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:32:51):**  environment, it's obvious it's got a lot of social benefits. But if you want to go really  technical, you can do something called a social return on investment, which is a very long-winded  economic analysis of how much, if you put a pound in, how much do you get back? And  if I remember rightly, the only one I can remember we did was one with Gorgie City Farm  in Edinburgh years ago, and it turned out the ratio was something like seven to one.  
**[0:33:13-0:33:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:33:13):**  So that for every pound you put in, you've got seven pounds worth of value back. But,  and this is important, going back to, you just mentioned the nutrition of food, the  interface between recognition of a need to improve resilience between planning departments  and public health departments in local authorities is the crucial place, I think. Because public  health can legitimately get involved in talking about food and public health wellbeing. That's  
**[0:33:40-0:33:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:33:40):**  the slightly ajar door that we think we can start pushing out.  Jason Vale,  And of course, what we were talking about earlier with Rachel around that, the reduction  of maintenance costs, because people are actively managing that land for their own micro businesses.  You know, there are ways of quantifying the money that's saved in order to perhaps inspire  
**[0:33:59-0:34:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:33:59):**  these cash strap councils to take more of an interest as well. So that's really interesting.  There is this sort of combination of being able to start to define costs that have been  removed, our social capital, as well as that natural capital creation. And all of this  goes towards making the case for more land being used for food production in city areas  and urban areas. Rachel, one of the areas that we haven't yet touched on, but which  
**[0:34:24-0:34:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:34:24):**  a lot of people will think about in terms of urban food is the value of high tech solutions.  So turning over subways, warehouses, and old power stations to high tech systems like hydroponics.  What role do you think high tech urban food should play?  Rachel Smith,  For me, it's last resort because we need to be thinking about reducing our carbon footprint,  
**[0:34:44-0:34:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:34:44):**  not thinking about new ways to use extra power and extra water and resources to create food.  All of these sort of case studies and research have proven that it's entirely possible to  use building rooftops, urban spaces, you know, stocking, growing, etc, to produce more than  enough food in, you know, in natural outdoors conditions, you know, where there's real sunlight.  I think if all of that is done, and we still can't produce enough food, then yeah, maybe  
**[0:35:11-0:35:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:35:11):**  consider it. But for me, it's absolutely last resort, because we can feed a population with  efficient design and good land use.  Jason Vale,  Is there anything wrong with doing systems like hydroponics alongside the kind of food  production that you're interested in?  
**[0:35:26-0:35:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:35:26):**  Rachel Smith  There's nothing wrong with it. It just uses a lot of energy and it's not very natural,  you know, it's often not with natural sunlight. So then you're bringing in UV lights or whatever  you need to kind of keep the plants alive. You're having to use a lot of water because  you're having to cycle water inside a building because you've got no access to rainfall.  
**[0:35:43-0:35:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:35:43):**  It's just moving food another step away from, you know, we're already disconnected from  our food. But then if we start producing food in white suits in a building, it's not, in  my opinion, really solving that problem of being connected to our food because you're  not outside getting vitamin D hands in the soil. You know, it's not really giving us  any of the benefits that we're talking about here with food production.  
**[0:36:04-0:36:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:36:04):**  Jason Vale  But of course, these sorts of projects are attractive to investors and to corporations.  And Jeremy, I wonder why you think it is that there's so much more investment that's centred  around high tech, urban food factories than around good community projects, micro businesses  with high social and natural capital delivery.  
**[0:36:25-0:36:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:36:25):**  Jeremy  I was making profits out of installing the systems. I did visit a very expensive hydroponic  plant in Berlin a few years ago, when we went to an international conference, but back in  the days that you did that sort of thing. And that was a million and a half euros of  investments and they were going to produce X numbers of plants and X numbers of different  
**[0:37:00-0:37:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:37:00):**  varieties of fish. It very quickly run out of steam and was producing one sort of fish  and losing loads of basil, probably more basil than Berlin needed. But here we go. However,  having said that, there is a space for what we would call assisted growing and poly tunnels  and greenhouses are part of a traditional growing system. And that is quite sensible  things to have. And particularly the further north you go, it gets colder. And there are  
**[0:37:24-0:37:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:37:24):**  systems in place where you can take heat from a neighbourhood heating system and feed that  into heating greenhouses. So there are elements of tech which should be harnessed and should  be used. But big business is always seeking ways to make the next bit of profit. They're  not interested in social capital and they're not interested in community welfare.  Rachel, Starbucks is essentially a coffee shop. It's a coffee shop which has been replicated  
**[0:37:53-0:37:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:37:53):**  and replicated and replicated. I wonder if you think that there are opportunities for  investors to invest in the sort of systems that you're talking about, to scale a micro  business so that you have a patchwork of these micro enterprises that are creating profit  for investors as well as the people who are working and growing in those environments.  Yeah, without a doubt. I mean, you've got the training elements, you know, where you  
**[0:38:21-0:38:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:38:21):**  can have people coming through your door that are learning how to grow food in an efficient  way. You've got surplus produce that is then entering the food system and being sold. You've  got access to land. You know, if people like we've been talking about people renting essentially  land off the local authority, there's no reason why that couldn't be a private landowner instead.  So there are multiple ways that other people can get involved and support that and to sort  
**[0:38:46-0:38:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:38:46):**  of monetise, dirty word, what we're talking about.  But investment and return is going to be an important part of upscaling the sort of thing  that we're talking about, isn't it? Sure. But I mean, you know, we used to create  all of our own or gather all of our own food. So, you know, our food systems just moved  so far away. And I guess that's why I say it's a bit of a dirty word, because we should  
**[0:39:06-0:39:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:39:06):**  all have the right of access to fresh and healthy food, which is what we had, you know,  hundreds, thousands of years ago, because we were all responsible for our own food.  And that power has kind of been taken away from us to people that want to just make money  from serving us our food. So it's kind of a lot about taking back a lot of that power  and resilience. I mean, I don't want to make it really this particular point about politics,  
**[0:39:28-0:39:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:39:28):**  but it is important. And, you know, we should all have some right to grow our own food,  whether that's to sell for an extra income or just for our own household, you know, and  a lot of people don't have that. And of course, in the old days, most people  were growing at least some spuds, you know, in their gardens and that sort of thing. So  it's getting back to that idea that we take some personal responsibility for the food  
**[0:39:49-0:39:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:39:49):**  that we're consuming, at the same time as allowing as much space as possible to be given  over to, whether it's volunteer groups or micro businesses or indeed, you know, larger  patchworks of businesses that have larger investment models.  We're coming towards the end of the programme, Jeremy, and I wonder if you were to pick out  one UK project that you think really exemplifies what you and the Urban Agriculture Consortium  
**[0:40:14-0:40:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:40:14):**  are trying to achieve. What would it be? Jeremy Carr- And I would say that I don't  want to pick out a project because that's a bit sort of unfair on others, but I think  a generic model of a farm starts taking on land which is maybe split between two sites,  perhaps an inner city site and a peri-urban site. So you've got an inner city demonstration  project that could be an existing city farm or a new one using some volunteer community  
**[0:40:38-0:40:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:40:38):**  engagement, some community investment. We haven't mentioned share offers, you know,  community share offers are a good idea or veg box schemes, community supported agriculture  type model. Taking volunteers, providing skills training, providing an income for one or  two head growers, because you do need somebody to actually manage these things. But then  actually having investment from the local authority and actually that model being recognised  
**[0:41:02-0:41:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:41:02):**  by the local authority of value to its well being across the piece. So that generic sort  of model of patchwork farming, incorporating lots of existing parts of this growing system,  including allotments, including community gardens, including all the schools, but it  being seen as part of a continuous growing landscape. So I think that farm start model,  plus the policy influencing side of things is what we're going to be trying to work on.  
**[0:41:28-0:41:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:41:28):**  And I'm really hopeful that we're going to be able to start something like this going  in the East Midlands. So watch that space.  Jason Vale And Rachel, just finally, could you tell me  what you think the key ingredients are of a really fantastic urban micro farm business?  Rachel Smith We definitely need the skills. And that's  
**[0:41:44-0:41:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:41:44):**  something that we're working on efficient design. So using that land to the best produce  and productivity levels, and then routes to market, which includes having that local customer  base, you have to have those routes to market, whether that's commercial through restaurants  and cafes, or direct to customer, and getting those networks set up so that businesses can  pass their produce on.  
**[0:42:03-0:42:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:42:03):**  Jason Vale Fantastic. That's been so interesting to  to dip into this world of urban agriculture. And unfortunately, that's all we've got time  for. I'd like to thank my guests, Rachel Hammond from edge landscaping.uk and Jeremy Iles from  urban agriculture.org.uk. If you've enjoyed listening, please come back and listen to  more. Tell your friends, like us, review us and share our links. Farmgate is funded by  
**[0:42:28-0:42:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Urban-food-e1kqtqq#t=0:42:28):**  San Calpa and you can join the conversation on Twitter by searching for Farmgate podcast.  I've been Finn low Kustain. Bye for now.  