### Farm Gate  (2020-08-09)
**[0:00:00-0:00:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to Farmgate, I'm Finn Logue-Kustein.  FAI Farms has worked with global food brands to embed sustainability at the heart of their  supply chains for more than 20 years.  Ever since I first came across the company in 2006, I've had a huge amount of respect  for the company itself and its objectives, and for the people behind the name.  
**[0:00:25-0:00:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:00:25):**  And while campaigning NGOs can wish things were different and advocate for change, FAI  can and has been working with big companies to help them understand the challenges of  sustainability and to drive change throughout their businesses.  As we look forward to a future disrupted by global warming, biodiversity loss, population  growth, widespread social and financial inequity, increasing antibiotic resistance and of course  
**[0:00:50-0:00:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:00:50):**  pandemic, FAI's role remains vital.  While the FAI brand has remained constant, the company itself has existed in different  forms, most recently as part of Benchmark Holdings, PLC.  Recently that changed again.  There's been a management buyout and now Oystein Tawson, previously the company director,  
**[0:01:09-0:01:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:01:09):**  is the new chief executive.  Carly Scott is the new director of sustainable operations.  Welcome both.  I'd like to start with just asking you to go into a bit of background for me.  What is FAI Farms and why is it so important, do you think?  
**[0:01:25-0:01:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:01:25):**  Hi Finlay, thanks so much.  So FAI originally stood for the Food Animal Initiative.  We were founded in 2000 by Ruth Leighton, Roland Bonney and Malcolm Pi.  These three had a vision really to create an equitable and sustainable food system.  And our work is grounded really in bringing both practical experience and scientific expertise  
**[0:01:47-0:01:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:01:47):**  to bring about new solutions to some of the challenges that we have within our supply  chain.  And when we talk about those challenges, what we're looking to do is create food systems  really that are always considering the three E's.  So sustainably economically, sustainable in terms of environment and also sustainable  
**[0:02:04-0:02:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:02:04):**  from an ethics perspective as well.  So considering both animal welfare and human ethics.  And we've worked with all levels of the supply chain for many years now, from farmers and  producers to food processors and suppliers and right up to food service providers and  retailers coming up with new solutions for how to develop a more sustainable supply base.  
**[0:02:26-0:02:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:02:26):**  It's interesting that you mentioned the way that FAI Farms really began as an outfit that  was particularly interested in embedding good farm animal welfare outcomes into the supply  chain.  And it's broadened that out so that it's much more about sustainability in the round.  Are you able just to sort of briefly describe for me what the link is between farm animal  
**[0:02:46-0:02:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:02:46):**  welfare and overall sustainability?  I think animal welfare sits right at the heart, I think, of a sustainable food system.  In some ways, it's a bit of a litmus test of what is acceptable, what appeals to consumers,  what sits right with producers.  It's also one of those areas that I think a lot of sustainability frameworks leave out.  
**[0:03:11-0:03:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:03:11):**  The people, planet, profit type approaches leave out the animals.  Those are a critical aspect of many of our food chains.  And that's why we've always talked about ethics, ethics being the guiding light of how we treat  both people but also the animals that we depend on.  So why is it, do you think, that FAI Farms and the role that it has is so important?  
**[0:03:34-0:03:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:03:34):**  It seems to me that there's quite a unique element about the way that FAI works and the  way that it's almost an interface between society and society's wants and demands and  businesses themselves.  But it does this in a technical, scientifically robust way, which is sometimes lacking from  NGO, you know, we want a better world sort of narrative.  
**[0:03:58-0:04:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:03:58):**  We try to do three things at the same time.  So we are purpose driven, we're driven people, we believe in a better food system, higher  welfare regenerative practices, and we want to push that.  But we're also at the same time science based and science driven.  And we have scientists on our staff, we deploy the scientific method in everything we do.  
**[0:04:22-0:04:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:04:22):**  We're hyper focused on data and analyzing data and understanding the insight that the  data can tell us.  And then finally, we're client focused, we're client driven.  We want to make sure that we always help, you know, solve the problems that our clients  have and deliver business value to them.  
**[0:04:40-0:04:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:04:40):**  So yeah, we are different in the sense that we're trying to hold those three purposes,  if you like, at the same time.  And that generates a sort of continuous internal dialogue of what is right.  And how do you balance those three things?  And how do you unapologetically do all those three things at the same time?  
**[0:05:02-0:05:06](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:05:02):**  And Farmgate, this podcast itself is part of that dialogue.  It's you know, partly an internal dialogue that's spilling over into the outside world  as well.  Where Farmwell and FAI Farms together are producing this podcast and hoping that the  conversations that we have together, where we're reaching out and talking to people that  
**[0:05:20-0:05:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:05:20):**  we're interested in, are then of interest to the wider world as well.  So that's a bit about FAI Farms, where it came from, why it's important, its role within  the world.  So you've gone through this management buyout, this MBO process.  How did that come about?  
**[0:05:36-0:05:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:05:36):**  And where are you going now?  What's next?  We're really taking control of our own destiny with this process.  Having been part of a bigger group for many years, we now have the opportunity to take  the company forward into a new era, a new chapter, making sure that the people who do  
**[0:05:55-0:06:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:05:55):**  the work and who love the work are also now the ones that own and run that business.  Through the process of setting ourselves up again, we've built an excellent new management  team.  We have really done the hard thinking around, you know, how do we build on the legacy that  we have of our sort of charismatic founders, as well as create a new path for ourselves  
**[0:06:20-0:06:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:06:20):**  in terms of both how we want to operate internally, how we want to make decisions, as well as  how we, you know, how we kind of express that into the wider world.  And Kali, what do you think the central mission of FAI will be going forward now that you  have this new independence where you can kind of set the trajectory for FAI's future yourselves?  You've got that new team together.  
**[0:06:45-0:06:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:06:45):**  You yourself have stepped up.  You're now the director of sustainable operations.  You know, it's a really big role.  What's going to be central to your mission?  Our mission now, we sort of frame as practical solutions for climate and food security.  
**[0:06:57-0:07:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:06:57):**  And I think whilst we feel that much of the work that we've done in the past will continue  to carry on our focus and our way of working across the supply chain and using that balance  of practical strategic thinking and scientific understanding will continue.  What is changing, I think, is the pressures that we're under globally and the focus that  we have as a society on where we're going in the future.  
**[0:07:19-0:07:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:07:19):**  So it's really using this opportunity to bring more kind of pace and reach to the work that  we'll be doing and bringing new ideas to the forum on solutions in order to achieve that  for our future, really, for stabilizing the climate, repairing biodiversity and bringing  food security and equitable supply chains.  There's one shift that we, you know, that we see and that we want to help drive, which  
**[0:07:42-0:07:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:07:42):**  I think this opportunity helps us do, is that mindset shift from maybe sustainability to  regeneration, if you like.  That's something that we're passionately involved with both on our own farm, but also obviously  something that we've discussed many times on Farmgate and other forums.  Essentially how do we become a force to sort of help businesses, farmers go through that  
**[0:08:07-0:08:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:08:07):**  mindset change of thinking about not just doing less bad when we produce food, but actually  generating goods and doing good through that process, which is really embodied in that  term regenerative food production.  So that's a really laudable mission.  But there, Carly, you referred to some really big ambitions there.  
**[0:08:27-0:08:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:08:27):**  And Oystone has sort of locked that up in this transition from sustainability and, you  know, there are many definitions of what that is, and then to regeneration, which is something  I think, although again, there are lots of definitions, I think we can all agree that  it's something which is more dynamic about the change that's being embedded.  You talked about individual farmers right up to big companies.  
**[0:08:51-0:08:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:08:51):**  And so I think it might be helpful for listeners if you could just kind of give us an idea  of who some of your clients are, because I said at the beginning, the changes that you  make, the changes that FAI embeds are big because you work with big names.  And that presumably then somehow trickles down from those big name brands to the producers  that are working and supplying them.  
**[0:09:13-0:09:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:09:13):**  Yeah, I think it's fair to say that our impact is definitely through our clients.  Since the very beginning, we've worked with McDonald's in the UK at the global level.  We've had a very long lasting relationship with Marks and Spencer's in the UK.  And from that, we've also we've expanded into packaged goods companies, chocolate companies,  variety of different retailers and food producers.  
**[0:09:40-0:09:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:09:40):**  But it's a big role call, isn't it?  When you've got Nestle, Unilever, Ferrero, I mean, lots of big names you've got you guys  have got some influence.  True.  And that is where our that's where our impact is.  
**[0:09:52-0:09:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:09:52):**  So I think where we're different is obviously we can't tell anybody what to do.  We don't have any coercive power, if you like.  And I think that's where it goes back to those three kind of goals I talked about earlier  is how do we how do we inspire our clients to do the right things, to make the changes  that we think and the science would tell us are the necessary changes and really inspire,  
**[0:10:17-0:10:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:10:17):**  you know, inspire that mindset in that is an area that we keep coming back to.  How do we how do we get people to really commit to this themselves as opposed to doing it?  Because they're being told to do it or they're being pressured by by external groups.  I think that's where that's where our role is a bit different.  We are we are trying to work with those big companies to help them see in a see the opportunity  
**[0:10:40-0:10:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:10:40):**  and see the reasons to do the right thing.  And Carly, you were, I think, a brand manager in the past.  And now you've stepped up your experience, therefore, is really important in terms of  understanding the nuts and bolts of the day to day of how you influence an organisation,  the sort of relationship that it's important to build up with them so that they they trust  
**[0:10:59-0:11:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:10:59):**  you enough when it comes to making some sort of bigger and possibly slightly riskier decisions.  Yeah, I think that's true.  And I think one of the most rewarding part really, if the MBO for many of us is that,  you know, we as a team will continue working together.  We're also working together in partnership with many of these very engaged and motivated  
**[0:11:17-0:11:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:11:17):**  individuals within companies and organisations that we've been working with for many years  that are prepared to make some of these these steps and decisions.  And that does take time to build up that level of trust and to bring about those changes.  As a company, how do you embed those sort of, you know, those ethical ideas that you're  trying to share with the rest of the world that you're trying to encourage in other companies  
**[0:11:38-0:11:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:11:38):**  and other businesses?  How do you embed those within within your own business?  So we're a strong sort of values led company that's been there in the past.  But I think in FAI sort of becoming its own entity, I guess it's given us the opportunity  really to reflect and initiate upon any changes on our internal operations or the way we work  
**[0:11:56-0:11:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:11:56):**  as a business for the future going forward.  So that would include anything from, you know, our culture as a business, as a team and how  we work together, as well as how we make decisions as a business to shape the wider world that  we're in.  I think for me, it starts with having that openness within the within the company and  
**[0:12:13-0:12:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:12:13):**  within the management group, always discussing our values, always discussing our mission,  reminding people of why we do what we do and bringing that into the kind of everyday decision  making.  So it creates a it creates an open and lively, if you like, and an ongoing dialogue about  what is the right thing to do.  
**[0:12:36-0:12:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:12:36):**  And I think trying to hold those three principles in your head at the same time, the purpose  driven, the science led and the client value piece together is what helps guide us.  It's not that we have a set of answers that we, you know, we apply in order to be ethical.  It's much more an exercise, if you like.  It's a practice.  
**[0:12:56-0:13:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:12:56):**  Boyston, you've written about conscious leadership recently.  And I wonder if you could just talk very briefly about what you think the difference is between  a leader and a boss.  Yeah.  So the concept of conscious leadership is something that it really juxtaposes it against  
**[0:13:14-0:13:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:13:14):**  sort of formal authority and bossiness.  So a lot of people might think of bossiness in terms of leadership.  So it's it's using formal authority to tell people what to do or coerce people to do a  particular thing.  Conscious leadership is more about soliciting that internal motivation in people and clients  
**[0:13:34-0:13:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:13:34):**  in, you know, in stakeholders so that they do the right thing for the right reasons.  So it's really, you know, working.  You know, it's a principle that we practice internally.  We have participatory kind of decision making.  We involve people in the in the decisions that we're making, which means that you have  
**[0:13:53-0:13:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:13:53):**  to you know, you really have to explain why you need to focus on the purpose of why we  should make this or that decision in order to solicit that commitment from your from  your colleagues.  And that is what we're trying to also practice with our with our clients.  It's interesting.  
**[0:14:08-0:14:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:14:08):**  I mean, you talk about you talked earlier on about the fact that, you know, FAI isn't  a food producer.  You don't sell food yourselves.  And so as a consultancy business, it is your role to lead and to and to bring your clients  into themselves, into a leadership position, ideally, but to help them to change the way  
**[0:14:26-0:14:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:14:26):**  that they work.  And it sounds like in the same way that you're trying to work outside the organisation, you're  trying to embed a similar process inside the organisation as well, which must be, you know,  an exciting environment to work within.  And I'm just struck because, you know, we've talked about some of the big names there that  
**[0:14:42-0:14:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:14:42):**  you're working with, whether McDonald's or Nestle, you know, and and there, you know,  there were challenges that NGOs and the media have picked out with those companies and with  many others.  So how do you deal as a business that has a very strong ethical foundation when ethical  conflicts or contradictions arise between what your own business ethics are and perhaps  
**[0:15:04-0:15:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:15:04):**  what the client's needs or their shareholder needs are and where those appear to be at  odds?  I think that there's always, you know, I think that is the definition of ethics.  There's always, you know, there's always, always tension.  For us, it starts with the it starts with the motivational, the motivation piece.  
**[0:15:22-0:15:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:15:22):**  So we've always said from the very beginning that we work with anybody who's willing to  improve.  So it's about the direction of travel.  We know very well that everybody can't be at the same point because their starting points  are different.  
**[0:15:36-0:15:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:15:36):**  So there's no point in judging clients or potential clients for where they're at at  this point, as long as we can kind of agree on a on a direction of improvement.  So that's that's really where we are at.  And I think that's the that is the hard business of change, to be honest.  It's sort of accepting that you're sometimes in an uncomfortable position, but knowing  
**[0:15:57-0:16:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:15:57):**  that we are heading in a in a direction that we all agree with and that we believe in.  So that's really where we where we start, where we start our work.  And a lot of our engagements with clients will will essentially start with that type  of, you know, vision, work.  So where are you?  
**[0:16:12-0:16:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:16:12):**  Where do you want to be?  Where are you now?  And where do you want to be?  And how do we how do we then get there?  Because to your point earlier, everybody doesn't want to be a leader.  
**[0:16:20-0:16:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:16:20):**  A lot of people, a lot of people just want to do better than they're doing now.  And that's cool.  Carly, I hear what Oystein says, and that's you know, that's that's the chief executive's  pitch.  And I know that you are somebody who in your own life is is very active in in campaigning  
**[0:16:38-0:16:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:16:38):**  on climate change, that it's really important to you.  Are there untouchables out there?  Are there companies, do you think that it just that they're kind of too beyond the pale?  You can't work with them?  That's a really good question.  
**[0:16:49-0:16:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:16:49):**  And I think probably one that we we continually have these conversations internally as to  where is the line between, I guess you could say greenwashing and wanting to make that  step towards that final vision.  And I sort of Toystone's point, really, I think our role really is to stay grounded  in the evidence, stay grounded in the science and help companies find that vision for the  
**[0:17:09-0:17:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:17:09):**  future.  But we're also there as a critical friend.  And when we feel that a particular project or a line of work that we're working on isn't  going to bring about the necessary changes or it's it's not in the wider greatest interest.  We also feel that it's not even in the brand or the partner that we're working with.  
**[0:17:27-0:17:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:17:27):**  It's not in their interest either to do projects or work that isn't fulfilling of that greater  sort of mission that we're working to.  So there are times when we would push back and say this isn't the right direction to  go in and we feel that this is this is a better route.  But our doors effectively remain open for everyone.  
**[0:17:43-0:17:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:17:43):**  We want to have that dialogue even when they're difficult conversations.  So there's been lots of change over the course of the last few months as you've been going  through the management buyout, but probably quite a lot is also going to remain the same.  Is anything really going to change in the short term for the clients in terms of what  they will see or will the services and operations that you provide, will they just essentially  
**[0:18:06-0:18:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:18:06):**  carry on as before?  So it's an immediate there's no changes to the to the way we work with the same team  and the same sort of level and quality of the work that we've always provided.  But in the longer term, this is really an opportunity for us to build areas of the business  that we feel have the greatest potential to to bring about change.  
**[0:18:24-0:18:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:18:24):**  So we'll be looking to expand the reach and impact of our work, bring new ideas, new collaborations  and new opportunities to the fore to do that.  The management buyout itself has been talked about, I guess, for nine or 10 months, but  the hard graft has happened over the last five or six months.  And of course, coincidentally, there's been a pandemic at the same time.  
**[0:18:44-0:18:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:18:44):**  Oyston, you are in New York.  Murillo, another director, is in Brazil.  The rest of you are in the UK.  How's that worked?  Yeah, this has been a process almost entirely done virtually.  
**[0:18:57-0:19:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:18:57):**  So as you say, we have a group of managers who are in Brazil, US, UK and Norway dealing  with obviously the counterpart, which is also in a few different locations.  Everything has been done on Zoom.  It's a virtual MBO.  I think we probably felt it, we felt it a little bit at the at the sort of, you know,  
**[0:19:22-0:19:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:19:22):**  at the signing point where, you know, you maybe were expecting some sort of a celebration,  but it happened in the middle of the night.  And most people were, you know, in bed with sleeping partners next to them.  So there's maybe a little bit of an anticlimactic Zoom experience right there.  But I think it's also shown us the opportunity of that of that type of technology.  
**[0:19:44-0:19:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:19:44):**  We've really invested in building a community, building a management culture, taking the  time to talk to each other as a group, as individuals.  And I have to say it hasn't, sure, it's happened on the screen rather than in a room, but it's  been equally as meaningful.  And we've managed to create those human connections through honest dialogue and honest conversations,  
**[0:20:08-0:20:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:20:08):**  bringing in a coach with us as well to sort of help facilitate how do you build that kind  of culture and collaboration virtually.  And I think we're on a good path.  And Carly, there's a degree to which that's sort of the way that FAI has had to work over  the course of the last few years, the last decade or so anyway, that, you know, your  
**[0:20:25-0:20:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:20:25):**  clients are around the world.  So actually, it's not that different a way of working.  Do you think as we come out of lockdown, as the travel restrictions are eased, do you  think that you're likely to go back to a situation where you're trying to get people in a room  together on a kind of monthly basis?  
**[0:20:42-0:20:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:20:42):**  Or do you think that you'll continue with this virtual approach?  Yeah, so I think, you know, we're in the same situation that many companies have been in  working more remotely now.  But we're also more familiar with this, as you say, from, you know, how we work as a  team, we're a global based team, and we have partners in the industry and clients all over  
**[0:20:58-0:20:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:20:58):**  the world as well.  And I feel there's enormous opportunity now for us as a whole society, really, to step  away from some of the practices that we have that are damaging for the environment.  There's many ways I think that we can continue to work together collaboratively from a remote  basis.  
**[0:21:14-0:21:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:21:14):**  So building that community and that trust between individuals is really possible.  And Oistan spoke to a number of the different ways that we do that in our meetings.  So with, you know, check ins at the start of meetings, you know, messenger or video  calls that are just for kind of team building purposes, or for short conversations, using  technology more effectively, really, to make sure we continue to connect as a team.  
**[0:21:35-0:21:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:21:35):**  I love the idea of those sort of management games.  I remember one where it was a trust exercise, you got to stand on a mantelpiece and everybody  catches you when they fall off.  When you fall off, I'd love to see that on zoom, that would be an interesting experience.  So maybe it's just it's the celebrations that we've got to get right.  
**[0:21:53-0:21:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:21:53):**  I think in terms of what you know, what will change.  I mean, for me personally, I don't hope I go back to the level of travel I did before  COVID.  And I think it's, you know, I think what COVID has done is open everybody's eyes to what  like basically any business can be done virtually.  
**[0:22:10-0:22:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:22:10):**  So the burden of proof, if you like the making the case for travel has absolutely been been  raised.  I think the other part for us is we talked about it earlier, that kind of the need for  the mindset change in order to drive the type of improvements and changes that we believe  in within our services.  
**[0:22:26-0:22:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:22:26):**  The one thing that has changed through this process is that we have brought with us a  suite of digital education courses and a team that works on digital education because we  see a critical part of the regenerative shift is the mindset shift and it's the knowledge  that's needed to implement those practices that will you know, the demand for that we  believe will just rise.  
**[0:22:48-0:22:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:22:48):**  So that's it.  That's a new kind of feather if you like to our hat since the since the MBO and obviously  again with COVID something that's very opportune.  That was a nice segue towards the end there from the internal to the external back to  regenerative agriculture and in the same way that the management buyout took place under  
**[0:23:06-0:23:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:23:06):**  lockdown and that you've had your own experiences with that.  There's also been a long and ongoing debate about food systems and food security linked  into food availability during the lockdown period.  Do you think that COVID has told us anything new about food and food systems or has it  simply given us a new lens through which to see things that we already knew before?  
**[0:23:30-0:23:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:23:30):**  I think it's maybe the latter.  I think eating and sharing food is such a sort of universal human experience and the  pandemic has really sort of brought the importance of food to light.  A lot of people I know are now preparing and sharing meals or even sort of growing food  at home on a daily basis and it's been a real sort of a focus of their days and comfort  
**[0:23:48-0:23:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:23:48):**  in recent months with all of the challenges that have been going on with the pandemic.  I feel that the disruption caused to food distribution networks and the normal ways  that we access our food has really highlighted the fragility of food systems and the crucial  job that many people growing food and providing our food play.  I would agree it's exposed vulnerabilities in the food system to a new degree and I guess  
**[0:24:12-0:24:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:24:12):**  for our business we also hope that it will have strengthened the appetite for building  resilience and for investing in improvements, whether that is at the farmer level, ensuring  that they can make a proper living through the processing stages and reducing the vulnerabilities  by building in more resilience.  One of the things that seems to have shown to me is the importance of diversity, that  
**[0:24:36-0:24:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:24:36):**  just putting all of your eggs into the retailer basket just isn't good enough and there's  been a real shift back towards more community-based food.  I mean you alluded to that, Carly, but also sort of village shops or smaller shops in  towns and farm shops and people have actually sought this out and I think not least because  with lots of people on furlough they've had time at home to actually do some cooking,  
**[0:25:00-0:25:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:25:00):**  which has been quite new and quite unique for a lot of people.  They've not had the time in their lives to experiment with stuff and so that's probably  been really beneficial as well.  I think the coronavirus pandemic and the challenges that we're in has given many people the opportunity  to reassess their day-to-day lives and their priorities and I think there is an increasing  
**[0:25:20-0:25:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:25:20):**  interest really in where our food comes from, the transparency of our food supply chains  and that element of community as well.  Many people who were self-isolating or restricted at home were dependent on neighbours and local  shops and services to be able to support them through that time.  There's definitely, I'd agree with you, a need really for the resilience of our food  
**[0:25:39-0:25:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:25:39):**  systems going forward to maintain that diversity of how we source our food and how we grow  our food and part of that I think is local-based or community-based supply chains I would say.  And we're doing a piece of work right now founded by the San Calpa organisation with  Cultivate Oxford which is looking at how we use the latest digital tools available to  support community-led supply chains going forward so that they are able to play this  
**[0:26:06-0:26:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:26:06):**  continuing role in an efficient and effective way to provide produce to our society going  forward.  So we're coming towards the end and I just wonder if I can ask you this final question  really about the buyout because you've gone from an organisation which was a very friendly  organisation where people did work together in a very constructive way but the structure  
**[0:26:26-0:26:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:26:26):**  that you have now is much flatter.  You've got a lot of directors and there's an old phrase, too many cooks spoil the broth.  You've got a lot of cooks, how do you make sure that the broth still tastes good?  I think that's a really interesting point because I think a lot of the maybe more traditional  feedback we've had during the process of the MBO is that a group of seven of us is a really  
**[0:26:48-0:26:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:26:48):**  large team to be sort of guiding the business forward and that thinking that perhaps a larger  group brings more complexity and creates challenges in decision making.  But I think actually for us we find that the opposite logic is in fact true.  The global challenges that we're looking to contribute solutions to are really complex  and they require such a diversity of thinking and expertise and creativity to solve them.  
**[0:27:09-0:27:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:27:09):**  And our team of seven, in addition to the wider FAI team, we sort of look to embrace  and celebrate that diversity and difference of opinion and it's through creating a culture  and ways of working that allow us to communicate effectively and connect effectively and build  trust in each other that actually is a strength for us.  That's a really positive note to end on.  
**[0:27:30-0:27:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:27:30):**  So I will, I'll end there.  I'd like to thank my guests, Oystein Tawson, FAI's new chief executive and Carly Scott,  the FAI director of sustainable operations.  If you've enjoyed listening, please come back and listen to more.  Tell your friends, like us, review us and share our links.  
**[0:27:45-0:27:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-changing-at-FAI-Farms-ejc2tv#t=0:27:45):**  Farmgate is a partnership project for Farmwell and FAI Farms.  We're funded by San Calpa and you can join the conversation on Twitter by searching for  Farmgate podcast.  I've been Finn LoKerstain.  Bye for now.  