### Farm Gate  (2021-07-15)
**[0:00:00-0:00:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to Farmgate, I'm Finn LoKusteyn. What's the difference between agroecology  and regenerative agriculture? Not sure? Well then, what about holistic grazing? Organic,  no-till farming or AMP adaptive multi-paddock grazing? Well, in this programme we hope to  get to the bottom of all this terminology that now seems to be so omnipresent in the  nature-friendly farming Twittersphere. I'm joined by two women who are going to help  
**[0:00:30-0:00:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:00:30):**  me slug out some definitions. From Roots of Nature we have regenerative agriculture expert  Caroline Grindrod and from FAI Farms we have Kelly Watson who's going to help us keep our  feet on the ground. Welcome both!  Hello, hi Kelly!  Hi!  
**[0:00:44-0:00:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:00:44):**  What we're going to try and do here is to tap into the incredible knowledge resource  of Caroline's brain. While at the same time Kelly I want you to metaphorically sort of  sound the horn if you think our definitions are starting to get too theoretical so that  we can make sure that we stay rooted in practical farm management as far as possible. And just  before we kind of really get started, Kelly, do the differences between these approaches  
**[0:01:06-0:01:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:01:06):**  to nature-friendly farming really matter?  For me, I'm not sure it's whether the differences matter in terms of the approaches, it's more  about understanding what those differences are because, you know, in your introduction  to Finlow you've already talked about agroecology and regenerative agriculture and my understanding,  and Caroline may put me straight on this, is agroecology is an umbrella, you know, an  
**[0:01:28-0:01:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:01:28):**  umbrella term for a number of different farming approaches that sit within it and regenerative  is one of those. So for me it's about people being able to get hold and understand these  terms and feel confident in what they mean. So for me you then mix in all this stuff around  no-till and then you put in an approach like organic. Well, where does that all sit?  Caroline, regenerative agriculture is clearly the gold standard so far as you're concerned.  
**[0:01:54-0:01:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:01:54):**  So what distinguishes regenerative agriculture from agroecology?  Thanks, Finlow, and I'd be cautious about saying that I think regen's the gold standard.  I think there's a place for, it's an ecosystem of things going on and that's quite right  and that's actually part of this whole concept really. So I think Kelly's absolutely right.  I think agroecology is quite a broad term and I haven't come through that sort of particular  
**[0:02:15-0:02:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:02:15):**  pathway but the way I understand it and the way I frame it is that agroecology is really  the application of ecology or ecological principles and to some degree regen is one of those.  So we absolutely use ecological principles for carrying out regen or being regen or getting  regenerative outcomes. So that's absolutely true I think.  So with agroecology perhaps it's a broader spectrum that takes in lots of these different  
**[0:02:41-0:02:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:02:41):**  approaches to nature-based agriculture where regen is one type of farming that fits within  that sort of agroecological spectrum. Is that fair?  I think that's a reasonable way to describe it, yeah.  What about the others? I mean how do holistic grazing and organic and no-till farming and  AMP fit into that sort of broader picture?  
**[0:03:02-0:03:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:03:02):**  So my kind of lineage towards regen ag was through holistic management and we'll start  with that. So holistic management was developed by Alan Savory and it's a framework for managing  complexity. So holistic management is the framework itself and one of the procedures  and processes within that framework is called holistic plant grazing. So people are often  using that interchangeably and saying oh I'm using holistic management talking about grazing  
**[0:03:25-0:03:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:03:25):**  but they're two very different things. So holistic plant grazing you definitely need  to use within the framework but you can use the framework to manage a hairdresser or a  government or anything else. So it's important to understand that distinction. So I absolutely  use the framework of holistic management to do regenerative agriculture and teach regenerative  agriculture. So that's how it fits together really.  
**[0:03:46-0:03:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:03:46):**  Okay so we've got there holistic management and holistic grazing being two separate terms.  So both of them are linked to Alan Savory's work. Holistic management is something which  is much broader which is a management application that you can apply to anything whether it's  a grocer's or hairdresser's or a farm business but holistic plant grazing is specifically  a regenerative agriculture grazing approach that's developed by Alan Savory. Organic.  
**[0:04:13-0:04:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:04:13):**  So organic again you can be regenerative and organic but organic doesn't necessarily mean  that you're going to be regenerative and in fact I work with a lot of organic farmers  who have set off with all of the great great intentions and then have ended up just getting  derogations for worms and losing soil health and all the rest of it. So it's a set of practices  and sort of standards and prescriptions and protocols but it doesn't necessarily mean  
**[0:04:40-0:04:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:04:40):**  that you're getting regenerative outcomes.  So that's I mean I know that this is really frustrating for you because you immediately  want to get into all the detail of these different systems but just help us out with no-till  farming and an AMP adaptive multi-paddock grazing. How do they fit into the picture?  Yeah so no-till is one of the practices that you might you might use within regenerative  
**[0:05:05-0:05:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:05:05):**  agriculture. So again it's just important to realise that the practices are not what  regen is and we'll come to this later but it's about working with a set of principles  and more than it is about just adopting a practice. So no-till means that you're you  know you're just keeping the soil covered and you're not using a plough and that is  one of the practices and there is a big movement just around that and often it is a starting  
**[0:05:24-0:05:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:05:24):**  point to get into regen but it isn't just you know you're not necessarily regen if  you just adopt no-till. And AMP grazing and adaptive multi-paddock grazing I think I would  be right in saying that this came about Alan Williams I think originally coined the term  and sort of interchangeably with flex grazing and again he's evolved his thinking and his  terminology now and I think he calls it adaptive stewardship. But ultimately it was really  
**[0:05:47-0:05:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:05:47):**  I think because they wanted to start to bring some science into holistic management which  has always been one of the sort of sticking points that because this is context specific  holistic management it's going to be different to each farmer. Very hard to actually fit  into a reductionist science model but in trying to do that they decided that the word holistic  was a barrier to some of the universities and things. They absolutely wanted to capture  
**[0:06:09-0:06:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:06:09):**  that this is adaptive you know they wanted to say that this is more than just rotational  grazing or just mob grazing and having a standard set of kind of you know moves across the farm.  This is absolutely about the landowner and the farmer getting engaged with their livestock  and their landscape and getting feedback from their decisions and then adapting their management  to fit. I'm going to just because you brought in another another term there which is mob  
**[0:06:34-0:06:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:06:34):**  grazing and I'm just going to have to get you to define that in context of all this  stuff as well. And again I'm scared that we're just going to get into more and more terms  but there's a load as a collection of different grazing terms which vaguely mean that you  are putting your animals together in a group using a fence to segregate your fields and  then moving them around the farm in a rotation with a gap. Mob grazing is a term a catchall  
**[0:06:54-0:06:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:06:54):**  term that's being used for anything along that spectrum.  Fantastic just to summarise agroecology is a spectrum that takes in lots of different  nature-based approaches to agriculture. Regen is one of those which is much more focused  on improving outcomes. It has an ecosystems focus. The holistic grazing specifically comes  from holistic management processes frameworks that were developed by Alan Savory and within  
**[0:07:23-0:07:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:07:23):**  that then we have practices like no-till or adaptive stewardship as you were calling it  or mob grazing. These are practices within that kind of bigger overarching sort of spectrum.  I think that's a brilliant summary yeah. Okay right let's move on. So Kelly let's just  park that for a moment. At FAI you're working a lot with retailers and brands. What phrases  do you find people asking about most at the moment?  
**[0:07:49-0:07:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:07:49):**  So for me the word at the moment I guess is regenerative. I think it's because people  have got into the mindset I think where we were talking about sustainable before and  sort of maintaining people are recognising that we need to do more than that and we need  to have a positive impact and I think you know regenerative that word itself you know  does what it says on the tin kind of thing and people understand it but what I would  
**[0:08:13-0:08:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:08:13):**  say is that from the way we speak with clients they're using sustainable and regenerative  sort of interchangeably. I guess I've got a slight concern in that I'm not entirely  sure some people have a very clear idea about what this means but others are making commitments  or saying they're going to use regenerative practices without actually knowing what that  means on the ground and the conversation we've just had with you know Caroline sums it up  
**[0:08:39-0:08:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:08:39):**  for me because many of you know the way our food systems work we've got standards in place,  we've got prescriptive standard place that's how you know food brands and retailers have  managed their supply chains. They put in a standard and then they can talk about what  they're doing publicly. I think from what you know as Caroline just said the practices  in themselves don't make you regenerative. I've got a concern about people using that  
**[0:09:00-0:09:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:09:00):**  term regenerative without really thinking about what that means in terms of change so  there's a whole piece isn't there about farmers needing to change their approach and their  outlook but so do our food companies. They're going to have to think about how do we change  our approach to accommodate this change in system and approach so for me regenerative  is the word at the moment and what I want to do is make sure that that is being used  
**[0:09:26-0:09:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:09:26):**  in the right way and not just being used as a buzzword at the time.  It's almost as though sometimes you know people just get bored with one word and they start  using another thinking that it essentially means the same thing and there is as you say  the danger that people use the word regen because they've kind of got a bit bored with  sustainability or it's being applied to a few too many things. It's about truly understanding  
**[0:09:47-0:09:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:09:47):**  that it is a genuine mindset change. There are practices within regen that can help you  get a bit of a sense of it on your farm but until you sort of embrace that mindset change  you're not a regen farmer. So Caroline you've been working on a new introduction to regenerative  agriculture course with the team at FAI. How are you going to how are you going about making  regen more accessible?  
**[0:10:11-0:10:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:10:11):**  So again just to frame it we've come from a farming system that's come out of a kind  of a mechanistic worldview I suppose so since the age of enlightenment we came in and we  suddenly realized that we could quantify and study and reduce and separate and understand  things and that's totally right for you know anything to do with maths and physics and  machines and we've come through that whole kind of period of science that did things  
**[0:10:35-0:10:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:10:35):**  in that way and it's got a huge way forward. So but the problem is that we've applied the  same thinking to living systems whether it's our bodies or whether it's an ecosystem which  is our landscape and that's why we've ended up with these results with degraded soils  and you know loss of biodiversity that's exact that's really the root cause of why that's  happened is because we've been thinking about land and systems as if they're a machine so  
**[0:10:59-0:11:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:10:59):**  that's absolutely at the complete heart and core of what regenerative agriculture is.  So we've got we've got a choice we've either got to simplify it reduce it and make it more  accessible so that it makes people feel comfortable and then get in the door or we try and allow  people to find their own way through it and then eventually they'll sort of come to a  point which is getting regenerative outcomes and they understand complexity and they understand  
**[0:11:21-0:11:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:11:21):**  the living system and I guess as a movement we've got to work out how to navigate that  which is why we get into such gnarly conversations around it all. So yeah you're right we've  at FAI what we've done is we've soon realised that there's such an appetite for regen in  the retail world that we decided we wanted to start to build something for them so that  they didn't end up just kind of you know diluting it reducing it and greenwashing it and and  
**[0:11:43-0:11:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:11:43):**  it's incredibly important because we just don't want to end up with the same mess you  know that's the whole point of why we got to regen. So we've come up with a kind of  set of ecological principles and then we are using those principles to try and improve  the ecosystem processes. So the ecosystem processes that we use are the water cycle,  the nutrient cycle, photosynthesis, airflow and then we talk about the fact we weave those  
**[0:12:05-0:12:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:12:05):**  together with nature's dynamic networks. So we work with those ecosystem processes and  that's the way we can measure our outcomes and then to achieve the increase in those  ecosystem processes we have a set of practices and they'll vary from farm to farm and some  people will invent their own practices so that could be a whole range of things you  know from no till that we discussed earlier through amp grazing through holistic plant  
**[0:12:28-0:12:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:12:28):**  grazing through agroforestry through composting and ultimately you don't know if that's worked  you don't know whether you are regenerative unless you've measured the outcomes which  is you know as I say those ecosystem processes so for the water cycle it might be we've improved  the infiltration rate for the nutrient cycle we can measure change in aggregates and whether  we've got more earthworms or whether we've got you know there's a whole range of metrics  
**[0:12:50-0:12:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:12:50):**  we can use we can identify whether bricks is good in our plants we can use nature's  dynamic networks to measure whether we're getting problem species or disease issues  and red flags we call them and airflow we can sort of measure you know and as I say  how good our soil structure is so.  And those data components that you've just mentioned there that the importance of monitoring  
**[0:13:12-0:13:15](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:13:12):**  is really sort of intrinsic to your process as well.  Absolutely so there's certain things that you can say that you do in region that generally  get good regenerative outcomes whether that's a living root in the soil you know do not  disturb so there's various sort of guidelines that you can come in on but it's just important  to realize that that doesn't mean that your region just because you're doing planting  
**[0:13:33-0:13:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:13:33):**  a cover crop and using no-till doesn't mean that you're necessarily a region the only  way to prove that is whether you're getting regenerative outcomes.  It's important not to become too purist about what that means because we want people to  get on board and if all they're doing is actually following practices and they're still getting  regenerative results that's a big step forward so I wouldn't want to stop that happening  
**[0:13:53-0:13:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:13:53):**  across you know large supply chains but it's just important to realize that there's more  to it than that and it's important to understand the bigger picture region includes making  sure the family is happy and healthy making sure communities are happy and healthy.  So Kelly Caroline's just set out there three if you've got a triangle then the three points  of a framework approach centered around region there's the set of principles we've got the  
**[0:14:16-0:14:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:14:16):**  practices you know the one other corner of that triangle but then the importance of monitoring  because it's the outcomes that matter it's making sure those regenerative outcomes exist  and measuring and monitoring those outcomes that's really important and so if those are  the sort of things that we're talking about at farm level if we're thinking about an ordinary  farmer who's perhaps interested in looking at regen what do you think are likely to be  
**[0:14:38-0:14:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:14:38):**  the easiest entry points for them?  I think the practices is the easiest entry point you know you can say to them if you're  not disturbing the soil too much if you're you know keeping ground you know cover on  the ground and then you can link that I think to the stuff around water and retaining water  you know that when you have the practice and then add on top the kind of ecosystem process  
**[0:15:01-0:15:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:15:01):**  bit works so for me I think for farmers that practice piece is probably how to get them  started isn't it now I take Caroline's point that that's not the only thing you can't just  do that and then expect to be regenerative so that that measuring piece and that kind  of wanting to take the bigger picture I think is important but I don't think we can underestimate  and we've touched on it already I don't think we can underestimate how big a mindset shift  
**[0:15:26-0:15:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:15:26):**  that entails for a farmer you know you farmed in a particular way for a particular farmer  and the fact that you're even taking this step but I guess for me it would be the temptation  to revert back to what you know when something happens that you don't know how to deal with  so I don't think we can underestimate that even when you start these practices that shift  is difficult you know for me when I saw the farm you know working I had in my head you  
**[0:15:51-0:15:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:15:51):**  know what good grass looks like when it's been grazed it's uniform it's short and then  it's a shock to you when you go out and you see all these different species and you see  you know most people would say it looks a bit messy you know that that is a mindset  shift you know that you have to kind of get your head round so I think for me the practices  are the way in because people can kind of grasp them and you can talk to them about  
**[0:16:13-0:16:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:16:13):**  what they're doing within that ecosystem but the mindset shift is the big one being confident  to stick with it I guess.  So Caroline we've talked about the principles of Regen on the podcast in the past to some  degree of detail and I wonder if you can just help us out with you know reminding us briefly  what the main ones are and why they're important.  
**[0:16:32-0:16:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:16:32):**  Again these are not hard fast rules of nature that's that's not a thing but we define it  by saying the seven sort of generally applicable principles in nature that we want to try and  bring into our farming system we work with networks it's really to the point that nature  is a network of interconnected living systems what you do to one part of it will affect  another part so this is the kind of the holism piece and that we absolutely need to sort  
**[0:16:54-0:16:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:16:54):**  of understand and work within in our regenerative systems.  The next one is energy sunlight is the fundamental source of energy that drives all ecological  cycles so you know everything in our system whether it's a lettuce leaf or you know an  animal has come from sunlight being converted in a plant at the soil surface so that's kind  of absolutely you know critical to the understanding of how these things work and we can't increase  
**[0:17:16-0:17:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:17:16):**  our output without using inputs obviously unless we increase our photosynthetic capacity  so we work a lot with that.  Cycles important to understand that water and nutrients cycle continuously through a  living system so we don't generate waste in a living system so we mimic the you know improve  the water cycle the retention of water and make sure that's being utilized by plants  
**[0:17:37-0:17:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:17:37):**  not running off across the surface and into our streams and nutrients we don't want to  be getting them through adding fertilizers we want to be able to use a living system  that recycles its nutrients properly and can actually get you know get the the nutrients  out of the rock so it's continually able to provide what the plants need and our animals  and then relationships there's unlimited number of relationships interrelationships they're  
**[0:17:59-0:18:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:17:59):**  all interconnected and woven together so we need to understand that and be willing to  work with the exchange energy and again it's back to this point that the you know the output  of a whole system is greater than the sum of its parts actually you know when you've  got more mycorrhizal fungi in the soil you can tap into more nutrients it's not so much  competition for nutrients it means that we can actually explore more of the soil and  
**[0:18:20-0:18:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:18:20):**  we're buffering temperatures we're buffering moisture so that we're getting more production  out of the system and then diversity is another principle all ecosystems derive stability  and resilience through the richness of diversity so yeah absolutely it's about we need to be  able to add things rather than remove things so rather than test or a disease and how can  we kill that and or how can we kill that in a slightly less toxic way which we might think  
**[0:18:45-0:18:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:18:45):**  of in perhaps some organic systems we're thinking about what's it telling us and how can we  advance you know the the diversity and increase the the connectants of that system so that  we're not getting these booms and busts in population that are really causing us the  problems in agriculture and adaptation is another big one an ecosystem is flexible an  ever fluctuating network that adapts to its environment so in our systems we need to learn  
**[0:19:08-0:19:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:19:08):**  to be adaptive we need to be in a conversation with the land all the time and the animals  and looking out for what's happening and then responding to it not sticking to a pattern  or a plan and then succession which is really about ecological succession which is how nature  turns bare rock into a forest it likes to build and add and expand in complexity all  the time and it's really important to understand that every species has a niche in that ecosystem  
**[0:19:32-0:19:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:19:32):**  it likes a stage of succession more than another so if you've got a problem species whether  it's a rush or a thistle it's because you've created the conditions and the point of succession  it likes so it's our job to understand how to increase complexity to get past that point  so we're seeing the plants we want and not the plants and diseases that we don't want  a lot of specific principles there and and what i'm kind of getting in mind while you  
**[0:19:54-0:20:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:19:54):**  go through that list is that for a lot of farmers when they make the transition within  a year or two their farms are going to look very different and so the mindset shift isn't  just it's not just something that's happening internally it's something that's visual this  is why we can't use plans and prescriptions because every time you advance your soils  in succession they're going to respond differently so you'll get different plants coming up every  
**[0:20:19-0:20:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:20:19):**  year and your animals will perform differently from year to year depending on what plants  are warm so we need to be able to make new decisions every step of the way depending  on what's happening in our outside environment so it's absolutely the case that the farmer  needs to learn how to become part of their environment so it's in tune and is responding  to it rather than simply being on the outside imposing you know a set of standards or and  
**[0:20:42-0:20:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:20:42):**  prescriptions kelly we've just gone through that list so that we've got you know the ecosystem  processes i've made my notes here sort of networks and holism with sunlight uh productivity  photosynthesis water and nutrient cycling energy exchange relationships between things  diversity adaptation succession do you think there are areas that are more challenging  to explain to to conventional farmers interested in making the transition yeah i think we i  
**[0:21:10-0:21:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:21:10):**  think we've got a job to do haven't we around around the communication of it because you  want people to engage with it and so i guess for me we don't want it to sound so big just  listening to caroline there going through those you know principles obviously it was  the bit at the end that i really kind of went oh yeah okay we want our activity to be part  of the ecosystem you know our the way farming's evolved i guess we have we sit on the outside  
**[0:21:33-0:21:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:21:33):**  and look in and we set stuff aside for nature but actually what we're saying is we want  what we do to be accepted as part of a natural system if we're not careful we make it sound  so so big that people don't feel that they can tackle it and i understand caroline's  point that we don't want to simplify it down to such a state that people just think you  can tick a box and it's done but i also think there's stuff around you know the tone that  
**[0:21:58-0:22:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:21:58):**  we use and presenting the opportunities because one thing we haven't talked about here is  you know caroline mentions productivity but productivity you know we're not saying you're  going to go regen and you're going to have to accept a yield drop we know we're not saying  that and i think we need to make that clear too you know the fact that you haven't got  the inputs you know would naturally make people think oh my goodness you know i'm not going  
**[0:22:18-0:22:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:22:18):**  to get the return but if i understand correctly if you're working in a regenerative system  then you don't have to accept that your productivity is going to be low for example this isn't  just about the planet this is about you and your business and actually you know ultimately  you know you could be operating a much better business on the back of it and just on that  productivity point i guess again it's about focusing on what productivity really means  
**[0:22:43-0:22:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:22:43):**  because if you've got a farm which is you know which is greatly overstocked and you're  bringing in loads of inputs from outside then then transitioning that farm to a regenerative  system is going to be quite different from a farm that is more or less stocked right  but is managing things in a conventional way that's then transitioning to regen because  at that point you are likely to see quite a rapid boost in productivity you're absolutely  
**[0:23:06-0:23:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:23:06):**  right though it's a really good point and we've just started pinning this down actually  and we started sort of screaming it like you know we need to redefine productivity if you  focus in on one element of production like your biomass production from your grass or  your dry matter or weight gains or whatever that is or milk output or whatever you lose  sight of the whole system and again kelly's point is really important that you know we  
**[0:23:30-0:23:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:23:30):**  have to then understand that we're part of this whole system so okay we may not be getting  in a month if you took a month snapshot we might not get in that month the same productivity  output in terms of dry matter but if you take the whole year the the fact that you've buffered  rainfall so you're not going into drought or you're not flooding and saturating the  soils or the animals are healthy and happy and getting shade and shelter and are picking  
**[0:23:53-0:23:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:23:53):**  the right nutrients that they need to then unlock these other plants overall the whole  system is going to be more productive and you may be able to completely drop your fertilizer  bill and you may be able to reduce your medication bill down so that's the really key point and  as you say pinlove it's not just a simple thing where increasing output it's about okay  well are we doing that without all of those ghost acres because essentially a hundred  
**[0:24:14-0:24:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:24:14):**  acre farm could produce something equivalent to a 300 acre farm that buys in enough grain  so it's making that distinction as in it and making sure that we're yeah we call it redefining  productivity and through all of that you know i'm just reminded of this phrase that you  know i've heard you know variously over the last few years which is you know that the  way that we've approached farming over the last few decades is is to be able to farm  
**[0:24:35-0:24:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:24:35):**  despite nature and what we're talking about here is changing to a system where we're recruiting  nature to work for us where they're we can reduce our inputs because nature's doing it  on our behalf where we can reduce the costs because nature's becoming the staff and and  they're sort of working for us on the farm absolutely and in rewilding you know i work  a lot with conservation organizations and that's the same problem you know they in some  
**[0:24:59-0:25:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:24:59):**  circles of conservation and wilding they think that people just should just get out of the  way because nature so-called nature can do a better job on its own but they forget that  we are absolutely intrinsically part of nature and we're missing a lot of the key predators  and processes that will be happening in a pristine environment so really we've got an  opportunity to take up that role ourselves as keystone species and say right we need  
**[0:25:20-0:25:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:25:20):**  to understand how to work with these principles of ecology because we need to step into that  system and start to run it you know so it's it's working well  so caroline the data monitoring aspect i'd like to come back to now your approach is  centered on core ecosystem processes which are at the heart of regenerative agriculture  i wonder if you can give us some examples of the kind of outcomes that you think are  
**[0:25:43-0:25:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:25:43):**  really important and the sort of monitoring monitoring and data that you have in mind  yeah and again everyone's going to have a different approach so savory's got ecological  outcome verification which is a proper certification based on what have you managed to achieve  and it defines its for ecosystem processes slightly differently but the way that we've  done it for fei is um we actually monitored a huge range of data sets and for the reason  
**[0:26:06-0:26:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:26:06):**  that we want to understand which are the best proxies because we want to ultimately find  something that's extremely easy to pick up by a farmer and gets the job done again a  lot of the problem with some of the more technical end of region you know where it's going down  that kind of analyzing soils and getting super technical about your monitoring is it's putting  a lot of people off so it's trying to find that middle ground which is giving you the  
**[0:26:26-0:26:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:26:26):**  feedback you need but the actual process of getting your hands in the soil itself is as  kelly says it starts to advance your thinking about yourself as part of the system so that's  important too so we've come up we monitor a huge range of things and i can't go into  them all but for instance in the water cycle we're suggesting that some key measurement  tools could be infiltration rates um so how quickly can the rainfall actually get into  
**[0:26:48-0:26:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:26:48):**  your soil and how is you know how effectively is it held in there and that's just kind of  almost like usually there's a sort of chimney experiment isn't there where you stick the  chimney on the on the soil pour in some water and see how quickly it drains exactly so we've  got hydrophobic soils that are repelling water because of what we've done to them so and  also we're creating capping that means that all of that rainfall is running off in them  
**[0:27:09-0:27:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:27:09):**  and going into drought and we're booming and busting and drought and floods so good infiltration  is one of the indicators that suggests that we've you know got better soil health and  we can retain water so that we can feed our plants better throughout the season and we  could record biomass production over over a year so we could say whether that's in animal  days or dry matter we could say that over the year we buffered the system so that it  
**[0:27:33-0:27:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:27:33):**  then is producing more consistently throughout the year so we take that over a wider span  so there's a couple things the nutrient cycle and we might measure carbon again and carbon's  important but it's becoming the next hook that everyone jumps onto we have to be cautious  carbon is one of the things that's important.  And how would you measure carbon what's the what's the best sort of the cheapest and most  
**[0:27:55-0:27:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:27:55):**  effective way of measuring carbon?  What we've done and again this is a huge topic in its own right with much debate we are using  loss on ignition and we're going down to 50 centimetres there's now some evidence that  carbon sequester much deeper than we thought if you had enough money we'd go down to a  metre but we don't so 50 centimetres seems accessible we take it in three different zones  
**[0:28:17-0:28:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:28:17):**  through that you know zero to ten ten to thirty thirty to fifty centimetres and we also do  bulk density so that we can work out stocks at a later date so we would we'd basically  work out you burn that sample it works out how much you know organic matter and how much  organic carbon you've got in there so that's how we would do the carbon.  What about things like worm counts and so on are they are they really good indicators?  
**[0:28:39-0:28:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:28:39):**  We've got worm counts under yeah so part of the nutrient cycle we might look at worm counts  again on its own isn't a good enough measure because depending on your how far along the  scale of bacteria to fungi you get in the ratios you'll get different worms in different  environments so but it's it builds a picture that's what's important we're building a picture  we could measure the nutrient quality of the porridge so you can do soil analysis and there's  
**[0:29:00-0:29:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:29:00):**  people that are doing incredibly detailed soil analysis but you've got to be very cautious  there to understand that we're not after soluble nutrients here what we want is available nutrients  that are complexed into organic compounds so just the standard soil test is not a good  indicator of soil health in fact in some respects you could say that in a natural system nature  wouldn't allow very soluble nutrients just be floating around in the you know in the  
**[0:29:23-0:29:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:29:23):**  pool basically and it would be complexed into organisms and soil structures so it's very  complicated we can't really go into it here but ultimately yes we can do very detailed  soil analysis and we do do we are doing that in the chemistry we are monitoring the biology  so we have fungi and bacteria predators of the system and the ratios of those and we're  coming up the system to make sure are we are those nutrients actually getting into our  
**[0:29:46-0:29:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:29:46):**  plants so we're monitoring the plants nutrient levels and we're also doing blood tests and  hair samples on the on the animals so we can say okay it's in the plants but is it getting  into the animals or is there things locking up that system i wouldn't expect average you  know farms to need to do that so what we tend to do is use soil mentor for the structures  because it's physical structures and soil are a bit of an indicator of proxy and earthworms  
**[0:30:06-0:30:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:30:06):**  is part of that so there's a whole range of different things that you're monitoring there  different outcomes that you're looking at you know all you know all associated with  those those key principles that you were mentioning if farmers are interested in moving towards  regen but they're not yet ready to make that kind of big leap what would you say are the  most important if you had to pick out three or four indicators that they ought to start  
**[0:30:29-0:30:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:30:29):**  monitoring straight away even before doing anything else to get it to start getting a  sense of where they are what would they be do you think mine would be the aggregation  of the soil so that vests assessment of the soil structure it would be plant density on  the soil surface you know how much bare soil have you got and how many plants have you  got grown and water infiltration i think those three would get you quite a long way and it's  
**[0:30:53-0:30:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:30:53):**  certainly not all of it and two of those at least are ones that the farmers can do without  spending any money at all um you know they all they could achieve was getting them to  go and do that on the land it would make a big difference i'm sure fantastic kelly some  of the information that caroline's talking about monitoring there just you know some  of it seems to be really quite straightforward common sense to me and i wonder to what extent  
**[0:31:14-0:31:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:31:14):**  this information is already being collected by farmers or being required by um supply  chains i think there is a lot of data you know that's recorded but to caroline's point  you know for examples farms may be soil testing but that's not necessarily for what we need  to do when we're looking for a renewable outcome so i mean i think for me there's some really  nice entry level points there for farmers this infiltration test earthworm counts or  
**[0:31:42-0:31:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:31:42):**  you know these are quite bare cut looking at bare ground to me seems a nice way to get  people started which doesn't involve expensive testing and just gets people thinking so you  know i think it would be unfair of me to say that farmers aren't testing and aren't looking  at these things but i'm not sure in the context that we need to measure regeneration if you  like i'm not sure that i'm not sure many people would be at that stage but i think there's  
**[0:32:07-0:32:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:32:07):**  good entry level ways to get people started i guess there's there's one final thing that  we just ought to get into because i think there's a sense you know if you're a conventional  farmer and you're thinking about regen there's a question of whether you're going to have  to spend thousands of pounds on consultants so that you sort of properly understand this  this shift this big mindset shift and land shift that we're talking about so just to  
**[0:32:28-0:32:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:32:28):**  give us a sense of the costs caroline are people really going to have to spend thousands  of pounds on consultants no i think like all of this stuff we've talked about there's lots  of different ways you can come at this and and you can do an awful lot by just starting  to read things like you know alan savory's holistic management book and there's a hundred  really brilliant regen books out there and that in its own right will start you thinking  
**[0:32:50-0:32:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:32:50):**  in a different way and understanding different practices and seeing all of this stuff come  to life you know so actually just getting to busy reading and youtubing is a great place  to get going and some people depending on where you start depends on how far that'll  get you um you know that might get you all the way and but if you feel that you know  you want to you know work with somebody in particular or you like a particular approach  
**[0:33:12-0:33:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:33:12):**  then you know it's really good to do what i almost think there's a good to do a foundations  course so we do one in wilder culture we're building one with fa fa savory does the foundations  or everyone calls it something different but essentially it's like a big immersion of two  or three days where you really get into the into the nitty-gritty of it you start to develop  that different mindset you're surrounded by people that are thinking in the same way and  
**[0:33:36-0:33:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:33:36):**  it massively helps you get started and i suppose that there's different ways of approaching  these costs as well because you know if it's an individual farmer taking on the cost of  doing that course for two or three days then you know that's going to cost a few hundred  pounds but but if people get in touch with their aombs or their local nfu or nfu mutual  then it might be that they can persuade those organizations to put on these trainings and  
**[0:34:00-0:34:05](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:34:00):**  then you know lots of farmers can club together or lots of farmers can can can take part in  this training at the same time and benefit from that sort of group approach yeah absolutely  i mean if you want to get a consultant to come in privately due to you that's going  to cost a lot of money and consultants will be upwards of you know probably 400 500 600  pounds depending on who you go to and what they what they do or you can go to group training  
**[0:34:23-0:34:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:34:23):**  which is going to be you know i don't know three four five hundred pounds for the three  days probably and then you can always ask for consultancy help in addition but it's  just important to realize that in these types of approaches consultants don't work like  the conventional agricultural consultants they don't come into a report and then you follow  it quite the opposite they train you in the principles and the approach they help you  
**[0:34:42-0:34:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:34:42):**  and facilitate you in that learning journey i might give you some ideas but it's it you  come at it a different way so you know for under a couple of thousand pounds of of good  training and support you could definitely get to the point where you could probably  if you're in a very conventional system of any size save yourself many thousands of pounds  over the years and depending on your scale and what you're doing you know so again it's  
**[0:35:05-0:35:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:35:05):**  about slightly just looking at the big picture of what you might be able to achieve if you  do this and but without really you know without knowing that you you don't you really don't  have to go and do some sort of 11-day cost you know you can start at any point and work  with what's available and i guess that that message that um you know it may well be that  it's uh you know it's it's a thousand pounds or a couple of thousand pounds investment  
**[0:35:26-0:35:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:35:26):**  over time but you are likely to save a lot of money through reduced inputs um over the  course of those first few years you mean and in perpetuity as a result and so really it's  a relatively small investment to build your productivity and reduce your costs quite significantly  i'm not one to go out and say you'll be able to double your productivity that because as  we've discussed it depends on what your inputs are etc but you can become much more resilient  
**[0:35:52-0:35:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:35:52):**  so you're not stressing all the time about the price of this and that and you know and  that you know roughly you've got a business plan that works every year regardless of what's  happening in the outside world and that you can get rid of a huge number of your inputs  and it'll get better over time so the point is you're making you know what profit you  make is is profit it's not just uh you know you can get rid of all of those unpleasant  
**[0:36:13-0:36:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:36:13):**  costs that are that happen to be really bad for the environment on the whole as well fantastic  kelly any final thoughts no i just think it's been it's been so interesting but today but  i guess it's it is it's for me it's that bit about when you understand the what it is it's  the how and the where so how do you start and where do you start and i think yeah you  know that's that's what we need to get to isn't it fantastic it's a difficult topic  
**[0:36:35-0:36:39](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:36:35):**  and i i think today we've made a pretty good stab at trying to shine some light on the  difference between those systems you know at the outset um all of which aim to help  farmers work more closely with nature but then you know through the rest of the program  to explain some more of the core principles and practices of regenerative farming well  that is all we have time for i'd like to thank my guests caroline grindrod from roots  
**[0:36:56-0:37:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/Whats-the-difference-eskuhm#t=0:36:56):**  of nature and kelly watson from fa i farms if you've enjoyed listening please come back  and listen to more tell your friends like us review us and share our links farmgate  is a partnership project for farmwell and fa farms we're funded by san calpa and you  can join the conversation on twitter by searching for farmgate podcast i've been finlow kustain  bye for now  