### Farm Gate  (2020-42-23)
**[0:00:00-0:00:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, welcome to Farmgate, I'm Finn Logue-Kustain. In the drive to improve food sustainability,  meat is often caught in the crosshairs. NGOs and active food citizens regularly criticise  the climate, nature and welfare impacts of the meat industry. A solution, a compromise  perhaps, is summarised in the mantra less and better.  But what does less and better mean? What does it look like? And is it fair to treat the  
**[0:00:31-0:00:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:00:31):**  meat industry as some sort of sustainability pariah?  Well, to help me answer that question, I'm joined by Dr Sarah Place, Chief Sustainability  Officer at Alanko Animal Health and former Senior Director for the United States National  Cattlemen's Beef Association. And I'm joined by Oystein Torsen, the Director of  FAI Farms, a global consultancy working for climate and food security.  
**[0:00:53-0:00:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:00:53):**  Perhaps we could start by asking you both to introduce yourselves and maybe within that  you could tell us how you approach this question of less and better.  Yeah, sure. So, as you said, I'm the Chief Sustainability Officer at Alanko Animal Health.  I'm an animal scientist, so I did my graduate work at the University of California, Davis,  originally from upstate New York, grew up on a dairy farm there and have spent some  
**[0:01:19-0:01:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:01:19):**  time in academia and in industry, so kind of a cross section of experiences. And in  terms of the less and better, I think we'll get into it in this conversation. But I think  sometimes it's just a question of what does that really mean, right? Because both less  and better are subjective terms. And Oystein, what does less and better mean  to you? Well, I think it's often framed around rich  
**[0:01:41-0:01:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:01:41):**  countries, right? Because we've seen a clear trend towards increased meat consumption with  rising levels of income, both in Europe, the US, but also in China and emerging economies.  And I think that in a world where 820 million people are going hungry, 2 billion people  are overweight and obese, I think there's little doubt that many of us could benefit  from eating better. And in many cases, this might mean eating less. But I think specifically  
**[0:02:13-0:02:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:02:13):**  applied to meat, the phrase does have an opportunity to create some common ground and meaningful  dialogue in a conversation that is, like many others these days, often defined by fairly  polarized views. The situation looks very different depending  on where you are in the world, right? So for the wealthy nations of the world, whether  it's in Europe or North America, historically, we have consumed a lot more just in general  
**[0:02:40-0:02:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:02:40):**  animal source food, we lump all meat and eggs and dairy and fish together than other parts  of the world. And as was mentioned, some of that is driven by really just the production  system realities in different countries. So I think that's super key to talk about as  well. So sometimes we just lump in, we just say meat and we just lump everything in together.  But what we've seen pretty consistently in most of the wealthier countries over the last  
**[0:03:08-0:03:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:03:08):**  30, 40 years is really the shift kind of away from red meat. And so by red meat, I'm specifically  talking about our ruminant meats, whether it's beef or lamb and pork to some extent,  and a shift towards more poultry. So mostly chicken and some turkey as well. So we've  seen that in the United States. Specifically, it's kind of interesting from 1970 to today,  we're eating roughly about the same amount of meat, but the composition of that meat  
**[0:03:36-0:03:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:03:36):**  has changed. So we eat like, essentially we were eating about three ounces of beef per  person per day in the mid 1970s in the United States. And now it's down to about 1.8 ounces,  but we're eating a lot more chicken. So it's actually kind of been a wash if you will.  Right. So we're eating the same amount of meat as we were in the seventies.  And actually just to let me break in that mean just to get into those figures about  
**[0:03:58-0:04:02](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:03:58):**  the amount of meat that's eaten, I think that's going to be quite a surprise for some of the  people listening, particularly in the UK, because the image that we have of the United  States is of great big steak houses to a large extent. The image is that we have of cattle  farming usually aren't the kind of ranches that you associate with a cowboy movie, but  it's these great big feedlots, sort of fueling the steak houses and the picture you're painting  
**[0:04:24-0:04:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:04:24):**  is a little bit different and rather more nuanced.  Yeah. And so this information that I'm talking about, one, to clarify, right, this is an  average number. Essentially, this is how much is available per capita. So, of course, individuals  may have different eating patterns, right? Obviously, some people don't eat beef, some  people maybe eat more, but that's what it averages out to. And I think that is really  
**[0:04:44-0:04:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:04:44):**  key is that, you know, it's just as we were alluding to, right, there's a lot of imagery,  a lot of emotion that goes into our perceptions of this issue versus the data. And sometimes  those things are heading opposite directions. But in the United States, and this is important  too, you know, ruminant agriculture are cattle, sheep and goats, regardless of where they're  raised in the world really is a forage and grazing based system. And that's true in the  
**[0:05:07-0:05:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:05:07):**  United States, too. So those large feedlots that people have probably the image in their  mind when they think about US beef production, that's where cattle are going to spend the  last four or six months of their life, right? So the vast majority of cattle at any one  time in the United States are out on grass grazing. And part of why we are such a major  beef producer in the world is because of the vast grassland resources that we have in the  
**[0:05:32-0:05:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:05:32):**  United States.  If you were looking forward 10 or 20 years, do you think that the feedlot would still  exist or do you think perhaps there might be a more grass finishing, I suppose, on ranch  land?  I don't think the feedlot is going to go away. And honestly, it's not just a US phenomenon,  
**[0:05:48-0:05:53](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:05:48):**  right? We, you know, even in the UK, if you look at how cattle are finished or in Australia  or in parts of South America, I mean, this is not just a US phenomenon. But I do think,  you know, again, it kind of brings up some of these questions of digging in more to the  context, right? And this idea of regenerative agriculture is actually not mutually exclusive  from feeding cattle and finishing them in a feedlot either. Right. I think that's important  
**[0:06:14-0:06:20](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:06:14):**  to clarify. Right. So what we see in the United States is we definitely have a lot of producers  that would consider themselves regenerative or part of holistic management. And they sell  those cattle into the so-called conventional finishing system. Right. And there's really  no differentiation if you were to go to a Walmart, if you will, in the United States  of whether this calf was raised from a regenerative ranch or somebody that doesn't consider themselves  
**[0:06:42-0:06:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:06:42):**  that way. Right. So I think that's important, too, is that we sometimes we draw firm boundaries  around things that actually don't have firm boundaries.  As you say that you're making me think that, you know, there's a degree to which this question  is is kind of the wrong question. And therefore it's almost impossible to come up with the  right answer because we're often talking within the food community about or complaining about  
**[0:07:05-0:07:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:07:05):**  the way in which, you know, this global organization or that global organization comes out with  a diet saying this is what people should be eating in order to improve climate change  outcomes, improve biodiversity outcomes. But the reality is that we what we eat needs to  be different in different places around the world. And so in some places it may mean less  meat in some places in sub-Saharan Africa. It might actually mean more animal protein.  
**[0:07:31-0:07:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:07:31):**  It's the wrong question. It's what's most sustainable. Yeah. And I think it's just very  difficult. I guess it's always to me, I find that very difficult to try to say, you know,  this this is what you should eat in this location. Right. Because the supply chains are so difficult  to trace. Right. And trying to change, you know, again, for example, the diets of hundreds  of millions of people in the United States or in Europe to try to make these incremental  
**[0:07:55-0:08:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:07:55):**  changes in the production side. I guess that's where I'm more of just almost like a pragmatic  person where I think, you know what, our opportunity is probably greater on the supply side and  making sure to your point that wherever we are, we're doing the smartest thing in terms  of producing food. Right. And agriculture is just a big carbon capture system, energy  transformation system that we're doing it in a way that makes the most sense in the  
**[0:08:21-0:08:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:08:21):**  long term where we're at. And I think even in the U.S., I'll just say, too, we have a  lot of folks that are cattle feeders that are very, very aware of the challenges with  regard to water use and thinking about, you know, how can they incorporate more grazing  of what we call stock or cattle and essentially bringing cattle in at heavier body weights  into feed yards and having shorter finishing time. So there's lots of innovations I think  
**[0:08:46-0:08:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:08:46):**  that are happening on the ground that I think are encouraging that, again, don't necessarily  fit in these, to your point, these these ways that we frame things as like, you know, one  global diet to rule them all that I think is largely impractical at the end of the day.  And I guess when we're talking about beef oyston, you know, we're talking about, you  know, cattle that are largely on grass for a lot of their lives then coming into, you  
**[0:09:09-0:09:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:09:09):**  know, a finishing system of varying different kinds around the world. But when we're talking  about, you know, other kinds of meat, I mean, the vast majority of pork that's eaten around  the world, the vast majority of chicken is grown, you know, from birth to finishing in  much more intensive systems. So I guess, I guess my question is, rather than saying less  meat, do we actually mean less intensive rearing of animals for meat?  
**[0:09:36-0:09:41](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:09:36):**  Yeah, I think many people would absolutely agree with that statement. And I think Sarah's  point earlier about the supply side is really important in answering that question. Because  I think if you look at something like chicken, the fact that we eat that much more chicken  now than we used to, I always said, you know, I don't think that is because consumers banded  together and demanded to eat chicken three times a day. I think it's, you know, it's  
**[0:10:04-0:10:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:10:04):**  more a result of sort of structural changes and developments on the supply chain, on the  supply side that made the, you know, the modern broiler industry possible in large part due  to, you know, cheap and available commodities and resources, you know, breed developments.  As a result drove, you know, supply up and prices down to an extent where essentially  it was, why wouldn't you serve chicken as often as you could or why wouldn't you, you  
**[0:10:32-0:10:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:10:32):**  know, why wouldn't you buy it because it's right there in front of you and it's become  very affordable. And I think if we look at it through that frame, I think there is a,  there is a danger of sort of personalizing, if you like, our planetary challenges, right?  When we go straight to the sort of the individual choices, your diet that needs to change. I  feel like it's sort of deja vu from the 90s where all you had to do was to change your  
**[0:11:01-0:11:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:11:01):**  light bulbs and we would solve the climate crisis. Today, the simple solution is just  change your diet, except it's not simple and it's probably, you know, probably not even  the solution, you know, relying on 7 billion people to change their personal cultural behavior  patterns is an extremely difficult way to affect systemic change. And I think, you know,  if we go too far down that route, I think we risk, by blaming the individual, I think  
**[0:11:32-0:11:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:11:32):**  we risk taking our sort of collective attention away from more structural changes. And that  could be things like, you know, how do we better put the half a trillion dollars of  public subsidies around the world as going into farming and food production to better  use to drive those positive outcomes we need to see in terms of soil health and carbon  sequestration? How do we most effectively, you know, decarbonize our economy and bring  
**[0:11:58-0:12:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:11:58):**  our sort of production systems, if you like, within our planetary boundaries, whether it's  carbon pricing or other legislation initiatives, or how do we incentivize producers to create  a more resilient and healthy food system? How do we, you know, how do we put more money  in the hands of those farmers that Nasera was talking about earlier, that really care  about their land and want to do, you know, want to do right both for their land and their  
**[0:12:24-0:12:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:12:24):**  animals? There's quite a lot to unpack there in what  you were just saying. And I think, you know, there are a couple of frames that you brought  up and I just got to summarize them around waste, you know, certainly in terms of supply  chain waste and nutrition. And interestingly, the Food Farming and Countryside Commission  that recently reported in the UK, you know, it was looking sustainability in terms of,  
**[0:12:44-0:12:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:12:44):**  you know, not just meat, but the food industry more broadly, was most of their framing or  an awful lot of their framing was around health. And I guess if we're looking at trying to  feed an ever rising global population with the resources that we have, there's often  this sort of talk, well, we need to increase food production because there are going to  be so many more people. Well, actually, it's distribution of food, perhaps, and consumption  
**[0:13:12-0:13:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:13:12):**  of food, the habits that we have eating food, which are more of an issue. And if we look  at waste, you know, I've seen many reports recently that have talked about it's not just  that third of food or more that physically gets wasted in the fields or thrown away by  retailers or bought on a buy one, get one free and thrown away in the home. But actually,  because people are having that, you know, you mentioned, Oystein, having chicken three  
**[0:13:35-0:13:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:13:35):**  times a day that that there is an overconsumption of protein, which just ends up as fat or being,  you know, weed or excreted away. And and so that's that's part of the waste equation,  at which point potentially wasting half of the food that's produced. So that supply chain  element is is really important. Yeah. So I think I think there's a lot there, too, in  terms of both on, you know, what are we actually consuming and what what has increased? So  
**[0:14:04-0:14:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:14:04):**  as I mentioned earlier, you know, in the United States, we're eating roughly the same amount  of animal source food as we did in the 1970s. So that's always my question is, were we eating  too much animal source food than to what are the criteria? I think this gets back to our  earlier part of the conversation of what are the criteria and the evidence sources that  we're using when we say these things. Right. And who gets to decide what is too much? So  
**[0:14:27-0:14:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:14:27):**  I think on the protein piece specifically, it often comes back to protein, because if  we were to just zoom out and think about our whole agricultural system of all the the macronutrients  like carbohydrates, fat and protein, protein really is the hardest one for us to make.  If we think about it from an agricultural perspective, whether it is, you know, from  plant sources or animal sources directly, it's the one that usually has the lowest availability  
**[0:14:53-0:14:57](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:14:53):**  per capita. And even, you know, I'm looking at some of the information from the UN Food  and Agriculture Organization from the UK, just total availability before adjusting for  losses. Looks like 71% of the calories in the UK food supply actually come from plant  source foods. Right. And 29% come from animal source foods. But if we're to look at the  protein, 57% of the protein comes from animal source foods and only 43% from plant source.  
**[0:15:21-0:15:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:15:21):**  So I think the reason that that stat is important, the fact that more protein comes from animal  source foods than calories is that sometimes this conversation we talk about calorie availability,  or we talk about just reducing the consumption of these animal source foods. And I think  we have to be realistic about what would displace that chicken or whatever is in somebody's  diet. Would it be, you know, good fruits and vegetables? Or would it be something else  
**[0:15:48-0:15:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:15:48):**  that maybe again, is more energy rich and nutrient poor? And I think that some of that  is unknowable. But I also don't think we should just assume that the change would be positive,  if that makes sense.  It's an excellent point. And it's a discussion that I've seen in, you know, in other sectors  too in seafood. You know, it also brings us maybe, what does less mean? One frame to look  
**[0:16:11-0:16:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:16:11):**  at this is obviously specifically around what is our kind of physiological protein requirement,  as you mentioned, Finlow. And that is where some of this is not that controversial. Right?  So if we're looking at most estimates, whether it's USDA or government, other governments,  nutritional advice or academic studies, you know, they would say we need about 50 to 70  grams of protein, you know, depending on our body size. Every meal provides a third of  
**[0:16:40-0:16:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:16:40):**  the protein you need during the day. Then a sort of typical, say, fast food fish sandwich  with about 15 or 18 grams of protein holds enough protein for that meal. And because  our bodies can't store the excess protein, you know, it will be, as Finlow said, it will  be expelled from our body. There's sort of no point in eating more than those 15 to 18  grams every meal.  
**[0:17:06-0:17:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:17:06):**  I can hear Sarah that you're ready to come in there. But what I want to do actually is  just going to move the conversation on a little bit. So I think we've talked about less a  lot. And I think we, you know, to some extent, we've come to the conclusion that we're not  quite sure actually what less means and that there are, you know, different frames that  we can apply. But if we move on to, you know, the better aspect of the phrase less and better,  
**[0:17:29-0:17:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:17:29):**  then perhaps you can answer what Oystein was talking about there in terms of that. You  know, whether, what does better mean? What are those priorities? I mean, we all want  things to be better, but what does it mean? Is it better land use, better profits for  farmers, better food security, better environmental outcomes or better health? Perhaps we could  start from there.  
**[0:17:50-0:17:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:17:50):**  Yeah, yeah, I think that's very key. And we can think about it from a food security standpoint  of I think with nutrition, it's really challenging, right? Because sometimes the way we talk about  nutrition and sustainability is through this lens of preventing chronic disease. And sometimes  the way we talk about it is kind of what was just touched on a more nutrient adequacy standpoint  and those things sometimes get muddled up together. And that's part of the confusion  
**[0:18:16-0:18:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:18:16):**  too. And even on the protein, I think there's a, and I say this as, you know, I'm an animal  scientist, right? I think there's a very big misinterpretation of what the recommended  daily allowance for protein is in and what it is not in humans. So essentially there  were studies done on how much, how much protein do you have to eat to prevent nitrogen loss  as a human being? And that's kind of that range that you're giving that 50 to 70, depending  
**[0:18:42-0:18:49](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:18:42):**  on how, how much you weigh, it's usually expressed as 0.8 grams per kilogram of body weight, right?  That's what's the, the U S and the close to the WHO standard is. And that is truly the  amount that you need to eat to make sure you don't lose skeletal muscle. And I would argue  there's a difference between that and optimum and like, and what we, you know, quote unquote  should be eating. And it's always strange to me. It's like with protein, the bare minimum  
**[0:19:09-0:19:16](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:19:09):**  is put forward as the maximum. Be careful that we, we recognize there's a, there's a  range, right? Of what you can eat. And, you know, again, that, that comes back to the  definition of, of overconsumption, but, but to your point, Finlow about better, I mean,  that's, that's part of it too, right? Is what, what are the criteria that we are, what we  care most about? And I think this, even this discussion on the nutrition, I think we have  
**[0:19:33-0:19:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:19:33):**  to recognize that there's going to be differences of what people prioritize. And we had to think  about how do we create a food system that allows that flexibility? You know, if I'm  somebody that I care most about climate change, and I want to think about driving down CO2  emissions per, per kilocalorie that I consume, maybe I make totally different decisions than  if I care most about animal welfare. And I think we just have to recognize that some  
**[0:19:59-0:20:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:19:59):**  of this isn't ever going to perfectly balance, but we have to try to move, if you will, in  a directionally correct way for a lot of these different categories.  And this is a challenge, isn't it? Because it's a challenge for governments and it's  a challenge for food companies themselves. And one of the things that, that I always  say when I'm talking to government is that, you know, we shouldn't be trying to solve  
**[0:20:19-0:20:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:20:19):**  climate change by itself. We need to be doing it at the same time as trying to restore and  maintain biodiversity because there's an equal catastrophe sort of looming. We need to be  improving or where it's good maintaining good animal welfare and maintaining a diversity,  diversified sort of rural economy where there are family farms, family businesses that are  able to thrive and, you know, and grow their businesses. And all those aspects are really  
**[0:20:45-0:20:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:20:45):**  important. And if we're just targeting one, we're going to lead to some really quite perverse  outcomes. Yeah, I think that's a great point. And that's,  that's always the challenge. It's not, you know, it's so easy to focus on just one aspect  of this, you know, but, but to your point that can have collateral damage that is unintended  if we do go down that route. And that's where I think food is, food is different than say,  
**[0:21:06-0:21:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:21:06):**  you know, how we have to tackle the climate change challenge of energy production, right?  Because everybody has to eat, right? And we do have nutrient requirements and we do have  diversity of ecosystems that we're dealing with. And we just have, you know, natural  variability. And so we have to think about resiliency of our system in ways that maybe  other segments of our economy do not. So I think it is just wildly complex. And I, I  
**[0:21:33-0:21:37](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:21:33):**  think that's where when we, when we use those words less and better, we can, we can get  behind, you know, general concepts, but I do think we had to get down to the concrete,  what does it actually mean? And I think you had mentioned this earlier, when we say less,  I know having worked for cattle producers, that's like, this is a trigger word for them,  right? And I almost think like the collateral damage of this conversation in terms of alienating  
**[0:21:58-0:22:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:21:58):**  groups of people that should be working together has been underestimated. I really think that  there's a lot of natural alliances there between people that truly care about the environment  and agriculturalists, but they sometimes feel almost like attacked, right? Or they, they're  like, well, you think my life's work, what I do is terrible. Why would I work with you?  Right. If that makes sense.  
**[0:22:20-0:22:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:22:20):**  It's really interesting because, you know, when, when I, when I kind of think back to  the work that we've done on climate change over the course of the last few years, particularly  in the UK, an awful lot of that has been about trying to reframe the language, move it away  from talking about polar bears. Everyone cares about a polar bear. They're not going to change  their life to save it necessarily. And so how do we reframe that in a, in a way that  
**[0:22:40-0:22:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:22:40):**  is mobilizing for the general public by talking about agricultural land, by talking about  food security and impact on, on land management, by talking about flooding and the way that  our homes are vulnerable. That's how we, we started to change the conversation on climate  change. And so many NGOs are using this less and better phrase. And yet if, if what you're  saying is right, and, and, you know, I'm sure that it is that just the framing itself is  
**[0:23:07-0:23:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:23:07):**  alienating, then we kind of need to grow up quite quickly and, and move away from that  language and find language, which is, which is embracing, which makes farmers and landowners  feel empowered to do something really good and feel valued for doing something really  good instead of this kind of, you know, slightly aggressive, even though it's not meant to  be framing that we have at the moment.  
**[0:23:29-0:23:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:23:29):**  Yeah, I think that's right. I mean, I guess that's a, you know, that is a point for us  also to really focus the conversation on better, right. Rather than, rather than less, because  better could mean better margin, you know, better pay, better, you know, better production  systems, et cetera. And I think that does, you know, that, that is where the food system,  I guess, at the moment has a, has a challenge around really differentiating. We don't, you  
**[0:23:53-0:23:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:23:53):**  know, we don't always know the, that a type of beef or a type of vegetable has been produced  in vastly different ways and that that has, has different outcomes in terms of, in terms  of things that we care about. So I'd say, you know, we need to move the conversation  to better. And I think we will always be in a point that Sarah mentioned that people,  people care more, we care about different things, right. And we do want to, you know,  
**[0:24:20-0:24:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:24:20):**  people will be looking around for, for, for, for products and processes and companies,  et cetera, that sort of align with, with what they care about. And for many, I think better  in terms of food refers to, refers to animal welfare. We haven't talked so much about that  so far. So if you think about chicken, you know, we've seen a bit of a move around the  world lately, both in the US and, and, and Europe towards companies considering those  
**[0:24:48-0:24:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:24:48):**  lower stocking densities. There's a call for, for alternative breeds of birds that are,  you know, slower growing and have a higher welfare outcomes, provision of sort of environmental  enrichments that allow the chickens to sort of express more of their, their natural behaviors.  Some of this is obviously driven by, by campaigns, but some of it might also just be driven by,  I don't know, an awareness or discomfort maybe with, with some of the highly intensive production  
**[0:25:18-0:25:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:25:18):**  systems. And in that case, less might become a way for companies or individuals to sort  of cover the added expense of producing that chicken that, you know, some, some consider  a considered better. So, you know, whether that's through, through again, portion sizes  or better, better utilization of the, of the full carcass or, or simply just eating their  better chicken one day, one day less a week.  
**[0:25:44-0:25:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:25:44):**  Yeah. And, and, you know, when we're talking about less, you know, the, the, the less part  of the conversation almost just doesn't need to be said because in some cases, you know,  it will by default become less, there will be fewer chickens from a system with lower  stocking density and, and a breed change. And, and so those other conversations that  you just raised are kind of important. But from that perspective, that better bit really  
**[0:26:09-0:26:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:26:09):**  becomes critical because a farmer needs to believe that they're going to at least sustain  similar levels of profit and ideally increase that either by shortening the supply chain,  selling directly to consumers perhaps, or working within a supply chain where each,  each chicken they're producing is more highly valued and therefore, you know, they're, they're  earning a bit more money.  
**[0:26:30-0:26:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:26:30):**  Yeah, no, I think you just brought up a really great point. And I think this is one of the  challenges too, even some of those figures that I presented earlier, right, about per  capita consumption. You know, if you had an economist on there, they would, they would  emphasize, you know, per capita availability is not demand, right. And it's to the point  that you just made that willingness to pay aspect and the total dollars within the animal  
**[0:26:51-0:26:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:26:51):**  agricultural system, the total dollars that get back to the producer aren't necessarily  always positively or negatively correlated with per capita availability, right. So I  think your point about thinking about how you structure the supply side and then some  of these other aspects are almost just going to, they're going to take care of themselves,  if you will, I think is important because in some ways we almost see that with the,  
**[0:27:16-0:27:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:27:16):**  the beef situation that, you know, per capita availability of beef, as I mentioned in most  developing countries has gone down, it hasn't increased much in developing countries. And  so really what we've seen is a fairly flat and even slightly declining per capita availability  of beef around the world. But in the United States, we've seen in the last 20 years,  the total dollars within the system has increased, right. And that has been providing a product  
**[0:27:41-0:27:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:27:41):**  that has seen as more highly valuable for people. And so I think that's, that's maybe  again, one of those ways to lower the blood pressure around this conversation is again,  just focusing on, focusing on that, that lived experience, that reality of, of the animals  of the people in the system and, and figuring out how do you capture more value for those  folks and, and kind of focus more on that. I think we'll, I think we'll drive more positive  
**[0:28:05-0:28:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:28:05):**  change if we, if we look at it that way.  So, so if we, I think, I think it feels like we're kind of moving onto the ground where  we're kind of defining sustainability as being, you know, part ethical, part environmental,  but that economics really needs to be sort of central to that as well. It's, you know,  it's that sort of third leg without which the, the stool falls over, the whole system  
**[0:28:26-0:28:30](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:28:26):**  falls over. And so I wonder if we can, we can just sort of, you know, think for a minute  about where those win-wins are, you know, what the, what the things are that we can  agree on and at the same time, think about the way in which people do have different  frames. They shop for different frames in just the same way that, that NGOs will advocate  in different frames. And so how can we help customers, people who are going out and buying  
**[0:28:50-0:28:55](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:28:50):**  food or going to a restaurant and, and buying a meal, ordering a meal, how can we help them  to understand that sustainability isn't about one thing or another, that it's a combination  of things. And then also to find, find products that fit in with that sort of definition of  sustainability. Yeah, I think, I think that's challenging.  There's a few different ways to think about it. We can think about it as more that kind  
**[0:29:14-0:29:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:29:14):**  of niche marketing and targeting certain people, or we can think about, do we, do we want to  do that or do we want to move the whole system incrementally, you know, towards better outcomes?  And I think your, your question about where some of those win-wins, I think there actually  are on linking some of the conversation that just happened about animal welfare and better  animal health outcomes, linking back to the productivity of those animals and hopefully  
**[0:29:40-0:29:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:29:40):**  resulting in fewer natural resources required to produce a given amount of animal protein.  Even in the developed world and definitely in the developing world, we still have lots  of challenges with mortalities of livestock and poultry species, right? And so anytime  that we can reduce illness, reduce mortalities that, you know, quite frankly, shouldn't be  happening, right? Because of disease, because of heat stress or whatever it may be, that's  
**[0:30:05-0:30:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:30:05):**  hopefully a positive where we're moving both the wellbeing of these animals and environmental  outcomes in the same direction. And sometimes that doesn't always happen with sustainability.  There are definitely trade-offs, but I think that's one of those bright spots where, you  know, hopefully we can improve the quality of life of animals, reduce mortality and improve  the environmental effects of the system. And so metrics are actually really important  
**[0:30:29-0:30:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:30:29):**  within that conversation. And, and Oystein, I wonder if you might want to come in on that  because you know, metrics, it seems to me, getting the right measures in place and, and  then using those to help farmers monitor the success of interventions or changes they're  making in their system, success or failure of those so that they can then further modify  what they're doing. But then also using those metrics somehow to communicate better with  
**[0:30:54-0:30:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:30:54):**  customers because of course, you know, in the old days, whenever the old days was, a  customer could go and buy direct from a farmer and have a conversation. Whereas now, you  know, the retailer is, is sort of there, the food supply system is, is there and kind of  in the way of that conversation for the vast majority of people. And that communication  between farmer and customer is very limited. So metrics and labelling the way that food  
**[0:31:18-0:31:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:31:18):**  is promoted becomes really critical to telling that story.  Yes, both, both the communication side, but also the, the, you know, the, on the supply  chain, the, the, the management side of things. So a lot of the work that we do at FAI is  around essentially expanding that toolbox of, of KPIs, right? Like key, key indicators  that a farmer or a supply chain manager can look at in order to, to measure the, the performance  
**[0:31:46-0:31:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:31:46):**  of, of that supply chain. And it's critical for us to try and come up with objective measures  that help us on a, on a, on a day to day or a crop by crop basis, really measure what  is the experience of the animals that are going through, going through this particular  system. And it doesn't matter which system it is, the, you know, the measures are often,  are often the same and they are as, as Sarah says, you know, they can be things like mortality,  
**[0:32:11-0:32:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:32:11):**  particular diseases that are, that are prevalent in different, in different species. They can  also be things that have to do with their, you know, their ability to express, express  natural, natural behaviors. So you get this sort of combination, I guess, of, of real  outcome measures, the things that we can look at an animal either in the barn or on the  field or at, even at the slaughterhouse to sort of see is, has this animal had a, had  
**[0:32:40-0:32:47](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:32:40):**  a good experience as well as measure consistently particular inputs and, and particular practices  that are done across the supply chain in order to add substance to that, to that communication  and add sort of evidence to do why, why could, why should you support, you know, support  this type of production system? And the same obviously then goes to, to those wider environmental  outcomes and I think that is where, you know, that is the next frontier in, in some ways  
**[0:33:09-0:33:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:33:09):**  is for when food production or when food producers can really evidence that their practices are  having positive outcomes on the things that we all agree that we need, you know, for the  survival of our own species. So I'm talking about documenting enhanced biodiversity on  your, you know, on your farm and in your field, improved soil health quality, water filtration  in the soil, pre-forestation, carbon sequestration, you know, the minute you have evidence from  
**[0:33:41-0:33:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:33:41):**  the, from the farm level to say that the production of, of these, you know, food products also  came with the production of these amazing outcomes. I think that's when we can shift  the debate and, and sort of make some, you know, make some real progress.  And communicating that to people, you know, that, that is, that is a challenge and Sarah,  I just, to flex, I'm going to come to you at the end of this, this question to see if  
**[0:34:03-0:34:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:34:03):**  you have thoughts, but, but it seems to me just in, in sort of trying to bring us together,  bring it, you know, draw us to a close on the conversation that we've started talking  about less and we've concluded that less isn't necessarily a helpful framing. But that better,  better can be helpful, particularly if it focuses on the economics as well and recognises  that farmers have families and farmers want to feel good about what they're doing. But  
**[0:34:28-0:34:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:34:28):**  then if we're using metrics to help with management and to assist with that future communication  with customers. But at the same time, you know, if I go into a supermarket now and I  want to buy sustainable, then, you know, I'm not sure that I can, because everything that  I'm looking at, whether it's you know, an organic mango that shrink wrapped and you  know, sent around the world, or whether it's it's a piece of local beef that was produced  
**[0:34:54-0:34:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:34:54):**  perhaps from a farm that wasn't as good as another, you know, there were challenges and  it's very difficult to sort of work my way through that as a, as a customer. And I wonder  if you have any thoughts, Sarah, about what we should be looking for, what people should  be looking for out there. And if you're not sure whether you have thoughts about the kind  of systems that could be introduced in order that we have better information in the future.  
**[0:35:16-0:35:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:35:16):**  Yeah, I think what was just said about metrics is spot on, right? So all these conversations,  a lot of the reason that we kind of have these circuitous conversations about these things  is because we don't have good measures that are outcome based, that we can actually track  some of these things over time. And so really, it's maybe not as thrilling of an answer,  but I really think it is about putting those systems in place where our producers can measure  
**[0:35:42-0:35:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:35:42):**  some of the positives and the negatives, if you will, so they can track it over time and  better measure it. And I think I think when folks can actually have those measures, they  will manage differently to change those outcomes. We definitely see that in other aspects of  agriculture, right. But if we don't have those good metrics, it's very hard for us to make  progress in that area. And I think whether that is soil carbon or these other ecosystem  
**[0:36:07-0:36:12](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:36:07):**  services that were talked about, right, whether it's water filtration or whatever it may be,  that is super important. As is I know you guys have been talking a lot about this GWP  star metric, which is great in terms of better linking methane emissions, whether it's from  the ruminants of ruminant animals or from manure, better to warming. But also if we're  going to use that metric, we need good time series data on methane. And we really are  
**[0:36:35-0:36:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:36:35):**  lacking that currently at the farm level. And so I think to answer your question, you  know, maybe we don't have those systems in place where somebody could scan a, you know,  a QR code and know that currently. But if we get those metrics in place and we have  broad agreement and set goals based on them, I think we're going to see a lot more rapid  change. But it's the lack of those deployable metrics at the farm level that's really holding  
**[0:37:00-0:37:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:37:00):**  us back from getting to the next level at the moment.  So it sounds to me like there is there's a real need to to find and I know that there  are different organisations looking at this from FAI, for example, at a global level,  working with the with the companies and corporates they work with. And, you know, in the UK,  groups like the Sustainable Food Trust, who are working on what those metrics are looking  
**[0:37:22-0:37:26](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:37:22):**  at them in the UK. But then, you know, looking at how those can be sort of broadened out  to to to work in systems around the world, getting those metrics in place so that people  can start to start to trust their food, perhaps more than they do currently in terms of that  sustainability aspect. But perhaps in in conclusion, rather than thinking in terms of less and  better and, you know, taking Oyston's point that we can focus on on better more, perhaps  
**[0:37:49-0:37:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:37:49):**  there are different phrases that we can we can think of. And the one that keeps sort  of coming back to my mind is one which is associated with regenerative agriculture,  you know, sort of four pillars of regenerative agriculture. And one of them is complexity,  you know, complexity of the sword, complexity in nature. And it seems to me that complexity  or diversity in our own diets is one of the things that we can all do that, you know,  
**[0:38:13-0:38:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:38:13):**  I know I eat a lot of toast, you know, frankly, and, you know, so that's a lot of bread. I  could improve my health, I can improve the sustainability footprint of my diet by broadening  the variety of foods that I use. But when we're talking about diversity, we should be  thinking about farm type. So the scale of the production system, and the type of food  that's produced in the fields and the outcomes, the environmental outcomes that are being  
**[0:38:40-0:38:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:38:40):**  delivered as well, that diversity is something complexity, you know, over the years, we've  been simplifying, ever simplifying the food system in different places, trying to, you  know, grow this one thing really, really well in this one place. But actually, if we add  more complexity, reintroduce a bit of diversity, then perhaps we'll start delivering some of  the outcomes that we're talking about.  
**[0:39:04-0:39:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:39:04):**  Yeah, I think that's key is that, you know, to your point, it's sometimes the way we frame  things is just completely wrong. And I think whether it's saying it's, you know, it's either  plant based or animal based agriculture, that's really at the end of the day, kind of silly,  right? Because it's about both and it's about how they fit together. And to your point,  you know, that's where livestock are very valuable in agricultural systems is, you know,  
**[0:39:27-0:39:32](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:39:27):**  that nutrient cycling, that upcycling ability that they have, that's really key. And so  that's very important. And then on the consumer side, honestly, I always, I hesitate giving  anybody any dietary advice. It's like, you know, you do you and I hope you eat enough.  That's pretty much how I feel about it of I don't want us to dictate people's diets  on some of these issues. When we just highlighted, we have such challenges and really linking  
**[0:39:55-0:40:00](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:39:55):**  production practices to a given item on a shelf. And so that's probably an unsatisfactory  answer. But I just I just really believe strongly that we don't want to turn this into a food  shaming exercise that people should first and foremost, take care of yourself and and  hopefully enjoy your food because at the end of the day, it's food.  I mean, I think what I'm taking from what I'm taking for what you've just said there,  
**[0:40:16-0:40:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:40:16):**  Sarah is that look, it's it's, you know, it's down to individuals what they eat. But actually,  there are so many other different aspects, different parts of the food system, the food  supply chain, you know, where, where these changes also need to be made. And so telling  people what to eat or rewarding people or for being vegan or telling people off reading  too much meat is it's beside the point, really, it's about making sure fundamentally that  
**[0:40:41-0:40:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:40:41):**  the food systems that we have, the food production that we have is sustainable so that we can  go on producing food so that people continue having choice, you know, for the decades and  the centuries to come. Absolutely. And that's that's very key. And  I want to say, you know, like if somebody chooses to be vegan, they shouldn't be vilified  either. Right. Like that cuts across everything. That's that's absolutely right.  
**[0:41:00-0:41:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:41:00):**  I totally agree. And I think there is, you know, at the moment, there is quite a lot  of sort of food anxiety, I would say. And and the sort of flip side of that, for me,  is that maybe, you know, less and better. Is it essentially the same as sort of everything  in moderation or, you know, a varied diet or a balanced plate? You know, we've had you  know, we've had we've had many sort of versions of that type of mantra. And and perhaps it's  
**[0:41:27-0:41:33](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:41:27):**  for me, it's it's, you know, the same way as as nature blossoms with with biodiversity.  I think our health and production systems blossoms when, you know, when there is diversity  and when we, you know, when we sort of eat diversity, so to speak.  So we spend 40 or 50 minutes answering a question that we kind of think might be a bit silly,  even to be focusing on in the first place. And, you know, we need to find more ways of  
**[0:41:52-0:41:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:41:52):**  doing better across the whole food chain. And perhaps we need to find better framing,  different framing that is that is appealing to more people, which engages producers in  the same way that it mobilises customers. So if anybody has suggestions, then answers  on a postcard or on Twitter, at least, please. So I'm going to draw it to an end. Thank you  very much, everybody. It's been a really good conversation. Thank you to my guests, Dr.  
**[0:42:20-0:42:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-Less--Better-mean-ebr9a0#t=0:42:20):**  Sarah Place from Alanko Animal Health and Oyston Torson from FAI Farms. If you've enjoyed  listening, then please come back and listen to more like us, review us, share our links  to all those things that you do with podcasts. You can join the conversation on Twitter by  searching for Farmgate podcast. Farmgate is produced jointly by Farmwell and FAI Farms.  I've been Finn Loceystain. Bye for now.  