### Farm Gate  (2020-45-07)
**[0:00:00-0:00:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, and welcome to Farmgate. I'm Finn Logue-Kustain.  Food security is a hot topic. Suddenly coronavirus has placed it at the top of people's minds.  But for many years, the issue has been much lower on the public agenda, perhaps because  some NGOs and policy advocates felt squeamish about the nationalism and the focus on volume  that older definitions of food security seem to imply. But has food security ever just  
**[0:00:31-0:00:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:00:31):**  been about calories and commodity? And if it was, isn't it time that we redefined  food security for the modern world, recognising the essential role that land use, food system  resilience and nutrition play in ensuring that not only our own citizens, but citizens  around the world can eat and eat well. In this programme, I'll speak to three food  system experts. Later, I'll talk to Vicky Hurd from Sustain and Tim Benton from Chatham  
**[0:00:58-0:01:03](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:00:58):**  House. But first of all, I asked Patrick Holden, the chief executive of the Sustainable Food  Trust, the apparently simple question, what is food security?  Patrick Holden, Chief Executive of the Sustainable Food Trust, Sustain  It's a simple question, but a very important one. I would define it very broadly as the  capacity of a population to feed itself in a reliable and sustainable way. And in so  
**[0:01:21-0:01:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:01:21):**  doing to withstand external shocks to the system. So I suppose I would include the word  resilience into the definition of food security. And as we all know from recent developments  with the pandemic, external shocks can easily threaten food supplies or even induce a fear  that the food supplies might be threatened. So I think that the definition of food security  needs to include the capacity to withstand these changing external conditions and still  
**[0:01:48-0:01:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:01:48):**  be able to feed ourselves in a reliable way.  World Finance Right at the beginning of what you were saying  there, you talked about feeding ourselves well. And within that, nutrition and good  food must come into place. It's not just about calories.  Patrick Holden, Chief Executive of the Sustainable Food Trust, Sustain  
**[0:02:03-0:02:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:02:03):**  No, of course. And really, it's implicit, but maybe needs to be explicit in the definition,  that maintaining the health of a population means positive health. Not just keeping people  alive, but actually keeping people in a state where they can withstand external disease  challenges and remain really healthy. So absolutely, health and nutritional quality is part of  the food security equation.  
**[0:02:26-0:02:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:02:26):**  World Finance Do you think the definition has changed?  Patrick Holden, Chief Executive of the Sustainable Food Trust, Sustain  Well, I think it's evolving. But you mentioned the Second World War, and the lessons we can  learn from history. And I'm told that the health of the public was greater and more  vibrant than ever before, during the dig for victory phase, where people actually had to  
**[0:02:45-0:02:50](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:02:45):**  be more self-sufficient. Many of my parents' generation had victory gardens, grew their  own vegetables, and changed their diets. And of course, the change probably was manifested  in much more fresh and wholesome food, and the result was better health. So I heard the  other day of – dare I call him a crackpot – but a person in the Treasury who suggested  that food security for the United Kingdom was just about sourcing food from the other  
**[0:03:12-0:03:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:03:12):**  side of the world, or wherever it was cheapest to produce. Well, I think we now can realise  that actually what, for me at any rate, food security represents is the capacity of my  household to source its staple foods in a reliable way from producers who are farming  near to me, who depend on me, and who know that I depend on them. And that's a beautiful  and mutually beneficial relationship. Because then, come tempest and storm, I can go to  
**[0:03:39-0:03:44](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:03:39):**  them, preferably even I can reach them if I need to, on foot. That would be the ideal  relationship, and be able to obtain my secure and resilient food supplies from them. Now,  in the case of a city like London, with a food footprint spanning probably a lot of  England and maybe a bit of Wales as well, from where I'm speaking to you, you can't  expect all the citizens of London to buy their vegetables from, you know, within 10 miles  
**[0:04:04-0:04:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:04:04):**  of where they live. But that said, my daughter Alice is working for growing communities,  growing organic vegetables in Dagenham. And I think one of the most inspiring aspects  of growing communities is that they have a policy of building relationships with peri-urban  farms around the perimeter of London and saying to those farmers, look, we will buy all your  product, whatever it is, and it's probably a range of different products if they're farming  
**[0:04:29-0:04:34](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:04:29):**  in a sustainable way. And you will know that you would have guaranteed market for your  outlet for your food come hell or high water, in this case coronavirus. And that way you  build food security for the citizens of London. Well, now what a brilliant idea and may it  grow to proper scale. I wonder if food security actually means doing slightly different things  in different places. And we've talked before about, you know, the localisation of supply,  
**[0:04:55-0:04:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:04:55):**  you were talking about it there. And I know that, you know, we've had conversations in  the past about how difficult it can be for people to identify sustainable food when they  go shopping in major retailers. Now, you mentioned the Dig for Victory campaign, people growing  food in their own back gardens. And I wonder if you feel in terms of easing some of that  pressure on bigger population centres like London or Birmingham, that actually there's  
**[0:05:22-0:05:29](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:05:22):**  an ongoing duty for people in more rural environments who have their own gardens to put aside a  little bit of it and actually use it to grow some of the food they eat.  Absolutely. And what a wonderful thing that would happen, not just in gardens, but in  parks and of course, the incredible edible initiative that Pam Wadhurst is leading, where  we start to look at open spaces which have been grassed over or growing kind of useless  
**[0:05:47-0:05:52](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:05:47):**  shrubs which probably aren't even very good for biodiversity, and instead thinking of  them as potentially food producing areas. So certainly, I believe that the current coronavirus  pandemic is going to precipitate a great surge of new interest in growing your own food and  increasing one's level of self-sufficiency in relation to vegetables and fruits that  one can grow in one's garden and therefore achieve a greater degree of resilience in  
**[0:06:17-0:06:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:06:17):**  one's food supply.  Now, Patrick, you'll know there are competing visions of what food security means and I  think, you know, I've come across conversations recently where people have been coming back  to price, back to volume and commoditisation that the way that we deliver food security  is by keeping prices low for the poorest, by making sure that we produce lots of key  
**[0:06:39-0:06:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:06:39):**  commodities in whatever way is necessary.  Well, I think I do agree that we need affordable food, but the present food pricing system  is dishonest because the prices we pay in the shops do not reflect the true cost of  production or its impact on natural capital, on pollution, on climate change, etc. And  it seems to me that we need to correct those distortions and have honestly priced food  
**[0:07:03-0:07:08](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:07:03):**  and that should be part of the move towards greater food security. And of course, until  we have that, it's very difficult for our own farmers to compete with imports produced  to lower standards. So this really needs to be wrapped up in a strategy to increase the  degree of genuine food security for this nation and to make sure that the prices we pay for  our food honestly reflect their environmental and human impacts. And if we did all that  
**[0:07:33-0:07:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:07:33):**  and the polluter paid and we redirected the subsidies, which are currently really a social  security check for farmers and made sure that they were conditional on producing high quality  food for local populations, then the world will be a better place and we would have a  much greater degree of food security.  And food security sort of expands from the immediate day to day. I mean, we're talking  
**[0:07:56-0:08:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:07:56):**  in the context of the coronavirus pandemic and, you know, my own experience, I'm sure  we've all had experiences of things that we wanted or needed to get in the supermarket,  which just aren't available. And so it's coping with those day to day aspects of people being  able to feed themselves well, but then making sure that over time the land becomes more  resilient so that we can predict with confidence that there will be greater food security in  
**[0:08:22-0:08:24](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:08:22):**  the future because our land has become more resilient.  Yes. I mean, it's very interesting you make the point about current shortages of food  due to a combination of hoarding and genuine scarcity. But even for the movement towards  greater food security that we are discussing, the pandemic is pretty disruptive. Just taking  our own farm as a case study, we produce a cheese which has been going to restaurants  
**[0:08:48-0:08:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:08:48):**  and to destination cheese shops and some has been going to export. And all three of those  markets have suffered in the pandemic. And as a result of the huge concentration that  most of the successful online retailers are placing on just getting the staples through  to their customers, products like our cheese are definitely not in the equation. So we're  looking at a 50% reduction in the sale of Havon cheese as a result of the pandemic.  
**[0:09:17-0:09:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:09:17):**  And we don't know when that's going to come right. And it's not because people don't want  our cheese. It's just that we don't have the channels to get it to people that want it.  So this is a really interesting reappraisal. And what I hope will happen is that the reappraisal  will take into account the relocalisation of sustainably produced food rather than just  go to a sort of military style, large scale sourcing exercise, which is probably currently  
**[0:09:42-0:09:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:09:42):**  dominating the government's minds.  Patrick Holden from the Sustainable Food Trust, talking about shortening supply chains and  the importance of embedding food production at the heart of all of our communities.  Fikki Hurd is the sustainable farming coordinator at Sustain. I asked her whether food security  should centre on availability and volume or be more strongly focused on quality and nutrition.  
**[0:10:06-0:10:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:10:06):**  We've got to really get away from the idea it's amount of calories and that's all that  matters. It's like the equivalent of GDP being an assessment of our wellbeing. Neither is  appropriate because we need a range of nutritional elements to make sure we've got a good diet  and people have different needs at different parts of their lives and depending on what  their activities are. So we've got to move away from it being about calories and just  
**[0:10:30-0:10:35](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:10:30):**  about money to being about people having control over what they buy and what they have access  to. So having some agency is very important as well. So some people use the term food  sovereignty, which is a very good one about having the control over whether you can produce  your own food or you can actually access your own food and your food being nutritionally  appropriate, culturally appropriate for you. And that also, food sovereignty is also about  
**[0:10:53-0:10:58](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:10:53):**  farmers having control over their livelihoods and what happens to the food that they produce.  Over the course of the last couple of decades, my own sort of feeling, my own understanding  of food security feels like it's changed. And I'm not sure whether that's just me and  other people within the food community or whether it's sort of society more broadly.  How do you think public perceptions of food security have changed over the last few decades?  
**[0:11:15-0:11:21](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:11:15):**  Oh, well, that's an interesting question. I think it's still seen by some as purely  a matter of can we afford to buy food wherever it's from. And I think there's certain elements  of our political class, you know, the politicians who still believe that's good enough. But  I think communities are getting very much more involved in what their food is about,  where it's from, how it's grown, how healthy it is. We run something called the Sustainable  
**[0:11:38-0:11:43](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:11:38):**  Food Cities Network and that's a movement. It's growing rapidly and it's very much about  people having interest in food at a local level. And that means food security. It means  food health, food sustainability, tackling the climate and nature emergency. And so that's  all the way from local to regional, to national, to global thinking about food security and  a whole section. I think there's also been a huge amount of information and campaigns  
**[0:12:04-0:12:09](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:12:04):**  around the impact of our consumption on the global commons and rainforests being destroyed  to produce beef and soya and palm oil. All these things are beginning to get understood  by people and particularly the younger generation. And they understand some of these global food  challenges. Let's come back to the sort of global picture  in just a moment. But I'm reminded as you talk that when I was given evidence at the  
**[0:12:27-0:12:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:12:27):**  Agriculture Bill Committee just recently, as I know you did as well, I think it was  a Labour MP that asked me about food security and about the impact of changes around agricultural  policy, the changes they were going to have on food prices and about the importance of  making sure that everybody could afford to eat. I guess my own response was that food  security isn't just about price. It's about making sure that we manage our land well.  
**[0:12:53-0:12:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:12:53):**  How do we separate out those different ideas? To be honest, I think it'd be very, very unlikely  for politicians not to focus every time on the price issue. It's the one thing about  food that always gets politicians excited and it was ever thus. We could try and you're  absolutely right. It is about so much more than that. And the reality is for the majority  of people who find they can't afford to eat well or to eat, or to eat the kind of things  
**[0:13:23-0:13:28](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:13:23):**  they want to eat, it's because they haven't got the incomes or they haven't got a car  to go to the shop. So we're very much focusing on tackling the drivers of people being in  poverty or not able to afford the kind of things they need. And it's to do with housing  costs, it's to do with poor welfare situation, it's to do with poor incomes, zero hours contracts.  All those things are very much at the heart of food prices being a problem. Because as  
**[0:13:49-0:13:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:13:49):**  we know, in the UK we've got the cheapest foods across Europe. And so making it any  cheaper would be very much leading us down towards more intensive and more harmful farm  practices, which we know we don't need because that's very much a problem in the long term  in terms of climate change, soil loss, biodiversity loss, and our ability to feed ourselves.  I think what you're saying is that the two are kind of separate, that we need to deal  
**[0:14:17-0:14:23](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:14:17):**  with poverty with one strategy, and then redefine food security so that we understand that it's  different from poverty. Poverty is a whole different social construct or result of policies  that we need to address in a different way.  There are issues around planning and availability of food that really need to be considered  as well here though, the availability of fresh produce on the high street, having those kind  
**[0:14:44-0:14:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:14:44):**  of issues dealt with. So we don't want to lose sight of the fact that people need to  have access to food, wherever they are, whatever their income. But yes, I think definitely  keeping it separate in terms of policy responses to farming.  If we were looking ahead and we're sort of recognising that there is a degree to which  in the past food security has been synonymous with calories, with volume, with an intensification  
**[0:15:09-0:15:14](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:15:09):**  of agriculture. If you were looking forward 20 years to what food security should look  like on the ground from your perspective, what are the big key changes?  That's a great question. That whole food system vision is what you're asking for. And I think  a good word to describe, well two words to describe it would be more diverse and sustainable.  And there's so many things within that. But if you think about diversity on the farm,  
**[0:15:34-0:15:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:15:34):**  so we're diversifying the cropping and the livestock so that they're better fitted to  the carrying capacity of the soil, of the land, of the microclimate. And making sure  that all fits together by having a more diverse cropping system and rotations, et cetera.  But it's also about a more diverse supply chain and a more diverse retail opportunity.  And we're very interested in 20 years' time, it would be fantastic to see real inroads  
**[0:16:02-0:16:07](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:16:02):**  by better food trading initiatives so that farmers can actually trade their food either  directly to consumers or through traders that are going to pay fairly. And that's made of  massive inroads. I mean if it all came out in 20 years' time I'd like to see 50% of the  food retailed through new forms of retail, all food service sector, compared to now where  the bulk of it is sold through a very small handful of extremely powerful retailers.  
**[0:16:29-0:16:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:16:29):**  So greater complexity, greater diversity.  More complexity and actually bringing it more local and regional where that's appropriate.  So yeah, getting people closer to the food that they eat where it makes sense. Obviously  we're still going to be importing things and getting things from long distance, but it  should be focused more on the regional and local.  
**[0:16:49-0:16:54](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:16:49):**  Through the conversation we've been talking about food security in terms of food availability,  the amount of food that is there, making sure, you know, different strategies, different  approaches to making sure that food is there. But do you think, you know, if we're talking  about food security and breaking apart that phrase a little bit, can you see in the future  if we fail to tackle climate change, if we fail to arrest the degradation of biodiversity,  
**[0:17:12-0:17:19](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:17:12):**  but disruptions to food supplies, that a lack of resilience in our food system could actually  lead to physical security issues, you know, in our own country and around the world?  I think that's absolutely right. I mean, we're talking more and more about resilience. And  if we've disrupted natural systems globally so much that we increasingly seen a rise in  zoonoses, a real crisis in terms of climate change, and that can be at local as well as  
**[0:17:42-0:17:46](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:17:42):**  national levels, as we're seeing with the Amazon, you know, it's potentially releasing  more comdioxide now than it's taking in, which is an extraordinary situation and it's largely  to do with our food supply. So if we don't tackle those things, if we don't tackle climate  change and the nature emergency, and that's a lot, you know, it's very much to do with  land use and particularly in relation to biodiversity. If we don't do that, we will increasingly  
**[0:18:04-0:18:10](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:18:04):**  seeing big threats to our supply of nutritional security. I think that's absolutely right.  So we've got to tackle those with the great urgency, which is why in climate talks and  in the negotiations, land use and food has got higher up the agenda, but it's very political.  Vicky heard from Sustain, explaining that diversity, both in terms of food production  and the meals we choose to eat, is critical to developing greater resilience in our food  
**[0:18:31-0:18:36](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:18:31):**  systems. Professor Tim Benton, the director of energy, environment and resources at Chatham  House has been working on food security for many years. I asked him about his day to day  working definition.  The shorthand definition I use is access to a healthy diet for a healthy life.  What you've said there about health and a healthy life is really interesting because  
**[0:18:52-0:18:59](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:18:52):**  I think there has been a concern from many within the NGO community that traditionally  food security has been focused on volume and therefore has been used as an excuse for greater  intensification of agriculture.  Yes, I think broadly in the sense that the food system that we have now on a global basis  has largely been designed on the notion that there hasn't been enough food in the world  
**[0:19:20-0:19:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:19:20):**  and it dates back to post Second World War, economic reconstruction, lots of starving  people. How do we get economies going? How do we drive things forward? How do we drive  down the price of food so that people have got more money to spend on other things that  can drive economies forward? And all of that has led to, through the Green Revolution,  through the liberalisation of trade, to this overall notion that food is largely about  
**[0:19:46-0:19:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:19:46):**  calories and filling our stomachs up. Food should be as cheap as possible and the health  impacts of the production of that food and the environmental impacts of the production  of that food are less important than the producing at large volumes and at cheap price. And of  course, that leads to a whole lot of other notions. The more we concentrate on cheaper  food traded internationally, the more we've squeezed down from a very large number of  
**[0:20:12-0:20:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:20:12):**  crops down to the basic eight or so that provide three quarters of the world calories. Everybody's  eating more or less the same thing. It's very rich in calories. It's poor in nutrients.  The diseases associated with having access to too many calories are becoming prevalent  all over the world. Non-communicable diseases like diabetes and heart disease arising from  complications coming out of obesity. So, we have taken our eye off the ball too much and  
**[0:20:39-0:20:45](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:20:39):**  defined the point of agriculture as producing cheap calories. And I think the whole notion  of food security in terms of, as I framed it, about a healthy diet for a healthy life  implies that we should be focusing on nutrition, putting people at the heart of our notions  of food security and the all people at all times by definition includes future generations.  So, you know, getting people right, you know, people's diets right for a healthy life, but  
**[0:21:08-0:21:13](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:21:08):**  in a sustainable way so that in 50 years time, children, particularly in vulnerable countries,  are not going to be disadvantaged even more by climate change driven by our current climate  and lack of biodiversity and poor soil quality, etc.  You've linked their food security to the, over the last decades, the commoditisation,  the over commoditisation of food. And I think the suggestion there is that food security  
**[0:21:32-0:21:38](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:21:32):**  needs to be as much about quality as it is about commodity and the health aspect really  needs to be front and centre as we move forwards. And I'm interested that there has been, you  know, even when I talk about this amongst colleagues, there is a certain squeamishness,  particularly, you know, if I would frame it this way from colleagues who were perhaps  on the centre or left of centre around the idea of food security, that it's somehow not  
**[0:21:59-0:22:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:21:59):**  only that it's associated with this commoditisation and intensification of production, but also  that it's a little bit, they're a bit squeamish around the nationalism of the food security  conversation. And equally, when I talk to other people, perhaps on the right of that  argument, there is quite a quick response and a quick assumption that food security  is about how we keep the nation fed in a very kind of World War Two fashion.  
**[0:22:24-0:22:31](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:22:24):**  Only in some circumstances, such as we might be entering now with COVID or a war situation,  is there a mapping of food security on a national basis to self-sufficiency. Those are typically  two very, very different notions. And they get confused in multiple ways. And there are  kind of contested bits in that, of course, different parts of the industry want to privilege  their parts of the supply chain for guaranteed markets and so on. So I think there's a whole  
**[0:22:54-0:23:01](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:22:54):**  host of things in that. From the, yeah, there is also therefore a degree of kind of nationalistic  or populistic thinking within that. I think from the left, the more squeamishness, and  it's also reflected in the right, but for different reasons, is the relationship between  healthy diets, sustainable diets, food price, and broadly food poverty. Food should be as  cheap as possible. And as I mentioned earlier, the reasons for that are that by making food  
**[0:23:23-0:23:27](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:23:23):**  as cheap as possible, you have other money to spend on other things that will drive the  economy forward. But it has become so deeply ingrained that politicians see cheaper food  as the necessity. And if cheaper food comes at the cost of healthcare subsidy or environmental  costs and environmental subsidy, then that is just how it has to be. And my own view  is that we should divorce the issue of poverty from the issue of food price and recognize  
**[0:23:51-0:23:56](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:23:51):**  that food price at the moment externalizes too much and food prices should rise, but  we should allow poor people to get out of poverty and we should tackle that as a separate  issue and not say we have to subsidize food prices in the name of the poor, because the  only way for that is to make it worse as time goes on.  I wonder if we're looking at the way that food security should be defined or framed  
**[0:24:16-0:24:22](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:24:16):**  in the future, whether we need to find a way of bundling in some of those additional costs  when we're talking about food security so that food security becomes about better land  use, better health, at the same time as hearing what you say about separating out the conversation  about food prices from the issue of food security itself.  Yeah, the way I would frame it would be we want to make our food system as productive  
**[0:24:43-0:24:48](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:24:43):**  as possible, not that we need to dance on the head of a pin about the definition of  food security, because I do think it implicitly deals with sustainable production and healthy  production. But the reason I say food system productivity is that we have focused so much  on agricultural productivity and yields and food prices. What we've done is we have created  a whole set of interlocking vicious circles that actually make our food system horribly  
**[0:25:12-0:25:18](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:25:12):**  inefficient. And what I mean by that is that food is so freely available and it's so cheap,  it's economically rational to waste it. To make food that cheap, we have concentrated  on a few crops growing at enormous scale with very high biodiversity loss, which are very  fragile to climate change and other interruptions. As we think about the future and the impact  of climate change and other interruptions, we're saying, oh, we've got to intensify more  
**[0:25:36-0:25:42](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:25:36):**  to make more food more cheaply that we can overeat and throw away and makes us into a  poor social state and drive our healthcare issues into bankruptcy. So instead of thinking  about how do we produce food as much as possible, as cheap as possible, that we can then throw  away that whose production has an environmental cost that we can overeat and that overeating  has a healthcare cost. Instead of doing that, we can think about how do we make our food  
**[0:26:05-0:26:11](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:26:05):**  system productive in terms of feeding people as the top of the sum and then underneath  the divisor feeding people, how do we minimise the traditional inputs, labour capital, synthetic  inputs, the natural capital, the waste of soil, the loss of biodiversity, the climate  change inputs, and how do we minimise the healthcare subsidy. And if you take that sum  of what a productive food system is, that's equivalent to how do we feed people healthily,  
**[0:26:34-0:26:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:26:34):**  sustainably per unit input rather than how do we grow as much as possible per unit input.  And if we just framed the food system in that way, it would imply a completely different  set of policy interventions. It would apply a more diverse food system. It would imply  a less wasteful food system, more interconnected livestock and arable farming, more complex  rotations. We would waste less food. There'd be less demand on the land. We could afford  
**[0:26:59-0:27:04](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:26:59):**  to use some of the land for carbon dioxide removal. We could have a more diverse landscape  with much richer biodiversity, et cetera, et cetera. So just simply by framing the food  system in terms of people fed healthily per unit input and sustainably, you end up with  a completely different policy space than how do we actually just increase yields as much  as we possibly can.  
**[0:27:19-0:27:25](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:27:19):**  World Finance, professor Tim Benton from Chatham House. Framing is incredibly important. How  we choose to define a question will nearly always shape the conclusions that we reach.  And I confess, I've been a little concerned by the way in which coronavirus has been used  recently by some commentators to try and reframe the issue of food security, just to sharpen  the focus on issues they already perennially campaign on. The current pandemic is a massive  
**[0:27:45-0:27:51](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:27:45):**  shock to our food system, not to mention our society and the overall economy. But it doesn't  suddenly eliminate the enormous pressures from other threats to our food infrastructure  that have become more substantial as the decades have passed. Climate change, biodiversity  loss, soil health, people trained to behave as consumers rather than citizens, the loss  of local infrastructure, and our reliance on vulnerable global supply chains.  
**[0:28:11-0:28:17](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:28:11):**  In my view, we need to do some serious work. Not only to define and describe the issue  of food security, using the frames described by my guests, but to consider the multitude  of threats we face, and the variety of human behaviours and reactions that may manifest  in response to coming crises.  I'd like to thank my guests, Patrick Holden, Vicki Heard, and Tim Benton. If you've enjoyed  
**[0:28:35-0:28:40](https://anchor.fm/farmgate/episodes/What-does-food-security-actually-mean-ecg6b2#t=0:28:35):**  listening, please come back and listen to more. Tell your friends, like us, review us,  and share our links. Farmgate is a partnership project for Farmwell and FAI Farms, and you  can join the conversation on Twitter by searching for Farmgate Podcast. I've been Finn low  Kustein – bye for now.  