---
title: Becoming The Change The Food System Needs
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### Tasting Terroir  (2022-11-30)  
### Author(s): Sara Hessenflow Harper  

**0:00:00-0:00:29:**  Hello and welcome back to our podcast, Tasting Tarroir, where we are on a journey to explore  the link between healthy soil and the flavor of your food.  I'm your host, Sarah Harper.  
**0:00:29-0:00:45:**  This week I am really looking forward to talking with you about the farmers and food producers  in our global food and farm community.  A number of them will be participating in a webinar that we're actually holding today,  
**0:00:45-0:00:58:**  December 1st at 11am Eastern.  You're all welcome to join.  It's free and you can find it on our website, globalfoodfarm.com slash events or just click  
**0:00:58-0:01:14:**  on the events button and it will let you register for the webinar.  If you can't make it today, we're going to have these discussions every month, first  Thursday of the month, again 11am Eastern US time.  
**0:01:14-0:01:31:**  The point of them is going to be to have more of a dialogue between those of you who are  interested in finding better food, interested in the regenerative agriculture movement and  the producers that are actually doing it and struggling with all these different decisions  
**0:01:31-0:01:45:**  and trade-offs and frankly struggling to get their products to market, to be able to cut  through the noise that is surrounding them.  We've created a page on our website called Find Better Food.  
**0:01:45-0:01:57:**  If you click on that, you'll get to see a little profile of several of our producers  in our community.  There are links there directly to their websites, to their online stores and to the different  
**0:01:57-0:02:09:**  podcast links that feature them.  So you can get a good amount of background about them but then on these webinars, this  is really your chance to have a discussion, kick the tires, ask them about the different  
**0:02:09-0:02:21:**  products that they're growing and how they make the decisions that they do and what their  food tastes like.  I know it's hard to describe taste but you can really learn a lot from somebody by talking  
**0:02:21-0:02:35:**  with them and being able to ask the questions that you're curious about.  And so we're really thrilled that a number of our producers and food company members  have agreed to participate in this ongoing dialogue with you, the public.  
**0:02:35-0:02:52:**  So again you can access this event and sign up for future webinars, first Thursdays of  the month, 11 a.m. Eastern at our website GlobalFoodFarm.com and then click on the events  page to let you sign up.  
**0:02:52-0:03:02:**  While you're there you can also sign up for our newsletter and latest updates from our  blog.  We'll be featuring our members and sharing updates about their newest products and what  
**0:03:02-0:03:15:**  they're doing and how it's going.  And I think it's just a great chance to really actually build community with these people.  And part of why I feel like this is so important is because as many of you know, I started  
**0:03:15-0:03:32:**  Grounded Growth, an online community, over three years ago and its goal was trying to  connect farmers that were doing regenerative practices with food companies.  And while we had some good connections and good work, overall it was a failure.  
**0:03:32-0:03:41:**  Sad to say.  You know, I could put a nice spin on it and say we were ahead of our time.  I do think that's true.  
**0:03:41-0:03:59:**  But also I was really naive.  Even after having worked in the food and agriculture policy space and the business space for a  long time, I think a lot of people believe a lot of the consumer surveys, the hype, the  
**0:03:59-0:04:10:**  marketing that says regenerative agriculture, my goodness, it checks all the boxes.  It is what every consumer wants.  And if we can just get it to market, whoever does that will have this huge advantage.  
**0:04:10-0:04:30:**  I do think that's true, but it will take longer than certainly I thought at the time that  I launched a company to try to help facilitate that.  And I think that that process only happens as fast as consumers like you make it happen.  
**0:04:30-0:04:38:**  And so one of the things I wanted to talk about a little bit was what is the consumer  role in all of this?  I mean, I know we're all so busy.  
**0:04:38-0:04:45:**  We go to the grocery store, we've got our list, we've got to get in, we've got to get  out.  Or maybe we order some things online and have it delivered.  
**0:04:45-0:04:56:**  But we don't have a lot of time to invest in researching all these different products  and making our dollars have a big impact all the time.  And I get that.  
**0:04:56-0:05:11:**  And I don't think that we have to do that with everything that we buy, certainly.  But I do think that if we care about the food system and if we're unhappy with what it is  that we're being offered in terms of the amount of nutrients in our food, the amount of chemicals  
**0:05:11-0:05:27:**  in our food, the amount of tillage being done in the name of avoiding chemicals in our food,  the things that are disrupting our microbiome, the soil microbiome, the climate, so many  of the problems that we face today are all linked back to the soil.  
**0:05:27-0:05:42:**  And if we do care about those things, and if you're listening to this podcast, I got  to assume that you do, then we have to do more than just become part of a nonprofit  group or post something every now and then or get mad on Twitter.  
**0:05:42-0:05:55:**  The good news is that we can do something more now.  There are actual farmers who have taken that.  I mean, the crazy difficult step of adding on processing and ingredient making and food  
**0:05:55-0:06:15:**  company to their current load of overworked life.  And then there are some food companies like Around the World Gourmet and Snacktivist and  now Greenfield Incorporated as an ingredient company that are also reaching further outside  
**0:06:15-0:06:28:**  of their comfort zone and their existing operations to actually mill crops and to turn them into  ingredients.  These are people who they're not just to be admired from afar.  
**0:06:28-0:06:45:**  If you don't buy from their online stores and pay a little extra for shipping and take  a little bit of added inconvenience, then this whole shift in the food system that we  all want, it isn't going to happen, or at least not for several more years.  
**0:06:45-0:06:56:**  I know that you all want that shift to happen.  And part of why I think you hold back is the feeling like you're just a drop in the bucket  and you can't really make a difference.  
**0:06:56-0:07:09:**  But with these people, with these producers and food companies that we've been highlighting  on the podcast and that we're going to have this webinar with a chance for you to talk  more with these people, you really can make a difference.  
**0:07:09-0:07:25:**  You really will make a big difference to their bottom line and their ability to make it.  And when they make it, that is when the big food supply chain will come along and make  all of it much more accessible.  
**0:07:25-0:07:38:**  So I really am pleading with you, I guess, to take a step as you learn more about these  folks.  And now you have an easy way to connect all of them on our new website page, Find Better  
**0:07:38-0:07:46:**  Food.  It's at globalfoodfarm.com.  And then just click on the Find Better Food button right there on the menu.  
**0:07:46-0:07:55:**  Take a look at some of them, maybe pick one, adopt one and buy some of their food.  Check it out.  If it's not good, fine.  
**0:07:55-0:08:10:**  You don't have to keep buying it just for the sake of a cause.  But if it is good and it's good for you and it's good for the planet and it's good for  changing the food system, then you really are doing something amazing.  
**0:08:10-0:08:22:**  Okay, enough of that.  In this episode, I wanted to bring you some clips from the interviews I've done with a  number of the producers that are going to be on the webinar.  
**0:08:22-0:08:31:**  And hopefully you'll be able to join.  But if not, we're going to record it and hopefully be able to share some of their insights and  discussions.  
**0:08:31-0:08:45:**  And after the clips of some of these folks, many of whom are featured in full episodes  in our podcast, so you can just go back through and listen to the full episode of those that  you are interested in.  
**0:08:45-0:09:00:**  After that, I am going to share something kind of unique with you in the lines of celebrating  these amazing producers and farmers that are taking so much risk.  And I'm going to share with you more about my story of transitioning from Grounded Growth  
**0:09:00-0:09:19:**  and the work I did there into the Jill Cloperton online community, globalfoodfarm.com.  This has been a regenerative process for me personally, not just the work I'm doing, but  to really experience what it takes to try to run a small business, especially one that's  
**0:09:19-0:09:30:**  on the edge of a new market.  I wouldn't recommend it, by the way.  It's because of people like Jill Cloperton, who I've had the tremendous pleasure to get  
**0:09:30-0:09:46:**  to know and work with, and the farmers and food companies in our online community that  I've been able to find a new way forward, a new way to try to help promote this movement  and connect people to these better food producers.  
**0:09:46-0:09:58:**  And I'm really grateful for that, for that ability to take what I've learned and take  it to a new level.  And I'm also feeling like it's important sometimes that we share publicly when things don't go  
**0:09:58-0:10:14:**  so great, when things are hard, because they often are.  And there's not a pretty Instagram filter for that.  So I'm going to share with you something that I put together for the actual members in our  
**0:10:14-0:10:27:**  community.  And I learned to play the piano long ago, but I play by ear.  And I don't know if you noticed the ending music, it is the Don't Stop Believing song  
**0:10:27-0:10:45:**  from Journey, which of course we would never be able to afford the rights to.  But I've learned how to play it, and so that's me playing it, the outtake of every episode.  And so in this little piece of this episode, after the clips from our members that you're  
**0:10:45-0:11:01:**  going to get to talk with on the webinar, you will get to hear me play that song and  dedicate it to the folks that I've been working with for so long, and give you a little more  inside of them and some additional clips of how they see regenerative agriculture and  
**0:11:01-0:11:14:**  why they have not stopped believing.  So this is intended to be an inspirational episode, an episode to encourage you to take  hold of the power that you really do have as a consumer and use it.  
**0:11:14-0:11:35:**  And to celebrate with me these brave people who are risking quite a lot and investing  a lot of their own money in their own time to bring regeneratively grown food that's  healthier for you, that has better flavor, to bring that through directly to the consumer  
**0:11:35-0:11:48:**  instead of waiting for the food supply chain to creek along and finally get there five  years from now.  So if you appreciate that like I do, then go buy something.  
**0:11:48-0:12:03:**  Thanks.  Okay, so now we're going to listen to some of the clips from members in our community,  many of them involved in our webinars.  
**0:12:03-0:12:16:**  First up you'll be hearing from Diana Lazinski, founder and owner of Guardian Grains.  They make great whole grain pasta and flour.  Then it will be Clint Brower, Greenfield Incorporated.  
**0:12:16-0:12:29:**  They are pulling together supply chains for pet food companies like Canada and Snacktivist,  another one of our companies that you'll hear from.  Followed by Clint, you'll hear from Jennifer Kohler, founder and owner of Around the World  
**0:12:29-0:12:38:**  Gourmet.  They make gluten-free pizza crusts and are milling gluten-free rice flour, regeneratively  grown.  
**0:12:38-0:12:53:**  And after Jennifer, you'll hear from Craig Cameron of Peony Beef, forage-based beef,  nature-based beef.  And finally rounding it out will be Joni Kindwall-Moore, founder and owner of Snacktivist  
**0:12:53-0:13:01:**  Foods.  They make a number of great baking mixes and snacks working with regenerative farmers from  around the country.  
**0:13:01-0:13:11:**  Enjoy.  What was important to me was that it was whole nutrition, flour being used in the pasta,  and water.  
**0:13:11-0:13:28:**  Those two things.  I don't use egg, which a lot of pastas do.  And I just wanted it to be a food option for everyone, no matter what their eating practices  
**0:13:28-0:13:39:**  are, whether they're vegan or vegetarian or omnivores.  I wanted everyone to be able to enjoy Guardian Grains pasta.  And so that was why the two ingredients of wheat and water were really important to me.  
**0:13:39-0:13:55:**  Well, then that really lets people taste the wheat.  And we've talked a little bit in our group about that it's not just wine that has terroir,  that has this place-based taste, because the minerals that go into food affect its taste.  
**0:13:55-0:14:08:**  And especially in a system like yours, where there's such a focus on enhancing the soil  so there are more minerals and they are more available and they get into the food more,  then you can start to see where you can have taste differences based on the place it was  
**0:14:08-0:14:18:**  grown and how it was grown.  Those two things together.  And so then with your pasta being so pure, it's just the wheat and the water, then people  
**0:14:18-0:14:24:**  will really get to start to taste the difference, like to taste North Dakota, if you will.  Right.  And that's the idea, right?  
**0:14:24-0:14:48:**  Is that there can be flavor, natural flavor that's actually good for you.  And I think that part of the pastas have gotten kind of a bad rap and like people that are  carb conscious and things like that will steer away from pasta.  
**0:14:48-0:15:01:**  And rightfully so, because all of the brand has been extracted from that type of semolina  pasta.  And there's no way for our bodies to recognize it.  
**0:15:01-0:15:14:**  So when we consume regular blonde pasta, right, it ends up our bodies are like, I don't know  what to do with this.  Let me just set this on your hip forever.  
**0:15:14-0:15:28:**  And it never leaves.  The brand is a really important part of the fiber being able to move the pasta through  your system and for your body to be able to absorb the nutrients.  
**0:15:28-0:15:39:**  So it's, that was the other reason that I wanted it to be whole nutrition.  I didn't want anything extracted.  I wanted our bodies to be able to recognize it because I think that's part of the gluten  
**0:15:39-0:16:01:**  problem in the, especially in the States is that the processing between the growing practices  and the processing, I think our bodies are rejecting it.  And so the idea of using our grains with minimal processing was the best way to offer it and  
**0:16:01-0:16:16:**  to a way that people have can enjoy pasta and can enjoy bread again.  And then in Canada and the supply chain that you're building, that's another way that you're  bringing regenerative forward, creating a market for farmers that are wanting to farm  
**0:16:16-0:16:26:**  this way.  Yeah, look, we're fortunate enough to do a test in 2015 and the team, you know, Canada  bought into this and we started creating a supply chain back then.  
**0:16:26-0:16:33:**  And there's a, it's a different team now than it was back then because people change a company,  but they stuck with it.  So often it's growing.  
**0:16:33-0:16:39:**  It's pretty cool.  Yeah, that's right.  That was a shock actually.  
**0:16:39-0:16:56:**  So, and we stuck with it and it's growing and, and, um, and you know, company, I mean,  that's great.  I mean, our pets deserve regenerative food, certainly, but so do people.  
**0:16:56-0:17:06:**  Well I, uh, you know, look, I mean, they're humans too.  And their company kind of rallies around doing good things.  And so not just pet food, but doing it right and doing it well.  
**0:17:06-0:17:14:**  And they do things that beyond the regenerative supply chain, they're pretty darn cool.  So I give them a lot of credit.  They're very thoughtful group of folks.  
**0:17:14-0:17:21:**  I've enjoyed working with them, honestly.  And so it's cool that, you know, we're in the tens of millions of pounds shipping now.  That's great.  
**0:17:21-0:17:31:**  They're, uh, yeah.  I mean, yeah, I think it's a pretty good example for folks.  And uh, you know, if they lacked imagination, they can just look to what we're doing and  
**0:17:31-0:17:37:**  go, Oh, wow.  You know, this guy and the pet food company of are making this work.  It's not all of their ingredients.  
**0:17:37-0:17:46:**  It's not there, but we're making progress like every year, you know, and it's, you know,  it's another steady markets.  It's been hard.  
**0:17:46-0:17:58:**  It's been a little different here, but, um, we're still chugging along, you know, it's  great.  We are a manufacturer of gluten free vegan pizza crusts.  
**0:17:58-0:18:15:**  I have other recipes that I have that don't taste like it.  I might add because yes, that does some, some of those can be a little taste challenged  if you will, and I have had the good fortune to sample them many times and, and, and can  
**0:18:15-0:18:30:**  attest that they are, you know, the, the really can't tell the difference.  And in fact, a number of your patrons don't even know that they're, that's true.  We are manufacturing these gluten free pizza crusts and having distributors pick them up  
**0:18:30-0:18:46:**  and then we ship, we ship things out as well that are, um, to like the university of Iowa  and Denison university here in Ohio.  Um, we just got into a pizza chain called pizza Joe's out of Pennsylvania, Western PA  
**0:18:46-0:18:57:**  that has 42, 42 units and all those pizza crusts just got picked up today.  Um, right before this call actually.  So that was exciting.  
**0:18:57-0:19:05:**  Yeah.  All right.  And so yeah, the pizza crust that you're talking about, we do have a small retail front and  
**0:19:05-0:19:22:**  I wanted to prove to everybody that our pizza crusts are the best and they do not taste  like, um, the typical gluten-free crust.  And so, um, I forced the entire Ohio Valley here to eat and they don't, they can't tell  
**0:19:22-0:19:32:**  the difference.  So, um, we even on online apps like door dash and delivery.com, we don't even say that it's  gluten free, even on our menu.  
**0:19:32-0:19:40:**  It doesn't say that it's just thin crust pizza.  Yeah.  Well, maybe you should in case there are people nearby that you could say you have a gluten  
**0:19:40-0:19:45:**  free option.  The one we do, we have that on there too.  Okay.  
**0:19:45-0:19:50:**  We say that we have a gluten free option, but it's actually all the same crust.  That's so good.  I love that story.  
**0:19:50-0:20:00:**  Hi, I'm Craig Cameron.  Uh, I farm in central Alberta, Canada, uh, with my wife, Miriam.  Uh, we've got two kids and then we farm with my in-laws.  
**0:20:00-0:20:05:**  We raise a beef.  Forage finished beef.  Wow.  
**0:20:05-0:20:09:**  Yeah.  It's, it's getting before it's finished beef now.  Yeah.  
**0:20:09-0:20:24:**  This, this episode, I really want, um, for you all in our audience to hear from farmers  that have actually, and brands that have actually committed to this, you know, their mindset  and what, what are some of the things that help them make that, uh, pretty big decision  
**0:20:24-0:20:35:**  to, to risk, you know, what you're doing.  Anytime you change something in a business, it's a, it's a big risk.  And in something like farming, where you have the social component to it too, like your  
**0:20:35-0:20:43:**  neighbors or everybody's doing things a certain way, and when you start doing things differently,  well, then you stand out and there's, you know, there's all sorts of stuff that comes  with that.  
**0:20:43-0:20:59:**  So it's a big deal to change how you do, uh, what you do.  So Craig, we'll start with you and maybe share, you know, is there one moment that kind of  was a tipping point or a process that you could, you know, some experiences you can  
**0:20:59-0:21:11:**  share?  Yeah, I guess, um, I, uh, I gave you the safe version in our other podcast, but then I was  encouraged a little bit, uh, from a couple of storytelling guys that I follow on LinkedIn  
**0:21:11-0:21:27:**  to look for a couple of those moments.  And, uh, it's kinda, I guess, scary for me cause I could get emotional about it.  So like, I guess growing up and, uh, and kind of, uh, starting on the farm that I grew up  
**0:21:27-0:21:42:**  on, uh, I was always interested in, uh, helping people, um, and helping the planet.  And, uh, I went off to university and got my bachelor's degree in environmental chemistry.  Wow.  
**0:21:42-0:21:59:**  Um, and so that was my goal then was to try and help people, um, get clean water.  Um, and that was kind of the vision I had going into university, but by the end of university,  I realized there was a lot of people that were working on that and that I was more,  
**0:21:59-0:22:14:**  um, I was more in a position to help on the food side of things.  And so I started down that journey and, uh, then I had a bit of a setback in my early  twenties when, uh, my dad was kind of my cheerleader on that.  
**0:22:14-0:22:25:**  He passed away.  And so then, uh, I kind of had a rough, rough spot there and kinda just walked away from  that and when I'm just going to go work cattle and just do that side of things, we went,  
**0:22:25-0:22:42:**  we started farming with my in-laws here.  And then the next big thing in my life was the, uh, the birth of my daughter.  And, uh, she had severe HIE at birth and, uh, has a lot of disabilities.  
**0:22:42-0:22:52:**  And so she's totally G tube fed.  And we kind of walked into that like, okay, like, she's not gonna be picky.  We want to be able to support her the best we can.  
**0:22:52-0:23:04:**  So let's find what's, what's going to be the best, most nutritious, best food we can give  her.  And that's when we kind of got on the regenerative path of like, yeah, yeah.  
**0:23:04-0:23:20:**  Everything that I've been learning about regenerative just ticks all the boxes on what we want to  do to support her and to support the rest of our family and then also our customers.  So that was the big couple moments that kind of a crazy path that got us here.  
**0:23:20-0:23:29:**  One of the really unique things about what you're doing is that you're working with some  really unique grains.  I mean, they're not unique, they're just grains, but they're not in the supply chain.  
**0:23:29-0:23:33:**  But they are.  Yeah, exactly.  They're kind of oddball grains.  
**0:23:33-0:23:39:**  Yes.  Like they're ones that just the average American, if they're like, Oh, what are your products  made out of?  
**0:23:39-0:23:45:**  And I'm like, Oh, millet, teff, sorghum.  They're like, what, what, what?  Like, not everybody's heard of them.  
**0:23:45-0:23:52:**  So and what do they taste like?  What does millet tastes like?  Yeah, it's actually they all taste very different.  
**0:23:52-0:24:03:**  And prosomellet is like a sweeter grain.  It actually has a very nice flavor profile.  And if you buy like, Steve's killer bread, or you know, any of the a lot of the more  
**0:24:03-0:24:18:**  healthier breads on the market actually usually do add some millet to it.  And it's a component in the original like Ezekiel bread, the Ezekiel recipe.  And it's got a lovely flavor and texture that people really like once they try it.  
**0:24:18-0:24:26:**  And I'm sure there are all sorts of health benefits for people.  Is it higher in fiber?  Does it keep its shell it's not milled off or or what?  
**0:24:26-0:24:40:**  Yeah, so it really depends on the millet that you're, you know, focused on.  Like for instance, the prosomellet I just mentioned is kind of like a classic one that  people see commonly in like both bins or in products.  
**0:24:40-0:24:50:**  That one has to have a hard pericarp like an actual that has to be dehulled.  It has a hole that is not digestible by humans.  So that one does have to be dehulled.  
**0:24:50-0:25:05:**  But then you take sorghum, which is the most commonly grown millet millet in in our in  our nation and in North American farming system, and it does not need to be dehulled.  So there's a lot of nuances in the processing and all these different millets.  
**0:25:05-0:25:15:**  Well, that that's very cool.  What made you want to go down this path of sourcing these kind of grains for your for  your snack foods and baking mixes?  
**0:25:15-0:25:29:**  Yeah, um, two major things.  I mean, for us, I have to say, like my entry point was, you know, not just out of curiosity,  but out of necessity, because I was struggling to feed a family that had multiple food allergies.  
**0:25:29-0:25:43:**  And we were looking for things that had had high nutrient integrity, which millets by  and large do.  And there are some really interesting information coming out about millets and about the diverse  
**0:25:43-0:25:54:**  nutrient profile that they contain is rather significant in that they're much superior,  especially compared to rice and corn.  In fact, it's shocking.  
**0:25:54-0:26:08:**  The United Sorghum Association just did some really great work.  From a nutritional standpoint, looking at the actual just basic nutritional profile,  including minerals, trace nutrient, like, you know, the things that don't usually make  
**0:26:08-0:26:29:**  it to the main frame on the back of the package.  And when you look at the nutritional profile of say sorghum, compared to other commodity  crops that we commonly consume, it's shocking how much higher it is in almost every nutrient.  
**0:26:29-0:26:51:**  Hi, I'm Sarah Harper, founder of Grounded Growth and the director of networking and  communications for the Global Food and Farm Network.  With seeing how fierce the marketplace is and how resistant to change it is, even to  
**0:26:51-0:27:07:**  something as amazingly positive as working with nature to grow food that's more nutrient  dense and helps the climate, who wouldn't want that?  But apparently, a lot of procurement people.  
**0:27:07-0:27:22:**  I almost gave up.  Over three years ago, I started Grounded Growth with the mighty ambition of connecting regenerative  farmers and emerging food companies to build a regenerative food supply chain.  
**0:27:22-0:27:35:**  I mean, it's what all the consumer research said consumers want.  Consumers may want it, but the supply chain wasn't too excited about changing.  So it was a tough road.  
**0:27:35-0:27:53:**  Thankfully, I got to be on that road with some of the most amazing people I've ever  met and I could imagine.  And in the process of launching that company, taking my tiny boat out to the ocean, I went  
**0:27:53-0:28:08:**  back to piano as a form of stress relief, which I highly recommend if you're an entrepreneur,  find an outlet that's not part of your work.  Anyway, so I play by ear.  
**0:28:08-0:28:19:**  I have enjoyed doing that and I pick stuff up YouTube videos of learning how to play  songs.  I've learned to play a bunch of them and it's just fun.  
**0:28:19-0:28:34:**  I just enjoy it.  There's one song that I came to just almost be obsessed by, both because the meaning of  it was so relevant to what I was going through, all the people in my little world were going  
**0:28:34-0:28:44:**  through and because it was a hard song.  It's really challenging.  It was like, it's one of the hardest songs I've ever tried to play.  
**0:28:44-0:28:57:**  So tonight I'm going to play it for you.  I want to dedicate it to a couple of people.  I know it's dangerous to do that because then you go, well, what about there's so many people  
**0:28:57-0:29:15:**  and most of them will be left out just because people won't watch a 20-minute video of me  capturing gratitude.  But I did want to just really take this moment to call out, to shine a light on some of these  
**0:29:15-0:29:28:**  people who really represent this song.  So first it is Jennifer Koehler, founder and owner of Around the World Gourmet.  I'm honored to be Jennifer's friend and to get to work with her and she was the first  
**0:29:28-0:29:47:**  food company to be a part of Grounded Growth.  She set her mind on building a regenerative supply chain and that woman does not know  how to take no for an answer, which is a wonderful thing for us all because she is now milling  
**0:29:47-0:30:07:**  regeneratively grown rice into gluten-free flour that she uses in her pizza crust but  she also sells it to other brands who can now create regeneratively grown products because  of the fact that she worked with this farmer that we found for her and she built this mill  
**0:30:07-0:30:28:**  and she has brought it to market.  The second group of people I want to dedicate this to are the Axstons, Derek and Tanis Axstons.  These are amazing farmers in Saskatchewan, Canada, Axstons Farms and it would be enough  
**0:30:28-0:30:51:**  just for that but they again like Jennifer have just embodied this song.  They have continued on over every hurdle and there have been so many to not only do 14  amazing crops on their farm using regenerative practices but they've also built a food grade  
**0:30:51-0:31:06:**  seed cleaning facility and now a mill and they're going to mill ancient grain, wheat,  all sorts of other ancient grains into flour.  So, that will be your gluten supply for regenerative flour.  
**0:31:06-0:31:28:**  The next person I want to mention is Clint Brower, Greenfield Robotics.  Clint has had an amazing journey himself working in amazing tech companies coming back to the  farm and building robots that actually kill the weeds in the field so you don't have to  
**0:31:28-0:31:48:**  use chemicals and you don't have to till and he has created this amazing thing, Greenfield  Robotics that is going to help scale up regenerative agriculture, I have no doubt.  And again, a resilient spirit like you've never met who's faced down naysayers and people  
**0:31:48-0:32:15:**  who don't believe and he has supported me at some critical moments recognizing somehow  that we're on the same journey even though I can't offer half of what he's doing.  And finally, I want to dedicate this song to Dr. Jill Claperton, my mentor and the woman  
**0:32:15-0:32:28:**  who just lifted me up when I was really ready to give up.  I can't say enough good things about her.  I mean, she's a brilliant scientist who's able to actually measure the nutrient density  
**0:32:28-0:32:41:**  of food.  She's able to tell farmers across the world and she does how to help make their soil better  by using plants, planting with purpose and she's just a wonderful human being.  
**0:32:41-0:32:57:**  She's curious and friendly and loving and so generous and I'm not kidding at the point  where I was ready to just hang it all up.  She came alongside me, brought me into her world so that I can help expand hers.  
**0:32:57-0:33:14:**  There are so many more people in our community, our global food and farm community, which  is a private online social network focused solely on soil health, regenerative farming  and bringing all of this good stuff to consumers despite a reluctant or pretty much absent  
**0:33:14-0:33:28:**  supply chain.  These are the people five years from now, 10 years from now, 20 years from now who should  be recognized as the true pioneers of bringing what we all want to market and they did it  
**0:33:28-0:33:46:**  because they held true to the song.  So, for those of you who may be feeling discouraged, frustrated about the marketing lies that you  keep hearing, the promises that aren't kept and feeling like maybe it's just never going  
**0:33:46-0:34:15:**  to happen.  Don't stop believing.  Do you think it's something that consumers are looking for?  
**0:34:15-0:34:30:**  Yeah, I think that there are some consumers that definitely care about this.  We've seen that they've cared a lot about organic in the past and this is just the next  step.  
**0:34:30-0:34:49:**  When we're looking at building and looking at measuring success and improvement, think  about sheets of paper.  I mean, that's kind of, is it better or worse than that?  
**0:34:49-0:35:04:**  I mean, that's what we're...  Same thing with the soil.  Regenerative agriculture is a work in progress.  
**0:35:04-0:35:19:**  I think that it needs much more widespread adoption.  I have some ideas on how we can bring that into being, but regenerative ag can solve  two major problems.  
**0:35:19-0:35:42:**  One is carbon.  I think the whole thing is about rebuilding or restoring of a system, of something, but  not restoring and just back to its good old self because that's where this whole term  
**0:35:42-0:36:00:**  of regenerative came from was, well, why are we sustaining a broken system?  We need to regenerate the broken system.  So I think the whole idea needs to be that when you regenerate something, you are evolving  
**0:36:00-0:36:38:**  the system and not devolving it.  Regenerative agriculture is, in a couple of sentences.  Regenerative agriculture is life.  
**0:36:38-0:36:57:**  Wow.  You've been listening to Tasting Terroir, a podcast made possible by a magical collaboration  between the following companies and supporters, all working together to help farmers, chefs,  
**0:36:57-0:37:15:**  food companies and consumers to build healthier soil for a healthier world.  Risotera, owned by Dr. Jill Cloperton, Risotera is an international food security consulting  company providing expert guidance for creating healthy soils that yield tasty, nutrient-dense  
**0:37:15-0:37:25:**  foods.  Check us out at risotera.com.  That's R-H-I-Z-O-T-E-R-R-A dot com.  
**0:37:25-0:37:40:**  And the Global Food and Farm online community, an ad-free global social network and soil  health streaming service that provides information and connections that help you apply the science  and practice of improving soil health.  
**0:37:40-0:37:52:**  Join us at globalfoodandfarm.com.  And from listeners like you who support us through our Patreon account at patreon.com  slash tasting terroir.  
**0:37:52-0:38:03:**  Patrons receive access to our full length interviews and selected additional materials.  Patrons will also have the opportunity to submit questions that we will answer on the  podcast.  
**0:38:03-0:38:23:**  Tune in next week to hear more interviews and insights with myself, Sarah Harper, and  Dr. Jill Cloperton, as well as the regenerative farmers, chefs, and emerging food companies  in the Global Food and Farm online community and beyond.  
**0:38:23-0:38:38:**  If you like our work, please give us a five-star rating and share the podcast with your friends.  Thanks so much for listening and for helping us get the word out about this new resource  to taste the health of your food.  
**0:38:38-0:39:00:**  Until next week, stay curious, keep improving, and don't stop believing that better is possible  when knowledge is available.  