---
title: How Regenerative Agriculture Lets You Love Grains Again
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### Tasting Terroir  (2022-11-03)  
### Author(s): Sara Hessenflow Harper  

**0:00:00-0:00:05:**  When you look at the nutritional profile of, say, sorghum compared to other commodity crops that we  commonly consume, it's shocking how much higher it is in almost every nutrient. So that was one  of our big, big points. Like, for me, I was like, okay, what do I feed my kids? I want to feed them  
**0:00:18-0:00:23:**  something healthy. And then as a nurse and someone who was involved in nutrition, I was a diabetic  educator working in ICU. And I was like, why isn't everybody eating this?  Welcome back to our podcast, Tasting Tarawa, a journey that helps you more accurately navigate  
**0:00:43-0:00:50:**  the marketing claims of better for you food by understanding the link between healthy soil  and the flavor and health of your food. I'm your host, Sarah Harper. That clip was from a  follow-up interview with Snacktivist Foods co-founder Joni Kinwell Moore. Joni set out on a  
**0:01:02-0:01:07:**  journey to find better snacks for her kids who had food allergies and in the process discovered a  world of quote oddball grains, as she calls them. Grains like millet and sorghum, which you will get  to learn a lot more about in this episode. It turns out that these gluten-free ingredients can offer  
**0:01:21-0:01:28:**  us all a lot, from a flavor and texture boost in our breads and crackers, to health benefits and  positive contributions to the health of the soil that grows our food. In our last episode, we  explored whether a brand can authentically be regenerative if it doesn't really know the farmers  
**0:01:40-0:01:46:**  growing its ingredients. I think you'll see in our continued discussion with Joni just why this  knowledge is so important. This week we are taking a closer look at some of the lesser known  ingredients being embraced by Joni's brand Snacktivist, the role these ingredients play in  
**0:01:57-0:02:03:**  enhancing both soil and human health, and we talk frankly about the supply chain and the food  processing challenges that her brand is working so hard to overcome. Once again, I want to encourage  you to claim the power that you have as consumers and use it to reward those who are working hard  
**0:02:16-0:02:22:**  to create better, regeneratively grown, flavorful, healthy food. People like our next interview and  frankly all the folks that we've been interviewing. You can find links to their online stores in each  podcast episode. And with that, we'll return to our conversation with Joni and understand a little  
**0:02:36-0:02:44:**  better why it's so important to know the farmers that grow your food. Well hi Joni, it's great to  talk to you again. You too, it's wonderful to see you. Yeah, well we had such a great conversation  last time exploring what is regenerative and how your company is applying it and how your  
**0:02:57-0:03:02:**  supply chains are doing that and how you're really working to both bring regenerative into your  supply chain and be honest about it, which is so refreshing. Yeah, the honest part is hard.  Yeah, so I wanted to follow up with you and talk more about the flavor side. You know,  
**0:03:19-0:03:24:**  we've talked about this podcast being tasting terroir and trying to understand the link between  health and flavor because those are things that consumers are really interested in. But then also  linking that back to the practices and the type of farming that we know really does add more,  
**0:03:35-0:03:42:**  certainly more nutrient density. And depending on who you are, flavor is a very subjective thing,  but it makes sense at least that there would be a positive flavor connection to having more  minerals and nutrients and things. So one of the really unique things about what you're doing is  
**0:03:55-0:04:00:**  that you're working with some really unique grains. I mean, they're not unique, they're just  grains, but they're not in the supply chain. They're kind of oddball grains. Yes, they're  ones that just the average American, if they're like, Oh, what are your products made out of?  
**0:04:11-0:04:15:**  And I'm like, oh, millet, tefs, sorghum. They're like, what, what, what? Like,  not everybody's heard of them. So yeah, and you're very involved in the millet. Is there a millet  association or organization? Yeah, so we've just launched like our kind of public facing side of  
**0:04:27-0:04:33:**  the North American millet Alliance. And really, that's just trying to create a community around  this emerging category of the millets, which are, you know, a large group. I mean, there's like 10  different species that are considered millets, even though they're not actually related species.  
**0:04:45-0:04:50:**  So there's a lot of folks taxonomy and kind of like cumbersome botany that needs to be navigated  here to create this category around the food group. But next year, the UN has declared UN  Europe millets. So it's a huge opportunity for us to leverage that storytelling and that narrative  
**0:05:02-0:05:07:**  around what the millets are, why they're really important to global food systems moving forward,  especially in the face of changing climate in a warming planet, and why they are nutritional  powerhouses. And what do they taste like? What does millet tastes like? Yeah, it's actually they  
**0:05:20-0:05:26:**  all taste very different. Proso millet is like a sweeter grain. It actually has a very nice flavor  profile. And if you buy like the killer bread or you know, any of the a lot of the more healthier  breads on the market actually usually do add some millet to it. And it's a component in the original  
**0:05:36-0:05:42:**  of like Ezekiel bread, the Ezekiel recipe. And it's got a lovely flavor and texture that people  really like once they try it. And I'm sure there are all sorts of health benefits for people.  Is it higher in fiber? Does it keep its shell? It's not milled off or what? Yeah, so it really  
**0:05:55-0:05:59:**  depends on the millet that you're, you know, focused on. Like for instance, the Proso millet  I just mentioned is kind of like a classic one that people see commonly in like bulk bins or  in products. That one has to have a hard pericarp like an actual that has to be de-hulled. It has a  
**0:06:12-0:06:17:**  hull that is not digestible by humans. So that one does have to be de-hulled. But then you take  sorghum, which is the most commonly grown millet, millet in our in our nation and in North American  farming systems. And it does not need to be de-hulled. So there's a lot of nuances in the  
**0:06:29-0:06:36:**  processing and all these different millets. Well that's very cool. What made you want to go down  this path of sourcing these kind of grains for your snack foods and baking mixes?  Yeah, two major things. I mean for us, I have to say like my entry point was, you know, not just out of  
**0:06:49-0:06:55:**  curiosity but out of necessity because I was struggling to feed a family that had multiple food  allergies. And we were looking for things that had high nutrient integrity, which millets by  and large do. And there's some really interesting information coming out about millets and about the  
**0:07:09-0:07:15:**  diverse nutrient profile that they contain. It is rather significant in that they're much superior,  especially compared to rice and corn. In fact, it's shocking. The United Sorghum Association just did  some really great work from a nutritional standpoint looking at the actual just basic  
**0:07:28-0:07:34:**  nutritional profile, including minerals, trace nutrients, like you know the things that don't  usually make it to the main frame on the back of the package. And when you look at the nutritional  profile of say sorghum compared to other commodity crops that we commonly consume, it's shocking how  
**0:07:46-0:07:54:**  much higher it is in almost every nutrient. So that was one of our big, big points. Like for me,  I was like, okay, what do I feed my kids? I want to feed them something healthy. And then as a nurse  and someone who was involved in nutrition, I was a diabetic educator working in ICU. And I was like,  
**0:08:04-0:08:09:**  why isn't everybody eating this? I mean, why is this just for gluten-free people? That doesn't make  any sense. So it became kind of a personal mission for me to really kind of champion for them.  Not only for a nutritional buy-in, like, hey, you're looking for more nutrition. We're trying to  
**0:08:20-0:08:25:**  give people permission to love grains again, because grains have been demonized largely in  American food systems for being empty calories and fostering inflammation and all these  other diseases. But when you look at millets as a whole, they're a grain group that's  
**0:08:38-0:08:43:**  rather exempt from a lot of those issues. So that's one of the reasons I champion so hard for  millets as a food. The other reason is when you look at agricultural systems and you look at  their role that they can play in regenerative cropping systems, it's really, really significant.  
**0:08:56-0:09:02:**  And thorium is a longer season crop, so it's not as much like a crop that you're going to sneak in  as a cover crop. But many of the other millets, like prosomillets, other minor millets like  foxtail, pearl, many, many others, they fill a very vital role in cover cropping between other  
**0:09:16-0:09:22:**  cash crops. And if we can add a value to those cover crops, the farmers are that much more  incentivized to bring in more biodiversity to their farming system and then shift in a  biomimicry way towards crops that are more naturally drought resilient. So long answer to a  
**0:09:33-0:09:34:**  short question.  No, no, it's very good. Do you know why millet wasn't developed as a mainstream grain?  Is it harder to process or what's held it back?  
**0:09:46-0:09:51:**  Yeah, so I have given this a lot of thought and I think that there is really a nexus point  between two major events in history that have made them underutilized kind of neglected  grains. First, green revolution. When you look at millets in general, they're not highly  
**0:10:05-0:10:13:**  responsive to heavy chemical fertilizer regimens. And so they, you know, compared to corn, wheat,  and rice, when you looked at agronomy during the green revolution where they were like,  what can we pile chemicals on and get crazy yield improvements? And that was the primary  
**0:10:25-0:10:31:**  crops that we see today, soy, corn, wheat, rice, etc. And these other crops just became  something that didn't have a lot of exploration when it comes to genetics and because they  didn't fit the model of the green revolution. Secondly, which now is proving to be important  
**0:10:42-0:10:48:**  because now that chemicals are very expensive and hard to get, many nations are scrambling  to go back to these non-green revolution crops because they will still perform, still produce  yields without any fertilizers added to the system or artificial irrigation. So that's  
**0:11:01-0:11:06:**  one reason. Second reason I think is cultural having to do with more just of like a colonial  food system mindset. Like there's a lot of racism associated with food. So when you look at, for  instance, sorghum and the role that sorghum played in Africa and when slaves were brought to the new  
**0:11:17-0:11:22:**  world, they brought sorghum seeds with them and it was a very important food group too.  African American early, you know, communities in the South. And so sorghum syrup and sorghum  products were commonly eaten, but it, I feel like it was kind of a lens of racism that they  
**0:11:34-0:11:37:**  were not brought into broader food systems because it was literally thought of as food for  slave groups, which a lot of people don't like to talk about that. But I think it's really important  that we're just really transparent about this conversation. It's fun to talk about, but it's  
**0:11:47-0:11:52:**  important to talk about. Well, as you explore, because I mean, obviously a lot goes into making  a food company and products, and you're always dealing with choices about ingredients and  putting them together and what consumers want versus also what your brand stands for. And as we  
**0:12:04-0:12:09:**  talked about with regenerative and wanting to bring in this better way of growing, that's that's  really prominent in your brand. And then you've got these great things like millet and other  sorghum and other grains, but you also of course have to make sure that it tastes good. And you're  
**0:12:20-0:12:26:**  dealing with a palate that in a large part of the mainstream public probably isn't used to a lot of  these things. So how did you go through like this product formulation path of balancing out the  the taste that's going to be attractive just to an average person that maybe that isn't  
**0:12:37-0:12:42:**  sophisticated or you know been, you know, hearty and growing their own, you know, great all the  stuff we should do, but most people don't, you know. And so how do you meet those people kind of  where they already are with a palate that's particularly loaded with sugar and so everything  
**0:12:52-0:12:57:**  if it doesn't have a lot of sugar then yeah. So how did you decide and balance all of that  out in terms of ingredients you selected? Well it was kind of a, I'd have to say a bit of a rough  learning curve for me because like I came in really gung-ho like, hey we're going to do this  
**0:13:07-0:13:13:**  100% whole grain, all this stuff. And then the early iterations people were like, uh, that's a  little too hippie for us. Like tone back on the granola style like hippie food. I was like, oh,  noted. So I ended up starting to make blends and blending in more things that were palatable to the  
**0:13:27-0:13:33:**  typical American palate given that most people are like, bread is white, it's bleached, it's enriched,  it's tasty, it's basically flavorless. Nowadays you look at like what, you know, commodity like  bimbo bread, all you taste is the sweetness of the starch. And so it's really tough when that's your  
**0:13:47-0:13:53:**  entry point compared to like in a European market where there's like a real market for like the old  world dark bread that have super robust flavor profiles. And so that's been a challenge for me.  Like what we first brought to the market was really robust. Everything the very first time  
**0:14:02-0:14:09:**  ingredient was sorghum or millet or teff of that early product line. We immediately heard from a  group of moms that they were like our early adopters. And a lot of these moms were struggling  to feed families that had not only food allergy issues, but behavioral spectrum of different things  
**0:14:21-0:14:25:**  that they were managing from autism to other behavioral things. And that's what led them to  an allergy-assisted diet is they had a child who is they're trying to fit this into their  therapeutic regimen to help manage their behavioral condition. And so they said,  
**0:14:36-0:14:41:**  hey, we need your help. You know, we've got these kids. They'll only eat it if it's white  and they'll only eat two types of food a day because that's just where they're at. So I actually  did a series of blending experiments and then I served food to all these moms and all their kids.  
**0:14:52-0:15:00:**  It was the Washington Autism Society actually in Spokane and they voted in what became our  all-purpose flour blend, which did lead with brown rice, but still had significant levels of millet,  sorghum, and teff. What a great idea. We were able to kind of blend that down. And so we ended up,  
**0:15:11-0:15:15:**  yeah, so in 2018, it kind of broke my heart because I was like, I'm all about the ancient grains.  That's what I want to put out there. We did a split where it was like, okay, focaccia remained,  sorghum forward, millet forward. Our pancake and waffle mix remained. First ingredient is teff.  
**0:15:27-0:15:33:**  It still is. And that's our top-selling skew. But then we put a milder flour blend in some of our  other products like our Artisan Sandwich Loaf because these moms were like, it needs to taste  like white bread or our kids want to eat it. What we're doing now, however, because this is years  
**0:15:47-0:15:52:**  later and I now have a lot more control over our supply chain and how it's based, which is  fantastic. I can collect for sorghum that has a milder flavor. I can collect for millet that  tastes a little sweeter. And now we're bringing back going into 2023. Starting in January,  
**0:16:04-0:16:09:**  we have brand new branding, brand new packaging. And again, we're shifting our ancient grains to  the top of the ingredients deck again. I think people are ready now. And I think I've gotten  better at blending. I think I've gotten better at blending it. So yeah, it's like we can sneak it in  
**0:16:20-0:16:27:**  as much as we can. That's so cool. That's very cool. And when you're tasting these different  ingredients to decide what would go into them, were you able to tell a difference between  places where you at least knew something about the farms? Maybe that the whole supply chain wasn't  
**0:16:39-0:16:44:**  fully regenerative, but at least they had various practices that they were sticking to and they had  more knowledge about the supply chain. And then these ancient grains are just kind of a whole  different supply chain bucket themselves because they're not mainstream. So talk a little bit about  
**0:16:55-0:17:04:**  the tasting of this different stream. So the very first ingredients that we started noticing  real differences in the flavor were in the sorghum and in the millet. We have always sourced all of  our tefs from Mezcal's test or Teffco, which is based in Boise. And they work with a really  
**0:17:16-0:17:22:**  dedicated farming group that is contemplating and shifting more and more regenerative practices,  but they're just not there yet. We're offering to work with them as much as possible,  but we don't have as much visibility into that supply chain because of the nature of how it comes  
**0:17:31-0:17:37:**  through the market. And they have specialized milling and a facility that handles tefs,  which is unique. So we're not really going there with the tefs. So I'm going to stay focused on  more of the sorghums and the prosomillet. We were sourcing prosomillet from Colorado organic farmers,  
**0:17:49-0:17:53:**  and we couldn't tell how regenerative they were in their practices, but we knew they were certified  organic. We knew that they were using organic biologicals for their soil health regimen and for  their fertilizer inputs. And we noticed when we couldn't get millet from them, and then we pulled  
**0:18:06-0:18:13:**  it from commodity and it wasn't organic, I noticed a flavor change. The commodity prosomillet, and it  could have been a different variety too, which we didn't know because there was no transparency or  provenance in that communication. But what we got from commodity had a little bit more of a corn  
**0:18:23-0:18:28:**  flavor that was a little bit more pronounced, where the organic one had a sweeter flavor without  that kind of corn flavor to it. We also noticed a change in the kernel size where the organic kernel  tends to be smaller and has that sweeter flavor, where the commodity one tends to have a plumper  
**0:18:41-0:18:47:**  kernel, but it's a little bit like a more pungent flavor, also more difficult to de-hull.  Organic is much simpler to de-hull. It goes to the de-huller with better efficiencies.  And then in sorghum, as I mentioned, when we would get organic sorghum, it would have a sweeter flavor  
**0:19:00-0:19:05:**  where the ones that we would pull from commodity would have a more bitter flavor to it. And we were  never able to figure out why or where that bitter flavor came from. You were saying that the the  sorghum commodity stream wasn't always consistent, which that's the whole definition of commodity.  
**0:19:17-0:19:23:**  Yeah, I know, and it's still not. And in fact, I actually just went and got a bunch of sorghum at  a bulk bin, my local health food store bulk bin. We were doing a photo shoot, so I was like getting  bulk sorghum for a video. And I took it home and I had to clean it. It had like bits of the straw,  
**0:19:35-0:19:41:**  and it had like chunks of stuff in it, and it had rocks. I don't know how you get a rock in  sorghum, because sorghum is like eight feet tall. I was like, how are there rocks in here? And I was  like, boy, the commodity side of sorghum is struggling to meet those consistencies. And I  
**0:19:53-0:20:00:**  think it's because it doesn't have the spec sheet control that say wheat does, where wheat, flour  standards, barley flour standards are strictly enforced by huge industry players that actually  force them to farm a certain way to meet a certain spec sheet that's somewhat artificially fabricated  
**0:20:13-0:20:19:**  through industrial chemical farming practices. But they keep it holds that that segment of the  commodity market hostage and farming the way it does, which is not regenerative or organic. So  it's a fascinating process as we kind of unpack this whole industry. And it's kind of fun working  
**0:20:32-0:20:36:**  in the wild west with these oddball grains that nobody really cares about because no one set a  standard for what the spec sheet should look like yet in these crops. So I think it's a great way to  like create a new category around rather unknown crops and bring them in as being like from the  
**0:20:48-0:20:53:**  beginning, they could come in as like part of their value proposition is that they lean  really well into organic and regenerative farming systems and that's part of their value.  Yeah, well, and that brings around, since we're talking about sorghum, one of my favorite,  
**0:21:04-0:21:10:**  favorite things, absolute favorite things is when two really good people that I happen to get to  know or work with end up working with each other. And so I know Clint Brower, and we featured him in  the podcast on the robots and he's growing sorghum among other things. And so I was thrilled  
**0:21:23-0:21:27:**  that you let people know that you're going to be sourcing some sorghum from them.  Yeah, we're so excited about that project because I've known Clint for a few years now. We've been  talking through this whole process of how we can work together, like how Snackivist could be one of  
**0:21:41-0:21:47:**  the path to market partners for Greenfield and their farmers who are using Greenfield robotics  so that those farmers who are investing in regenerative have a market to sell into that's  not just commodity that will allow them to tell their story and have that farmer soil connection  
**0:21:59-0:22:06:**  and that provenance piece in place. So I actually, we wanted to do it last year, but the sorghum  didn't turn out quite like we wanted it to. And but this year we actually despite crazy, crazy,  crazy, you know, terrible weather in this part of the world, we have a beautiful sorghum crop.  
**0:22:18-0:22:24:**  So this is actually, this is Clint's sorghum. And this weekend I'm going to be running it through  our little mill. We do have a small mill at our facility. Nothing that we would do on commercial  scale, but it's awesome for small scale stuff. This episode brought to you by the Global Food  
**0:22:39-0:22:46:**  and Farm Community, globalfoodandfarm.com. A private online space where farmers, chefs,  emerging food entrepreneurs, and conscious consumers learn about and apply the latest  science behind building healthier soils for a healthier world. Members also gain access to help  
**0:22:57-0:23:02:**  with their marketing and communication efforts through our Grounded Growth Paddock, featuring  DIY instructional videos and joint marketing projects that are designed to help small  businesses find an audience for the better products they are making. The community provides  
**0:23:12-0:23:17:**  new original content to members each week in the form of video interviews, scholarly articles,  and the chance to ask Dr. Jo Claperton any questions you may have each week. To get a free  online tour of our digital streaming library and learn more about how this amazing resource  
**0:23:29-0:23:37:**  community can help your business grow, contact me, Sarah Harper, at Sarah S-A-R-A at Global Food  and Farm, all spelled out, G-L-O-B-A-L-F-O-O-D-A-N-D-F-A-R-M.com.  Because we're doing all kinds of fun stuff with sorghum, not only just flowering it and using it  
**0:23:55-0:24:01:**  as a flour in our baked products, but we also have a whole cool R&D pipeline for other sorghum  products that are, I can't really talk about, but very cool, exciting stuff. So we love the fact  that there's no gross stuff on that sorghum. The robots did all the weeding, so we didn't have to  
**0:24:14-0:24:19:**  pour a bunch of chemicals on them. And they have some pretty tough weeds. And no till!  Exactly, exactly. Because that's one of the things we're always up against with regenerative.  And I'm a huge proponent of regenerative because I have a heart for transitional agricultural  
**0:24:30-0:24:34:**  systems. We can't, it's like drug addiction, you can't just say, well stop doing your drugs  tomorrow guys, it'll be fine. Like it's not going to work that way. We have to have a transitional  piece. And with a goal in my mind getting to a point where we don't have dependency on chemical  
**0:24:46-0:24:51:**  inputs any longer. And even in fantastic regenerative systems, we still do have a lot  of glyphosate dependency, we still have a lot of, and I'm all for technologies that can help us get  that extra mile and eliminate those chemicals from those systems whenever possible. I love the work  
**0:25:03-0:25:09:**  Clint's doing. That's a huge missing piece. I mean I've talked about this with probably everybody and  I'll just admit, I probably always will because my heart burns when I think of this, that  there are all these people marketing about regenerative. And there are a number of  
**0:25:21-0:25:26:**  large-scale companies that even have their own mills, or have their own, you know, the ability  to process. Some of them have mills in the name, I'll just say. Yeah, so they could do it. They  could absolutely do it. And in a way that wouldn't add a whole lot of cost. And they're not. And yet,  
**0:25:40-0:25:44:**  you know, people like you, people like Jennifer Kohler, you know, small brands and farmers like  the Axons who are becoming a brand, becoming a mill themselves, you know, you are the linchpin.  I mean it's great to have some transitional grace for these farmers, but there's nowhere for it to  
**0:25:57-0:26:03:**  go. There's no difference. And without a brand to bring it through and to capture that value.  And you know, I'm kind of jaded by, you know, I started out too naive and then I turned too jaded,  so that's a problem, my own problem. But I have that problem too sometimes. You're a good company,  
**0:26:13-0:26:23:**  Sarah. But you know, I look at what the trajectory they're on and it seems to me that there's just a  push to try to, you know, sprinkle in a few things and call the whole existing system regenerative.  Like that's the path. Oh yeah. That's the path that they would like to be on. So they don't have  
**0:26:34-0:26:39:**  to change any of the efficiency, you don't have to change, you know, and get this whole big PR boost  for the whole existing system, which is so far away from what the farmers that we talked to and  that we work with are doing. Yeah, it's so frustrating because I feel like you'll hear this,  
**0:26:53-0:26:58:**  I'll read a press release and you know, here we just had the whole big USDA Climate Smart Ag  grant go through and some of these large corporations and they're like, oh yay, we got  100 million dollars and we're going to do this. And I'm like, and we're going to be regenerative.  
**0:27:09-0:27:14:**  I'm like, guys, have you not been reading the agriculture books the last like 50 years? We  already have been doing that. It's called conservation agriculture and that's not regenerative.  That's just one tool in the shed that plays into what regenerative is. And I feel like that  
**0:27:24-0:27:30:**  reductionistic mindset of like, okay, we checked that box, now we're regenerative is a dangerous  thing. I'm glad these big companies are at least doing that. Like yay, hooray for them, we need  that. But should we pay them 200 million dollars to do that? No, their farmers could be saving  
**0:27:42-0:27:46:**  money by doing that, which means they could be saving money by doing that and they're already  profitable. So a lot of really fantastic smaller organizations and companies that did put in for  that grant didn't get it because they were already doing the good work. And it is, oh, the story.  
**0:27:59-0:28:04:**  I used to work on climate policy, you know, 20 years ago, climate nag policy on Capitol Hill  and the Senate and then, you know, with environmental groups and farmers and that was  the most maddening part of it all. That people who with a straight face care about the environment so  
**0:28:16-0:28:23:**  so passionately that they will exclude the people that already did it. And because we have to get  additionality, we can't credit anybody that's already done it. And no really not letting it  sink in at all. The message that that sends, the undermining of all the first movers, all  
**0:28:37-0:28:42:**  you know, all those people that pointed at them and said, you're stupid, you're taking too much  risk, you're never going to get paid for that. You just made them right. You know, by yes,  exactly. A little technical policy. Right. And what's crazy to me, you know, in addition to that  
**0:28:57-0:29:02:**  is like, you know, some of the, you know, applicants that I know that did not get awarded,  you know, some of them were, you know, they were already doing the good work. So it wasn't a matter  of convincing farmers to transition. A lot of these particular grants were working on growing  
**0:29:11-0:29:17:**  the market channels to get these products to market through novel channels. And again,  this is where I think the USDA made a big mistake is that I feel and granted, this is just my lens  into the people I've spoken to, I could be wrong, but that they didn't put enough value on that  
**0:29:29-0:29:35:**  market growing focus, where they were like, a let's prioritize getting more farmers to start  trying to do this or thinking about it. And be let's really put a lot of money towards validating  carbon sequestration data. Like any grant proposal that had that carbon piece in it seemed to get  
**0:29:46-0:29:51:**  funded a lot faster than the other ones that were like, let's try to create market segments  and market pool for the farmers who are already doing it that did that just was down the triage  list apparently for the USDA, which I think is really tragic because yeah, I mean, in my position,  
**0:30:01-0:30:06:**  I have way more farmers that want to sell to us and we can possibly move to market.  And if we could have with our partners that we applied for the grant with it, had we gotten that  money, we could have built a more robust, you know, kind of a market poll that would have helped  
**0:30:18-0:30:23:**  get a lot of this product to market. Yeah, I know. I mean, it's like when I started  Grounded Growth and we, we had wheat growers all over the US and Canada and all varieties,  all, you know, and we're talking with a number of different potential big millers and we could  
**0:30:35-0:30:42:**  have put together a regenerative flower supply chain easily. Yeah. And, but guess what? They  don't want to pay anymore anymore. So what, what is the reason to aggregate all of that,  you know, and it's the same old answer, like, well, we need to get the market started first  
**0:30:54-0:30:58:**  and then, you know, we need to prove the concept and then, you know, that would be fine as long as  the then part kicked in and money did actually come back down the chain, which it hardly ever  does, you know. Especially when you're dealing with big, huge brands, like the big guys that  
**0:31:11-0:31:16:**  got a huge chunk of money out of this grant program, we already know it's very rare that  they're going to have any sort of trickle down cash effects that ends up reaching the end  producers, because that's not how their business model is structured and it never has been. I  
**0:31:28-0:31:33:**  highly doubt they're going to be able to change that mid-flight when they're running billion  dollar a year companies that are global, like you don't change your business model overnight. It  just doesn't work like that. But unfortunately, a lot of the, you know, organizations and entities  
**0:31:44-0:31:49:**  that do have that built into their business model just weren't selected for the grant. Bummer.  MELINDA EPLERINI Well, I mean, the good news about all of this is that consumers have a  tremendous amount of power in the market and increasingly they are getting more opportunities  
**0:32:02-0:32:10:**  to vote with that dollar in ways that really matter. And especially I love that you guys are  on Thrive Market because that's a nice online store that already has a lot of customers looking  for better food and done in a responsible way. And so that they can find you easily there is so  
**0:32:24-0:32:29:**  they're fantastic. I mean, Thrive honestly, like they put their mouth, they do their  their top, they do their walking with their talking, which is fantastic, because I'm finding  that most retailers don't like, you know, I'll go to a retailer that I'm like, we've submitted  
**0:32:39-0:32:45:**  our product line to multiple times, don't even get a call back. And then you go to their website,  and they're bragging about how they're the leaders of working with brands that are doing regenerative.  And I'm like, well, that's funny, because you don't even bother calling us back. And  
**0:32:52-0:32:58:**  we're one of the only ones in the in the grain sector that focus on regenerative and focus on  climate resistant crops as a focus, which Hello, that's a big freaking deal. And I'm like, Come on,  now, guys, really like I get with it. It just, it irritates me because as a little brand, like,  
**0:33:11-0:33:16:**  we would love to grow and be able to drop our prices with along with our volume. But you can't  do that when you're coming in as a very small brand. You don't have you don't have that luxury.  And it's not because we're making a lot of profit. It's because you just aren't, you're not  
**0:33:26-0:33:31:**  competitive yet. So you're you have to come in and kind of an ultra premium positioning. So we're  hopeful that as we grow, and as we grow our product lines to leave the baking mix that I mean, I'm not  I we never started our company to be a baking mix company. We started it to make great brain based  
**0:33:44-0:33:48:**  foods out of different grains, unique ancient grain blends. And eventually we'll be back.  You know, we're launching our frozen lines, our pizza crust and brownie bites. And we have some  fantastic snack lines that we're piloting and hoping to launch and then in the coming years,  
**0:33:59-0:34:05:**  but you know, without the without the business from retailers, we're at a standstill.  I mean, we're literally contingent on retailers listening to us to even have a chance. And which  is a bummer because when you're a little brand from Idaho, they don't really care. They're like,  
**0:34:15-0:34:19:**  Idaho, where's that? Ohio? Like, I literally will argue with people that were like, you're in the  Midwest. I'm like, No, we're in the Northwest. They're like, Idaho is in the Midwest. I'm like,  no, Idaho is in the Northwest. Like, really? Yeah, but they've thoroughly checked their supply  
**0:34:31-0:34:38:**  chains for regenerative. I'm, I'm sure. Yeah, clearly they do. Yeah, yeah. Because I'm like,  I can give you the phone numbers of like five of our farmers if you'd like to talk to them.  Yeah. But you know what we're doing Sarah, and I'm really excited about this is, you know, because  
**0:34:48-0:34:52:**  we have been really hit and miss, like, we'd be like, Oh, cool, we can buy this. You know,  we do our purchasing with our co packer as a partner. He's fantastic. It helps us solve some  of our cash flow needs. Because and he's just a dedicated, amazing human. But and so that makes  
**0:35:03-0:35:08:**  it cumbersome as well, because it's not just us and vertically integrated as us in partnership  with co packers, etc. And one of the things we're doing to help combat that need for transparent  storytelling in the supply chain is we are releasing a QR code that will be live on our  
**0:35:19-0:35:27:**  packaging as of like January 1, where you will be able to go in and it will be a little bit more  expensive. And it won't take you to our website, like most QR codes do. It'll take you to a world  where you can end up at our website if you want to learn more about our products and you want to  
**0:35:36-0:35:41:**  buy from us online. But it will also allow you to navigate into a world where you can go to the  field where the millet was grown or to the field and there's Clint's robots out there, whacking  down the weeds or, you know, me sitting down with farmer Steve and he's talking about his garbanzos  
**0:35:51-0:35:56:**  and why he is an early adopter of regenerative where he lives in Nebraska and where they're  in drought. You know, like, and those are the stories that we need to tell. And then from where  from our operational standpoint, you know, because we're not a huge brand, we can only buy so much,  
**0:36:05-0:36:10:**  we only have our farmers grow so much if they're growing for us. So when we run out, we'll be out  until the next year. And so if that happens with that QR code being what it is, we can say, Hey,  guys, here's what are now we're planting with three more farmers, meet them, here's farmer,  
**0:36:21-0:36:26:**  you know, Deanna, and here's farmer, you know, john and whatever, and they're planting for us.  And by next fall, you'll be able to paste in these products. And it kind of brings them into  a community experience rather than this static supply chain, which is not realistic.  
**0:36:35-0:36:41:**  Yeah, well, and it really lives up to your name, it lets your consumers be snacktivists,  you know, be actual activists in the best sense of doing something positive to make the change  that they want. Yeah, right. And, you know, and then it'll be cool to hear the stories from these  
**0:36:54-0:36:59:**  farmers, especially farmers who are really in precarious positions where they don't have access  to irrigation, they don't have their significantly strained by drought. And the fact that they're  shifting to really drought resilient grains is one of their only life saving measures of keeping the  
**0:37:10-0:37:15:**  farm. And that's something I'm really passionate about. And a lot of farmers have already lost  everything, you know, having to cut down orchards in California because they've lost irrigation,  they're sitting there on fallow ground, the dust is blowing away, they're going to have to turn  
**0:37:24-0:37:28:**  their backs on their farms and walk away. And we're like, No, you don't you can grow, you can  grow post a millet for us, you can grow triticale. Let's figure out a way to make a great triticale  cracker. Let's partner with like California wheat commission, they already know how to do it. Like,  
**0:37:38-0:37:44:**  we can add value to these crops that desperately play a role in a changing climate and the  face of agriculture. It's just that no one's doing the work to do it. And then investors are  scared to touch it because they're like, boy, that's risky. I'm like, Yeah, but it's the most  
**0:37:52-0:38:00:**  freaking important thing you could do. Come on. Yeah, I'm so glad. I'm so I'm so glad that you  mentioned California wheat commission and our dear friend Claudia Carter. She's a fan. She is  amazing. I know I love her. And she's, she's helped a number of members in our network help  
**0:38:10-0:38:17:**  Jen Koehr find her mill to do rice smelling and, and help just explain the whole industry side  to the farmers in our group that often are just in the dark about that. And they need to know it  if they if they're going to have to move into that space to get their better stuff to market.  
**0:38:31-0:38:35:**  So yeah, I can't say enough about her. In fact, reminds me I need to need to get her on the  podcast too. But I know you totally do. It's an interesting world. We're all navigating because  like, we're kind of building the parachute on the way down. But like someone who believes in future  
**0:38:45-0:38:51:**  generation, someone's got to do it. And it's not going to be easy. But I am confident enough that  we can shift our food system to where our grandkids and great grandkids will have food on  the plate. And we can feed the world against some pretty dire circumstances. But we have to change  
**0:39:03-0:39:08:**  now. And we have to put our money where our mouth is and, and get serious and be collaborative and  work together as a team to get it done. Yeah, well, and that's, that's what our global food and  farm community is about to trying to bring those people together and help each other and, and help  
**0:39:18-0:39:24:**  consumers to find to have a hub to find, you know, to find these different people. So important.  I know you probably have to go but I do want to ask you about, you know, just as you think  about the flavor of place, do you think that you can taste place? I mean, I know it's, it's not a  
**0:39:35-0:39:40:**  scientifically settled question at all. But you're working with all sorts of different places that  you and you know where they're coming from. So do you have any experience with having different  tastes based on where it's coming from? We don't have a much enough data yet with our crops that  
**0:39:53-0:39:58:**  we're working on to really have like a microclimate terroir type of a focus. Like, we don't have  a lot of data yet. My suspicion is that it will happen. My suspicion is that it will not only be  reflective of actual geographical location and soil type, but it will also be highly reflective  
**0:40:11-0:40:17:**  of the actual rotational systems and the rhizosphere ecology that we have. Because we know  it's the rhizosphere ecology that drives a lot of the presence of the secondary tertiary metabolites  that are largely responsible for flavor. And we do know that that is also a potential driver in  
**0:40:30-0:40:35:**  metabolites that have certain functional properties that we're really interested in, like, for  instance, the antioxidants and phytonutrients that are present in sorghum that are not only  antioxidants, but have microbiome conditioning properties that are now being validated and proven  
**0:40:46-0:40:51:**  in the lab, like University of Nebraska-Lincoln and in Benson's lab, they're actually trying to  prove that, yes, these metabolites positively affect the gut microbiome. What we don't know is  what's driving presence of those metabolites. Like, what key component of either the variety of the  
**0:41:05-0:41:11:**  sorghum or the farming system or the rhizosphere ecology, what's setting that up to make that  perfect storm happen? And so to add in the flavor nuance to that is like a whole other thing that's  going to be like transformational in the next few years as we start to get enough data to really  
**0:41:23-0:41:28:**  like pull that all together. But there's a fantastic baker by the name of Sean Duffy,  and he's the head baker at the Grain Shed in Spokane, Washington. And he works with a group  of farmers, but mostly farmer Don Shurman out of Duluth country in eastern Washington. And they  
**0:41:42-0:41:47:**  have taken the terroir of these wheats down to the hillside. And it's when you taste the breads  that they make, it's like a whole other world of bread making. It's like the wine, it's the fine  wine of the grain sector. And I'm confident we'll also find that in the grains that we're working  
**0:41:58-0:42:03:**  with too. Yeah, I mean, that's the thing. I mean, that's part of why I wanted to name the podcast  Tasting Terroir because it isn't just wine, it is in a lot of different crops. And especially as we  know more about the varieties, the place, the practices, and that can only come from knowing  
**0:42:17-0:42:22:**  the supply chain. And that's the thing. That's what will make it more valuable in the marketplace,  just as certain wines are more valuable for the exact type of grape in place and all that data  information that then fuels the story too. Yeah, we'll be, I mean, we're just going to be working  
**0:42:35-0:42:43:**  independently to gather as much of that data as we can. I know Martin, our North Dakota farmer,  he's biodynamic, he's regenerative, he's organic. He grew prosomillet, a small kind of a test plot  of prosopress this year, and we are going to get, he just sent in the soil samples. So, and then  
**0:42:54-0:43:01:**  we're sending that off to BioNutrient Association and BioNutrient Institute to get some actual  quantitative data on nutrient density there as well. So as this all comes together, the work at  Adacity with Eric and Joe and like all these different people, we're going to build a database  
**0:43:12-0:43:19:**  that's going to give us actual data sets that drive our food system towards quality and change  the narrative because our food system has been only driven by quantity and we have abandoned  not only flavor and terroir, but the medicinal properties that used to be naturally occurring  
**0:43:29-0:43:34:**  in our food. And we've actually selected our food system away from medicinal properties. And that's  why food's no longer medicine and food's killing us. So we've got to bring that back and flavor is  going to be a huge driver. Yeah, yeah. I'm so excited to see all these different pieces coming  
**0:43:45-0:43:52:**  together across our network and I'm convinced that, I mean, these are the people that are  really going to be paving the way for a much better food system. So. Absolutely. And you know,  when we have all that data in place, I mean, I don't, I can taste something and I don't need  
**0:44:03-0:44:09:**  data to convince me I'm like, this is better. But a lot of people do and industry does and  policy does. And so it's really important that we develop a body of basically evidence-based  practice guidelines for growing nutrient-dense regenerative foods. And so I'm really grateful  
**0:44:21-0:44:27:**  to all the work that's being done to everyone out there so that we have lots of options to quantify  this moving forward. Well, that is great. Thank you so much for spending so much time and I have  to compliment you on all your understanding of agronomy and the rhizosphere. I mean, I ventured  
**0:44:38-0:44:44:**  a guess that there are very few food brand owners that even know what half those things are, let  alone fluent in them. So it's a really, it's a soil. I was a soil scientist for a couple of years,  for a couple of years, like a grunt. I know just enough to be dangerous. Well, that's wonderful. I  
**0:44:57-0:45:02:**  work in the labs of Dr. Tom DeLuca at University of Montana for a couple of years, and I collected  thousands of soil samples and ran them in the lab. So again, I know just enough to be dangerous,  but it's also enough to really load a different level of appreciation for how that affects food.  
**0:45:12-0:45:17:**  Yeah, absolutely. Thanks, Tom. Those were really primitive years.  Well, good. Well, awesome, Sarah. Yeah. Thanks for having me and best of luck. Yeah. Always so much  fun to get caught up with you. Thanks for doing the awesome work of advocating and getting the  
**0:45:30-0:45:35:**  community rallied. And I just love the work that you and Jill are doing. So Dr. Claperton,  Sarah, keep up the awesome work. Love you guys. All right. We will. Okay. All right. Take care.  You've been listening to Tasting Terroir, a podcast made possible by a magical collaboration  
**0:45:59-0:46:05:**  between the following companies and supporters, all working together to help farmers, chefs,  food companies, and consumers to build healthier soil for a healthier world. Risotera,  owned by Dr. Jill Claperton, Risotera is an international food security consulting company  
**0:46:18-0:46:23:**  providing expert guidance for creating healthy soils that yield tasty nutrient-dense foods.  Check us out at risotera.com. That's R-H-I-Z-O-T-E-R-R-A.com.  And the Global Food and Farm online community, an ad-free global social network and soil health  
**0:46:39-0:46:45:**  streaming service that provides information and connections that help you apply the science and  practice of improving soil health. Join us at globalfoodandfarm.com. And from listeners like  you who support us through our Patreon account at patreon.com slash tasting terroir. Patrons  
**0:47:00-0:47:06:**  receive access to our full-length interviews and selected additional materials. Patrons will also  have the opportunity to submit questions that we will answer on the podcast. Tune in next week to  hear more interviews and insights with myself, Sarah Harper, and Dr. Jill Claperton, as well as  
**0:47:19-0:47:24:**  the regenerative farmers, chefs, and emerging food companies in the Global Food and Farm  online community and beyond. If you like our work, please give us a five-star rating and  share the podcast with your friends. Thanks so much for listening and for helping us get the  
**0:47:39-0:47:46:**  word out about this new resource to taste the health of your food. Until next week,  stay curious, keep improving, and don't stop believing that better is possible when knowledge  is available.  