---
title: Regenerative Conversion Stories
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

<script src="https://cdn.podlove.org/web-player/embed.js"></script>
    <script>
        document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', function () {
          if (document.readyState === 'interactive' || document.readyState === 'complete') {
            podlovePlayer('#player', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/Tasting Terroir/Regenerative-conversion-stories.json', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/Tasting Terroir/config.json').then(registerExternalEvents('player'))
          }
        })
  </script>

### Tasting Terroir  (2022-11-18)  
### Author(s): Sara Hessenflow Harper  

**0:00:00-0:00:26:**  Hey friends, have you missed me? I'm so sorry we missed last week and are a little late  getting the next episode to you. The challenges of sometimes doing 20 things by yourself caught  up to me, I will admit, and throw a little sickness in there and you know, well, that's  
**0:00:26-0:00:46:**  what you have. But we are making up for it this week and I'm super excited to share all  of that with you to really launch the beginning of an opportunity for you to have actual conversations  with some of these amazing farmers and food makers that we are profiling and sharing stories  
**0:00:46-0:01:02:**  with you about on a monthly basis going forward in our new webinar series that we're going  to be telling you about in just a minute. But welcome back to our podcast Tasting Tarroir,  a journey that helps you more accurately navigate the marketing claims of Better For You food  
**0:01:02-0:01:19:**  by understanding the link between healthy soil and the flavor of your food. I'm your  host, Sarah Harper. This episode features a conversation I had with several of our regenerative  farmers and food companies, many of them we've interviewed in previous episodes of the podcast  
**0:01:19-0:01:42:**  from our global food and farm community. And by the way, if you are curious about that  community we just have launched a new website that I built myself, globalfoodfarm.com or  globalfoodand farm.com, which will be profiling and being able to link you to these fine folks,  
**0:01:42-0:01:57:**  as well as explaining the benefits of being part of our community. What is it that we  do? What do we provide? And how could it maybe benefit you? So please do go over there and  check that out globalfoodfarm.com. As I said, we will be telling you directly how you can  
**0:01:57-0:02:16:**  talk to many of these amazing folks. And in our episode today, you're going to get to  hear from them stories about their conversion to the regenerative mindset. How is it that  they came to make this choice to go in this direction of working with nature and focusing  
**0:02:16-0:02:33:**  on continuous improvement and not just yield? It's a big change. And so some of the reasons  behind that change are the focus of this episode. As I mentioned, I am super excited to share  with you today that you will be having a chance, an ongoing chance to actually talk directly  
**0:02:33-0:02:54:**  to these folks in a webinar series that we are launching on December 1st. Today, I'm  happy to announce our first Finding Regenerative Food Free Consumer Webinar. It will be December  1st at 11am Eastern Time US on a Zoom call. And to be part of it, all you have to do is  
**0:02:54-0:03:13:**  go to our new website globalfoodfarm.com or globalfoodandfarm.com and sign up on the form  on the front page that just says you're interested. And you'll get an email with the Zoom call  information as well as updates about future events like webinars and opportunities to  
**0:03:13-0:03:28:**  talk directly with these producers. And what it's going to be is we're going to give the  producers and food companies a chance to describe what it is they do and how they do it. But  mainly it is a chance for you to ask them your questions, not just about the food they  
**0:03:28-0:03:45:**  produce but about this regenerative movement, about other claims that you've seen from other  brands perhaps that you want to get an insider's take on. Really, it's up to you. Wherever  you want to take it, this is your opportunity to find regenerative food if you want to actually  
**0:03:45-0:04:02:**  purchase it. And also to find out more about it from people who are right in the midst  of it. So again, that webinar will be December 1st, 11am and we will try to have these on  a monthly basis. And if you sign up on our website globalfoodfarm.com, you will be able  
**0:04:02-0:04:21:**  to get the call information and notices about upcoming events. On this December 1st webinar,  you will be getting to meet producers of ancient whole grain flour and pasta, gluten-free flour  and pizza crusts, snack foods made from sorghum and millet, vegetables like onions and squash  
**0:04:21-0:04:41:**  and grass-fed regeneratively raised beef. So really, if you wanted to, you could buy  a whole regenerative meal feast really, just from the producers on this call. So no more  excuses about not being able to find regenerative food. That's going to be definitely a theme  
**0:04:41-0:04:56:**  of this episode. No excuses. So again, sign up on the webinar globalfoodfarm.com. I know  I hate being repetitive, but unfortunately, you apparently have to hear something three  times before you'll actually get it in your mind. So globalfoodfarm.com. Sign up on the  
**0:04:56-0:05:11:**  web, the form and you'll get the zoom call, you get to be a part of the webinar, get to  meet these amazing people and expand your life all for free. So do take advantage of  that. And with that, let's dive into our conversation with these amazing farmers and brands and  
**0:05:11-0:05:30:**  farm brands who will be participating in the December 1st webinar and get to hear more  from them about what it is that made them shift into this regenerative journey.  All right. Well, I am thrilled today to be joined by several members of our global food  
**0:05:30-0:05:47:**  and farm community. And that is made up of farmers and food companies, chefs that are  really on this regenerative journey. And we're lucky enough to have a number of the folks  in this community really actually making ingredients and products that people can buy, you know,  
**0:05:47-0:06:03:**  that, that have that carry with them the knowledge of how they were grown and the continuous  improvement that is continuing to go. So I want to just go around the group and have,  first of all, have each of them just do a quick introduction and where they're farming  
**0:06:03-0:06:16:**  and what they're going. And then we'll continue on the conversation from there. So we'll start  with Craig.  Hi, I'm Craig Cameron. I farm in central Alberta, Canada with my wife Miriam. We've got two  
**0:06:16-0:06:26:**  kids and then we farm with my in-laws. We raise beef.  Forage finished beef.  Well, yeah, it's getting before it's finished beef now.  
**0:06:26-0:06:43:**  Yeah. Forage beef. Yes. And many of these folks, we have done podcast episodes on and  so I'll link to the show notes below the different episodes that feature some of these folks  so you can learn more about them in depth. So Deanna, let's go to you.  
**0:06:43-0:07:07:**  Hi, I'm Deanna Lozinski. I farm in central North Dakota with my husband Kelly and we  grow a variety of small grains typically in our rotation. And we have introduced heritage  grain, wheat, Egyptian hullace barley, and we launched a small brand called Guardian  
**0:07:07-0:07:20:**  Grains where we sell our whole grain, stone milled flour and artisan pasta with the grains  that we're growing here in North Dakota.  That's great. And Jay, I know you're driving, but you can give us a little introduction.  
**0:07:20-0:07:41:**  Sure. Jay Brandt here. Brandt Family Farms in central Ohio. I farm with my father, David,  and son Christopher. My wife and second son Isaac also have a meat business that's on  farm there. We've been involved in conservation practices, feeding care regeneratives for  
**0:07:41-0:08:02:**  about 40 to 50 years in our area. So we grow primarily corn, soybeans, and meat. I have  started growing some heritage corn and meat varieties and also started a local grain hub  with about five or six other like-minded producers in the area to supply whole grain meat and  
**0:08:02-0:08:19:**  flowers in central Ohio.  And Wes, why don't you give us a little introduction of who you are and what you're growing.  Okay. Well, I, I, I manage a ranch that's north of Big Timber, Montana. And I've been  
**0:08:19-0:08:47:**  here for coming up on 40 years managing the same, same place. And we, we started our organic  journey in 1989. And by the time we found out what regenerative was, we were doing it.  It's kind of how, how we evolved. But basically all that we sell is, is beef and it's certified  
**0:08:47-0:09:11:**  organic grass finished. And we do have occasional tours of the ranch. We market primarily in  the state. We've just started in the past couple of years doing some website sales.  That's been somewhat promising, but it's not a, not a big volume. And you know, we, we  
**0:09:11-0:09:29:**  shop hard for stores in, in Montana. We're getting more and more people all the time.  And especially in Bozeman and Billings, we're situated between them. So that, that helps.  But we primarily wholesale our products to, to retailers. The community food co-op in  
**0:09:29-0:09:44:**  Bozeman is our largest customer.  Great. And we're lucky enough too, to have two brands with us. I say lucky because there  aren't nearly enough of them that are actually working with farmers and sourcing regeneratively  
**0:09:44-0:09:56:**  grown ingredients. So Jennifer Koehler with Around the World Gourmet, why don't you introduce  yourself?  Yes, Sarah, thanks for having this. I'm the owner of Around the World Gourmet, as Sarah  
**0:09:56-0:10:23:**  mentioned. And we've also started a, another DBA called Regenerative Mills. I've been in  the food industry manufacturing since 2005. Started in 2014 baking gluten-free vegan pizza  crusts. And I met you and decided that regenerative was the way to go. So we through your network,  
**0:10:23-0:10:46:**  we're able to meet a lot of the farmers and started a partnership with a farmer, Adam  Chappell and our group and buying rice from him directly. And we're milling it. So we  decided to buy a mill. We're able to mill other gluten-free grains as well. Sorgum and  
**0:10:46-0:11:03:**  millet and teff and what else? Chickpeas, things of that nature. So we haven't started  doing that yet, but we are operational and hoping to grow.  That's great. And you're in Ohio, right?  
**0:11:03-0:11:23:**  Yeah. Eastern Ohio, central Eastern Ohio. So we're about one hour from Pittsburgh, two  hours from Columbus hour and 45 minutes really. And about close to three hours from Cleveland.  And another brand that we have lucky enough to have Joni Kenwall Moore with Snacktivist.  
**0:11:23-0:11:38:**  Why don't you introduce yourself?  Yeah. Hi, I'm Joni and I'm the founder of Snacktivist. We're based in Idaho and we are  definitely on the brand side. I actually were not vertically integrated, so I don't have  
**0:11:38-0:11:56:**  a farm, I don't have a processor, I don't have a mill, I don't have a de-hauler, but  we're hoping that that can position us in an interesting location in the business world  where we can help facilitate pull through of different regenerative grains and legumes  
**0:11:56-0:12:12:**  both and be that market force. So we can be more nimble, we can do aggregated sourcing.  So that enables us to take on bigger contracts that a lot of times vertically integrated  models can't because they have like a finite amount of materials. And so that's kind of  
**0:12:12-0:12:29:**  our goal. We've always been focused on ancient grains is like our major focus, the millets  as a family. So sorghum, prosomillet, teff and other millets. We're actually interested  in developing a market for like pearl and foxtail and other millets that are important  
**0:12:29-0:12:46:**  in regenerative rotations. We know a ton of farmers that grow them, but there is not any  domestic sourcing program for them at all in the grain form. It's always grown for pasture  or like for hay. Some of the foxtails are actually grown for like animal feed and we  
**0:12:46-0:12:59:**  want to change that. So our focus of our brand, like we do make baking mixes, we do make some  finished products. We're trying to get that finished product line launched. And again,  it's just always like all the steps. So we have awesome farmers that grew for us this  
**0:12:59-0:13:13:**  year and we're still struggling to get it through the value chain, like it didn't hold  while still maintaining provenance and still maintaining all the specifications that we  need like gluten free. That's the source of frustration to where sometimes I'm like, Oh  
**0:13:13-0:13:25:**  my goodness, can't wait until we have a non gluten free line because we're not out to  like de-glutenize the world. We're just out to add value to the grain sector. And we really  feel like to do that and to disrupt this notion of grains being empty calories, we have to  
**0:13:25-0:13:43:**  add diversity back to grains. So yeah, that being said, that's what we do.  All right. Well now I want to ask each of you to share if possible, the moment or moment,  one of the moments that kind of led you to really make a change in your mindset around  
**0:13:43-0:14:00:**  how you farm or how you source toward regenerative. And you know, we have a lot of our podcast  episodes are exploring what is regenerative and explore the importance of it being a mindset  and a set of principles and not reducing it down to a checklist of practices that, you  
**0:14:00-0:14:15:**  know, some practices are very important, you know, but it is really that continuous improvement  journey and that working with the soil to enhance soil health, a true curiosity and  as well as outcomes that you can measure all these things. So if you want to know really  
**0:14:15-0:14:34:**  what is regenerative, listen to the other episodes. We've got a whole bunch on that.  But this episode, I really want for you all in our audience to hear from farmers and brands  that have actually committed to this, you know, their mindset and what are some of the  
**0:14:34-0:14:51:**  things that help them make that pretty big decision to risk, you know, what you're doing.  Anytime you change something in a business, it's a big risk. And in something like farming  where you have the social component to it too, like your neighbors or everybody's doing  
**0:14:51-0:15:05:**  things a certain way. And when you start doing things differently, well, then you stand out  and there's, you know, there's all sorts of stuff that comes with that. So it's a big  deal to change how you do what you do. So, Craig, we'll start with you and maybe share,  
**0:15:05-0:15:22:**  you know, is there one moment that kind of was a tipping point or  It's kind of, I guess, scary for me because I could get emotional about it.  So like, I guess, growing up and, and kind of starting on the farm that I grew up on,  
**0:15:22-0:15:43:**  I was always interested in helping people and helping the planet. And I went off to  university and got my bachelor's degree in environmental chemistry.  And so that was my goal then was to try and help people get clean water. And that was  
**0:15:43-0:16:01:**  kind of the vision I had going into university. But by the end of university, I realized there  was a lot of people that were working on that, and that I was more, I was more in a position  to help on the food side of things. And so I started down that journey. And then I had  
**0:16:01-0:16:18:**  a bit of a setback in my early 20s, when my dad was kind of my cheerleader on that he  passed away. And so then I kind of had a rough, rough spot there and kind of just walked away  from that, and when I'm just gonna go work cattle and just do that side of things, we  
**0:16:18-0:16:41:**  went, we started farming with my in-laws here. And then the next big thing in my life was  the birth of my daughter. And she had severe HIE at birth, and has a lot of disabilities.  And so she's totally G tube fed. And we kind of walked into that like, okay, like, she's  
**0:16:41-0:16:58:**  not gonna be picky. We want to be able to support her the best we can. So let's find  what's what's going to be the best, most nutritious, best food we can give her. And that's when  we kind of got on the regenerative path of like, yeah, yeah, everything that I've been  
**0:16:58-0:17:14:**  learning about regenerative just ticks all the boxes on what we want to do to support  her and to support the rest of our family and then also our customers. So that was the  big couple moments that kind of crazy path that got us here.  
**0:17:14-0:17:32:**  Craig, wow, wow. Yeah, that's so powerful. That's so powerful. And, and I'm so glad to  that you, you recognize that you have this huge ability to affect the food system. I'm  sure it must feel sometimes like you're just a drop in the in the ocean.  
**0:17:32-0:17:50:**  Well, the toughest thing I think, like for most of the farmers is like, we're doing all  these good things on the production end. And it's so hard to get it to the customer where  they know that they're getting that value. When we have extra stuff, it just goes into  
**0:17:50-0:18:03:**  the regular packing plant and just gets mixed with everything else. So yeah, it's really  nice when we can, when we can get that product to people that appreciate it and know that  they're getting the value that we're producing. Yeah.  
**0:18:04-0:18:28:**  Well, Deanna, let's hear your conversion story.  We came from a conventional grain operation. And that involved no till for us, we're more  of a never till situation. So that part has always been part of the equation of what we  
**0:18:28-0:18:48:**  do. And we were what I call moron farming. So all we did was keep putting more of all  of the inputs on more seed treatment, more chemical, more fertilizer, more insecticide,  more fungicide, more of everything.  
**0:18:49-0:19:11:**  And no doubt encouraged to do by several very smart people.  Well, we were stuck in the paradigm of big bushels equals good farming. And so we chased  that and we started intensively managing our wheat is what it was kind of labeled. And  
**0:19:11-0:19:30:**  so my husband developed a way, this is about 15 years ago, to variable rate all of our  fertilizer applications based on soil type, because we were trying to be more efficient  in the fertilizers that we were putting down. But instead of just now putting down NP and  
**0:19:30-0:19:55:**  K, we were also putting down sulfur and zinc. So we watched our fertilizer bill climb, and  we watched our plant health decline. And that's really what happened. So our inputs went up  and we saw disease pressure in our plants go up. The pest pressure went up. And we were  
**0:19:55-0:20:14:**  always continually treating sick plants. Everything was always sick. And about nine years  ago, we just couldn't do it anymore. Financially, we couldn't do it anymore. Labor wise, it's  my husband and I, we could not do it anymore. Just the two of us. There were several, sometimes  
**0:20:14-0:20:35:**  there was five or six passes over the land to accomplish what we were doing. And we decided,  this is also too right around when our daughter was born, our first daughter was born. And  it really, we decided we were going to have to change something. And maybe if we started  
**0:20:35-0:20:58:**  farming with nature instead of against it, that our plants might be able to become more  resilient and start healing themselves. And so that really started down the soil health  path of reducing inputs and the fertilizer applications and eliminating seed treatment  
**0:20:58-0:21:22:**  and insecticides and fungicides and pre-harvest desiccants, all of that went away. And so,  yeah, it's been a huge transition. And all of those things have been easy compared to  what we are doing now, which is the on-farm infrastructure of cleaning, storing, processing  
**0:21:22-0:21:43:**  our grain to go direct to consumer, to retailers, to restaurants and bakeries. That has been  the hardest aspect of what we're doing because most farms aren't set up to do that.  And so that's where we're at now. We're in the growing pain stage of it. And it made the  
**0:21:43-0:21:59:**  transition to regenerative seem a whole lot like easy compared to what we're doing now.  And you've had to do that because the mills that you would send your product to to be milled  aren't taking regenerative and they aren't marketing it separately. And the brands that  
**0:21:59-0:22:15:**  they sell to obviously aren't asking for it. So farmers like you are having to add this  kind of infrastructure or Craig is having to find ways to do a processing of his beef  because the existing system doesn't want it, basically.  
**0:22:15-0:22:39:**  Right. And my husband and I started Guardian Grains for that reason to give people an option.  Instead of buying conventional or organic, they could support our farm and the healing of our  soil and better food. And that started with grain and then it evolved like many things do  
**0:22:39-0:22:54:**  into stone milled flour and now artisan pasta. And those things were easy to fall into place.  But like I said, the on-farm infrastructure has been a real struggle for us.  Well, good. Well, Jay, what is your conversion story?  
**0:22:54-0:23:14:**  As I mentioned previously, my father David has been involved with conservation practices  since the late 60s, early 70s. So as one of the first adopters in our region to take on no-till,  that kind of built through the years and get his expertise at that kind of travel and meet  
**0:23:14-0:23:37:**  other folks that were doing similar things and kind of would challenge him to that point where  in 2010 and 2011, working with NRCS, Ray Archuleta and Gabe Brown, they received an SARE grant  to look at multi-species cover crop blends in front of corn and bean rotation, which is  
**0:23:37-0:23:58:**  traditional in our area. So after application of that different blend that we were looking at,  that's what here was corn production. We have to have a drought in that case. And the corn planted  in those different cover crop species performed as if there was no drought in our area. So we were  
**0:23:58-0:24:17:**  able to really name a lot of information based on that collaborative work with NRCS and the SARE  grant. And part of that was the training as well. That was part of the grant. So we had a lot of  field days to talk about what was learned and able to share that information. That really defined how  
**0:24:17-0:24:38:**  it added to our process from being basically a monoculture cover crop user to really get into  the multi-species and the ability to really drop fertility and synthetic inputs that before we  were really asked to do. But this gave us a real footprint on how to start that and how to advise  
**0:24:38-0:25:00:**  other people to do that as well. And Wes, was there a moment that made you want to go a different  direction or a process? Well, it goes back quite a ways, I guess. And when we went organic, that  was a decision made by the owners of the ranch and one that I didn't agree with, but that's their  
**0:25:00-0:25:24:**  ranch. And so we did it and we didn't have a general transition to organic. I just drove the  bus off the cliff. And so, you know, our hay production dropped about 20%. That's basically,  you know, the only crop that we were raising at the time. And I thought, aha, this is it. And then  
**0:25:24-0:25:45:**  you do the books at the end of the year and you realize that the drop in production was almost  exactly equal financially to the reduction in the cost of the inputs for the chemicals and  fertilizers that we had been using previously. And all of a sudden, the organic became really  
**0:25:45-0:26:13:**  intriguing at that point. It could be revenue neutral. So what did we need to do with our  operation to change things? We started adding seeds to our hay fields. And initially, I guess  the first I remember, we were trying to just add clover. We had sold most of our equipment, we put a  
**0:26:13-0:26:32:**  spin spreader on the back of an ATV. And we'd go out and we'd have to wait for a light snow.  And we'd run out so we had tracks to follow and could see the seeds on the snow. And we just  broadcast the clover seed. We got away with that fairly well and did okay. And then we  
**0:26:33-0:26:54:**  had an old disk drill that we took out and we realized that it wouldn't get into sod very well,  but it would let us meter seeds. And so we started coming up with seed blends that would have  three or four different plants in the mix and do that. But when we really turned the corner  
**0:26:54-0:27:16:**  was about five years ago, we bought a no-till drill. And that's been a huge game changer for us.  I think 10 is the fewest varieties that we've had in the drill box at any one time when we're  seeding. We seed rangeland, we seed, you know, former crop land, we have irrigated ground that  
**0:27:16-0:27:39:**  we seed, we come up with different blends for all. And we do use some seed treatments  that are built specifically for us to encourage life. And I guess that's probably the best way  to live. And I guess that's probably the neatest thing we think about what we do is I have  
**0:27:39-0:28:07:**  relatives that farm and ranch and they are obsessed with killing weeds. And we are obsessed with  making more vibrant communities of plants on the ranch. And it's the difference between  actually living a really positive or a really negative lifestyle. And it makes everything  
**0:28:07-0:28:28:**  different in your world to be doing that. Between just working on improving the diversity of plants  on the landscape and doing that, I don't know, it was a few years ago, Gabe Brown was kind of  touring the state and speaking different places. And I guess that's when we actually realized that,  
**0:28:28-0:28:46:**  hey, that's what we do. We're regenerative now. Jennifer, I know you're not a farmer,  but you're a brand. And you mentioned a little bit already about, you know, making a decision  to really go toward regenerative and make your brand about that. What were some of the things  
**0:28:46-0:29:07:**  that led up to that? And was there a tipping point experience? So I've always been, even as a kid,  an advocate of the earth and always respecting it, not littering, recycling. And it truly for  me is about respecting the planet that we live on. And I've always believed also that we are what we  
**0:29:07-0:29:27:**  eat and eating more nutritious foods is important to our minds and our body. And Sarah, it was you  actually who educated me on regenerative agriculture and the benefits it has on the  climate change issues that we're seeing, not to mention the health benefits for the soil and for  
**0:29:27-0:29:49:**  us. So it just made sense to me immediately. And I don't know if it was a moment where I was like,  oh, that's it. You know, it was just like, oh yeah, that makes total sense to me. I'm on board.  You know, kind of why didn't anyone think of this already? I mean, they had already been doing it,  
**0:29:49-0:30:13:**  but well, especially in the brand side and the processing side. Yeah. Yeah. It makes sense to  me on the processing side too. I don't know why people aren't jumping in. Anyway, I think they  will be. It just takes people longer to get there. And I actually, I may not be a farmer, but I did  
**0:30:13-0:30:29:**  because I wanted to test this out after you had educated me on regenerative. So I went to my  grandfather's and I said, I want to, we used to do gardens there. He had always had really big  gardens. And I said, I want to, I want to do a garden. And of course we had to get the grass  
**0:30:29-0:30:53:**  off of there, but then we did it for two years and I didn't till that second year. And we didn't,  I didn't use any herbicides and pesticides. So that was fun with the weeds. But I also,  for the cafe that we have, had my contractors set up a raised bed garden so that we could  
**0:30:54-0:31:16:**  do vegetables. And these were all vegetables that we were growing like tomatoes, jalapenos,  green peppers, habaneros, basil, lettuce, even we had a couple of different varieties of lettuce,  cucumbers, things that we would be using in the cafe, you know, for prepared foods. And I never  
**0:31:16-0:31:33:**  tilled that up. I never used herbicides. In fact, I've never even put any fertilizer on anything.  And we've had tremendous success with the plants and the vegetables.  Great. Yeah. And we're now using regeneratively grown rice, as I mentioned previously,  
**0:31:33-0:31:52:**  and we're milling that into flour and using it in our gluten-free pizza crusts.  And it's just also amazing to me that we are able to do all of this.  Yeah, that's great. So Joni, what about you? What led to your focus on this as a brand?  
**0:31:53-0:32:08:**  Well, I have to say it's a little bit of a different angle. I think like  back in the 90s, I did a lot of camping and hiking in the desert Southwest, like in Utah,  and in the high desert and kind of became enamored with cryptobiotic crust.  
**0:32:09-0:32:25:**  I have a degree in botany and I have a chemistry background, so I do tend to get kind of nerdy when  it comes to that stuff. And, you know, just was enchanted by the fact that in one of the  harshest environments on the planet, it was really the delicate balance and symbiosis between the  
**0:32:25-0:32:42:**  different species working together that would stabilize soil and provide a substrate that  plants could actually grow in, despite having horrific environmental conditions like extreme  heat, extreme cold, either no water or when it rains, it just pours and it tends to run off.  
**0:32:42-0:32:59:**  I mean, the flash flooding in the desert Southwest is really significant. And it was the cryptobiotic  crust that really is the ecological framework that holds the most important things in the  whole framework that holds desert ecosystems together. And so literally that was like my  
**0:32:59-0:33:15:**  gateway drug to thinking about regenerative systems in general, because like that same  lesson that's learned from cryptobiotic crust is applied everywhere that there's any sort of  soil substrate that's getting anything done at all. So unless you're in like on Mars, which Mars  
**0:33:15-0:33:32:**  has no cryptobiotic crust, that's one of the reasons it has no life and has no water. It's  like you start seeing it everywhere, that same lesson. And so then I went and lived in northern  Alaska and spent a lot of time in the tundra. And again, same lesson there, like the resiliency of  
**0:33:32-0:33:52:**  the ecosystem was stitched together and held together by the symbiotic relationships of  microscopic organisms. And so that's really kind of my operating system in my head of why we need  to apply the same principles to all of our arable lands, whether they be pasture, going towards  
**0:33:52-0:34:09:**  grazing. I grew up with cattle. I grew up on a small farm in western Oregon. And I grew up with  a real connection of like food systems. And we had a garden that was pathetic. I don't know why  my dad had it in like the worst place ever. Clay soil, it was a struggle. It never did well. And  
**0:34:09-0:34:25:**  then one year we decided to move it down to the back where the cattle had been. And it just was  like night and day. And my dad was like, wow, holy camoly. And so I think that those were those early  experiences that shaped my thinking to want to dedicate my life to shifting the entire food  
**0:34:25-0:34:43:**  system to a more biology-focused model. Because once we bring back biology, everything else falls  into place. And soil is where that biology lives. So whether it's impacting climate because plants  are the best organism on earth, anything with a chloroplast can bring carbon out of the air and  
**0:34:43-0:35:00:**  put it back in the lysosphere where it belongs. That's just nature in action. So how do we optimize  that? Well, agriculture is clearly the biggest mover and shaper and manipulator of all landmass,  you know, and so why not put it to work towards good. And markets move practice. And so that's why  
**0:35:00-0:35:18:**  I'm totally focused on markets and developing products that help infuse need to farming systems  for like biodiversity, because diversity on the plate ultimately drives biodiversity in the field.  And that's just the way the economy works. So my right to them, I am getting us all t shirts that  
**0:35:18-0:35:38:**  say markets drive practice. Because what an idea, what an idea. No, and it's totally not. We just  convinced all these farmers to change and then Oh, like that. Yeah, it doesn't work like that. And I  have farmers literally calling me every week most days like hi, we want to grow for snacktivists.  
**0:35:38-0:35:55:**  Yeah, we want to be a snacktivist farmer. And I'm like, if we could get our retailers on board,  and actually supporting our work, we could put we could, we could rapidly transition but the sales  cycle, the culture, the like sickheadedness out there. Yeah, it's it's a struggle. That's Yeah,  
**0:35:55-0:36:11:**  it's a struggle. The struggle is real. The retailers who are listening, get your butts in  gear. Absolutely. Absolutely. And consumers, consumers. I mean, that's the that's the thing. I  mean, the hope for all of this really has to be on the consumers. And I mean, anyone listening to  
**0:36:11-0:36:28:**  this podcast, I think is interested in, in finding better food. And, you know, one of the greatest  frustrations for me, and I know for many of you, I know, I've heard you all, you know, hear the same  thing I do that people say, you know, this is so great when they learn about regenerative, it's so  
**0:36:28-0:36:44:**  great. Oh, it does all these great things. So we just need to convince more farmers to change. And,  you know, yes, of course, you know, that's, that's great. And there are plenty of reasons for farmers  to do this, even if there isn't a market. I mean, farmers save money, they enhance the assets of  
**0:36:44-0:37:05:**  their soil. But the people that are taking this message out there are often big brands that are  marketing on how great regenerative is, and, and acting as if there's no supply, as if there's as  if they can't, they just can't find it. And, you know, yes, it would take some change in the  
**0:37:05-0:37:22:**  processing. But you know, those guys have a lot of influence with processors. So they actually said  they wanted it, and would commit to buying it. The processors are not, you know, stupid, and  they're not that stubborn. They would, they would create it, they would mill it, they would chop it,  
**0:37:22-0:37:45:**  they would, you know, they would do whatever needed to be done. So I just want you all as farmers,  and maybe share, share your experiences with, with that phenomenon. And, and, you know, so Craig,  we'll start with you. I think it's just the natural process of having to try and get it  
**0:37:45-0:38:01:**  direct to consumer to get the benefits that it's a lot easier for people to go to a store where they  get all the rest of their groceries than to come get beef from a small brand or whatever.  And because they often they think they're getting the kind of things that you're doing,  
**0:38:02-0:38:16:**  or that regenerative is doing, because and that's to the point about the word and what does it mean?  And how does it confuse people, but it is it is something materially different. And I'm excited.  That's part of what's so great about our network being connected to Dr. Jill Clapperton, because  
**0:38:16-0:38:31:**  people like her that, you know, could do the actual nutrient density testing and,  and show the difference like actual difference in the in the final product because of how it was,  how it was raised. But you know, the whole point of you having to go direct to consumer  
**0:38:31-0:38:50:**  is because there's not a value added pathway that will take it right.  Yeah, not not not an easy way for being able to track and get those benefits all the way to the  consumer. It's a lot easier to just mix it with all the rest of the stuff that you've got coming  
**0:38:50-0:39:09:**  through and maybe one person will get a little extra benefit. But yeah, well, in fact, mix it  with the worst stuff, because your quality brings up, like you said, a lot of the the testing and  stuff that's coming down the pipeline is going to make a big difference in that people will actually  
**0:39:09-0:39:30:**  be able to tell to see the zinc zinc is in your beef or how much beta carotene because it was,  you know, raised on plants and, you know, all that good stuff. Well, Deanna, I know you share this,  this frustration of mine. We've talked about it many times. But do you do you hear that  
**0:39:30-0:39:50:**  from people if only more farmers were like you? Yeah, if only more farmers, right? Yeah.  And it is a frustrating aspect of it, because I think that's very true that markets drive practice,  right? And so depending on your area, you have to grow what is being purchased. Okay, so when we're  
**0:39:50-0:40:13:**  talking about this intercropping, and let's grow all of these things together, right? Let's grow  peas, mustard and oats all together, diversity to your soil system all in one pass. Let's do this.  Guess who buys that? Guess who buys that mix? No one buys that mix. No one buys that mix. And so  
**0:40:13-0:40:34:**  it is left to the farmer to separate that mix. And this is what I was talking about earlier on  the on-farm infrastructure to even be able to manage something like that. In theory, it sounds  amazing. But the separation of those intercrops to offer diversity to the soil system in a single  
**0:40:34-0:40:56:**  growing season, it's a challenge, right? And so we wanted to grow milling oats. Well, we. I say me,  it's me. It's not we. I told my husband, I said, let's grow milling oats. I want to offer oatmeal  through Guardian Grains. That's going to be my new offering this year. And he said, well, you've  
**0:40:56-0:41:15:**  already added flour and pasta. And I said, yeah, I'm just going to add one more thing. And so, and  he said, well, find me the seed, I'll plant it. And so I chose a milling oat that had maybe a little  bit more aggressive root structure, a little bit taller biomass, right? Always putting soil health  
**0:41:15-0:41:36:**  first. And so we did that. And in the midst of that have been planted, I ran out of my Bob's  red mill oats that Kelly was making me for breakfast every day. And I said, could you make  our Egyptian hulless barley for breakfast instead? And he was like, just give me whatever. And so,  
**0:41:36-0:41:52:**  and he did. And I started eating it and I was eating it for a week. And I said, you have got  to really, you really got to try this. And he said, okay. And he had been eating eggs and bacon,  right? He's an eggs and bacon kind of guy. And he tried the Egyptian hulless barley prepared like  
**0:41:52-0:42:13:**  oatmeal. And he has, and that was in May and he hasn't gotten back to eggs and bacon since. So,  and as we are having Egyptian hulless barley for breakfast, he had, and I call it naked barley  because there's no hull on it. And it's one less processing step for me. Right. And he said,  
**0:42:13-0:42:29:**  I hate to ask, but what does this mean for those milling oats? And I was like, oh yeah,  I'm really sorry about that. I'm not going to be offering oatmeal through Guardian Grains.  I'm going to do naked flaked naked barley instead. And he was like, oh gosh. And I was like, what?  
**0:42:29-0:42:50:**  It's 18% protein instead of 11, right? Like they both are a great source of beta glucan. Let's,  let's say that to say that I have 10,000 bushels of oats with nowhere to go. Not one buyer,  not one. And they all qualify as a milling oat. And I don't, I don't have a buyer for them.  
**0:42:51-0:43:09:**  So what happens to this 10,000 bushels of milling oats? It goes as animal feed.  And it's just part of it. So that's what happens where people are growing corn and soy.  They're growing corn and soy because that's where their buyers are. Yeah,  
**0:43:10-0:43:29:**  absolutely. I would love to grow oats. It grew beautifully. It offers great benefit to our soil  structure. Right. I have no buyer for that. So here it sits. 10,000 bushels just sitting here.  Yeah. Yeah. And Deanna, if you don't mind me adding to that, just because it's an interesting  
**0:43:29-0:43:45:**  conversation, because like part of like the issue that we're seeing with the oats market path is the  having them be gluten-free, viable because so much of the oat market is driven by the ability  to be tested out as certified gluten-free. And it's like, again, the reality for that,  
**0:43:45-0:43:59:**  for producers and farmers, like you don't have two combines sitting around, like it's so  interesting how like the market is now shaping that demand because oats are in high demand.  Like it's crazy, but a lot of them have to be certified gluten-free.  
**0:43:59-0:44:14:**  Like, how do we work with that? How do we help you? I want to help you. That's cool.  Right. No, that's, you know, and that it is, it is a, it is a thing, but like you have to,  like the market I'm directing it to isn't the gluten-free market. Right. It's not even a  
**0:44:14-0:44:31:**  regenerative market. This is a conventional market. It's not even a regenerative market.  This is a conventional commodity market and I still can't find a buyer. So I'm just saying  like that, you know, grow oats, grow oats. We all want to eat oats and then there's no buyer for  
**0:44:31-0:44:52:**  them. So you can imagine how excited my husband is about me growing 10,000 bushels of oats and  having no place to put them. So it's a struggle. Yeah. No, it's well, in the, in just the whole  fact that you, uh, are, have built a path to turn your, your ancient grains into pasta and into  
**0:44:52-0:45:11:**  flour, because, uh, I mean, and same with, with Jen, you know, Jen adding a mill to her  manufacturing process, you know, that wasn't, that wasn't, uh, wasn't the first, uh, first thing you  wanted to do. I mean, either of you, because it's expensive, it's a whole new thing to learn,  
**0:45:11-0:45:29:**  a whole new complexity to add, but, um, both of you and other farmers in our network that are  doing, are doing this too, adding in processing capacity on the farm because the processors won't  take it. They won't do it. You know, even if you would pay them to what they call it a toll,  
**0:45:29-0:45:43:**  you know, processing fee to basically set aside what they're doing and process your stuff and  then go back to what they're doing, rent the facility, essentially, they won't do it.  You know, they just, I, I, I keep saying it because it's been years of me exploring how do  
**0:45:43-0:46:02:**  we find, where do we find, how, you know, surely if someone's willing to pay you, you would do it,  you know, but they won't, you know, and that stands in such stark contrast to all the demand  you hear about. And I've read for years, consumer, consumers and what they say they want, uh, all the  
**0:46:02-0:46:23:**  things, the laundry list of things they want, regenerative meets it, regenerative meets it  and beyond. And so, um, I really feel like we're at a point where people have to put up or shut up.  Consumers have to actually buy this, you know, this stuff that is, um, is really bringing this,  
**0:46:23-0:46:39:**  this quality, it's almost impossible quality, uh, to them and have to, you know, really buy it  direct from the source to know, to your, to your point, you know, it's hard to know what is  regenerative, but if you, if you know the people and you know, you can hear their, their mindset  
**0:46:39-0:46:56:**  and their practices and see the tests that show the outcomes, then you're as close to knowing as  you're ever going to get, you know, and there are more, you all are doing that more in our network  that are doing that. So that's my little soapbox, but anyway, continuing on, Jennifer, uh, maybe  
**0:46:56-0:47:10:**  let's, let's jump to you off of that because you did a, you had a similar thing that you,  you had to do with taking on, creating your own capacity to create an ingredient that was how you  wanted it, because I mean, you couldn't, if you wanted to dedicate your brand to a regenerative,  
**0:47:10-0:47:27:**  you couldn't buy, you know, regenerative rice, you had to mill it yourself. You know,  after I met Adam through the network, he had the rice, but he just didn't know  how I was going to get it and have it milled. And so he was able to find a cleaners that's nearby  
**0:47:27-0:47:45:**  that cleaned it and de-hauled it and sent it, you know, then we were able to send it directly to me,  but that was, that was an issue. I know that there were a lot of people who had called around to  different mills and no one was willing to do smaller quantities. So I had found also through  
**0:47:45-0:48:05:**  the network, a contact who then led me to Reynolds engineering, who had pulverizing mills that we  could use for rice, which is a little different, you know, than the hammer mills and such that you  would use for softer grains. So I did have to invest in that. I was able to get some money  
**0:48:06-0:48:27:**  from the state of Ohio, but it was only maybe like a third of what it cost. And we did have a,  you know, a GoFundMe campaign that you helped with the video for that. And again, it's just  trying to manage an entire another project of trying to raise funds that way. And  
**0:48:28-0:48:44:**  just not enough people. There's not enough, I'd like to duplicate myself five times.  Joni, do you hear that too? Like if there were more farmers?  Yeah, I mean, honestly, I know so many high quality farmers that are, you know, some of them  
**0:48:44-0:49:01:**  very far along in their regenerative journey, some just getting started and needing that financial  incentive to make the leap and buy, you know, some different equipment that they'll need, etc.  And it's just a constant frustration for us that it's passed market. You know, like right now,  
**0:49:01-0:49:20:**  I, you know, we're buying some prosomillet from a farmer in North Dakota. And so, you know,  a farmer named Martin Gorder, really great guy, fantastic farmer, interesting perspective on  holistic management of, you know, like his farming system, which, you know, he's doing a lot of row  
**0:49:20-0:49:36:**  cropping, which is a passion point of mine, because that is a part of the ag sector that  needs a lot of help. And, and we are having trouble moving a couple coats through deholling  and having it be still, you know, carrying the provenance, like he's certified organic,  
**0:49:36-0:49:51:**  and he's regenerative, he's working with ROC, we're almost through those hoops. And now it's  like all these like pieces in the middle that are just driving me crazy to get it to where we can  mill it, then we can put it into our product. If there's a decentralization event occurring  
**0:49:51-0:50:09:**  in this process, and it's not being serviced very well. So we have movement and transition on the  farming side, we actually do have movement and transition on the consumer side, where we don't  have enough entrepreneurial innovation, and capital is in these middle steps of the process  
**0:50:09-0:50:22:**  of like, how are we getting it from field to, to where it's going to reach the consumers, because  it's awesome if you can do the Gabe Brown type method where everyone comes to your farm, and  they're buying their meat and the eggs and whatever there. But like, if you live in a really  
**0:50:22-0:50:38:**  rural area, there aren't enough people to support that a and b, there's a ton of people in the city  that need really good quality food, and they don't have local food system. You, Jen and, and I know  Joni, you really, with retail and with focusing on, you know, dealing with customers and customer  
**0:50:38-0:50:55:**  feedback, do you get a sense that customers, food, you know, people that are buying food, and  particularly natural food consumers, do you, do you think that they know about this gap and the  power that they would have just by asking, you know, if they would ask their brands, if they would write  
**0:50:55-0:51:09:**  in an email, and you know, where does this, which farmers are you working from? What are the practices?  Because they all, they have their standard, you know, non-answer answers that they would email back  to them. But the more that they get that input, that consumers actually care about it, that's,  
**0:51:09-0:51:24:**  that's what starts to move the needle. They're kind of getting there, honestly, like, I think that  consumers know that they want something better. Do they know it's regenerative? No. Like regenerative  for one has too many syllables, like it's a catastrophic word for this movement. Well, they don't mean to call it that.  
**0:51:24-0:51:38:**  It's so meaningful, like, but from a marketing perspective, it's kind of marketing suicide. And  also, there's no clear definition of like, what regenerative means. And, and that, and, and, and  for good reason, because it's a dynamic continuum, it can't really be encapsulated into one little  
**0:51:38-0:51:56:**  thing. So those are things that are harming the market adoption of regenerative. But I think also,  there is a lesson, and somebody told me a really great example yesterday, they're like, if you would  have done a consumer survey about if they needed a smartphone back in 2010, the vast majority of  
**0:51:56-0:52:10:**  people would have said, no, why would, why would we need to carry around a little computer that's  expensive? We have a phone, we have a computer, we don't need them combined. Well, Steve Jobs was like,  they're going to want this. So we need to just, we need to get it to them. And then it will change the  
**0:52:10-0:52:25:**  way the world looks at things. And I think regenerative is up against a similar situation where  I think we just have to deliver it to them. And then they'll go, Oh, where was this? Like, we  needed this, it'll be a similar phenomenon. It's just going to take a lot of pushing and some brute  
**0:52:25-0:52:42:**  force to bring this to the market, honestly. You know, from a grain, we don't have any livestock  that are domestic, right? So what we have are the native species that are here and returning,  which is awesome, right? And that's been one of the really exciting things to watch about our  
**0:52:42-0:53:02:**  system is to watch all the native species come back that were gone for a long time and to watch  the reproduction of those species like our, our white tail deer are no longer having one fawn at  a time, they're having two and three. So the reproduction side of that has been really  
**0:53:02-0:53:22:**  interesting. And I attribute that 100% to soil health and regenerative practices and minimal  disturbance, right? I think that and no insecticide, no fungicide, right? I think  those are huge players in that from the grain perspective. So I don't have another outlet,  
**0:53:22-0:53:47:**  the grain that we move through Guardian Grains is a fraction of a percent of what we grow.  And it really is just to help me feel better about our grains not 100% getting commingled  at the elevator with conventional grains. It's just a small outlet for me to know where the  
**0:53:47-0:54:07:**  end user is. And there's a huge amount of, like I said, there's a huge amount of stress that has  come with the whole infrastructure piece on farm cleaning and dehulling and things like that.  But there's a whole nother side of it that has been super rewarding. And the  
**0:54:07-0:54:29:**  accountability piece has been huge, because dealing and going direct to consumer, which is  that I want to do more of. I think it's the best way for people to really know their farmer  is just come direct to the source. And so that's where I'm really focusing a lot of our marketing.  
**0:54:29-0:54:50:**  But I think the important thing about that is that we have a huge sense of accountability  of what we're doing. Because if I'm dealing direct to consumer now, there's no buffer.  So if I screw up, that's on me. And so the choices I make on the farm directly reflect  
**0:54:50-0:55:12:**  my customer. So there are things that I'm flat out unwilling to do. And so I'm not going to  do and sacrifice like things that I'm not going to compromise on like desiccation and insecticide  use and things like that, because I am not going to let that interfere with how it affects the  
**0:55:12-0:55:37:**  consumers health and my soil health. So and it's and I like the idea of diversity in the  crop thing and companion crop thing. And it's awesome. Right? The idea is such a pretty  picture, right? All of these things going together. But from a grain aspect, combining  
**0:55:37-0:55:54:**  all of that together, it's not a saleable product. It's not saleable. Yeah, there is  a whole separate separation process of that. And they're not talking about that end part.  Just scroll all these things together. It'll just be beautiful. And then what graze it with  
**0:55:54-0:56:13:**  the cattle I don't have. I mean, I'm just saying like, that's not an option for me to have have  Craig have a road trip, bring his cow. Come on over. No, it's still right. That's something  to explore later. Like I Yeah, as more of our neighbors that do have cattle come into learning  
**0:56:13-0:56:30:**  a lot more about rotational grazing and things like that. I think it's a good option for us.  As we wrap this up. I just again, back to the consumer. So, you know, Deanna, you have a  website for Guardian grains and Craig, I know you're working on that. And, and we again, we  
**0:56:30-0:56:49:**  have on our new website, we are going to have links to all of your operations. So people will  be able to easily find you. And I just I just really want to encourage people to think about  the investment in buying from direct from farmers that are not only farming this way, because that's  
**0:56:49-0:57:06:**  that's fantastic enough, but taking that extra step to really get it in a form that you can buy,  you know, it's not just the grain from the field, it's pasta. It's fantastic pasta that people rave  about what's whole grain has it all in there, nutrition and climate friendly and all of that.  
**0:57:06-0:57:21:**  And, you know, committing to buy pasta from Deanna or beef from Craig or flour from Jay,  or maybe pick one, you know, and you and you're and you're continuing to buy that almost like  a subscription, my goodness, you know, what do we pay for all of our streaming subscriptions,  
**0:57:21-0:57:38:**  or all of our entertainment, you know, all of our Starbucks, or any coffee shop,  all the things that we seem to find money for that aren't nearly as important, you know,  and that's kind of what I just want to like, wave a flag and say, you can't get yourself off the  
**0:57:38-0:57:55:**  hook so easily as to say, if only I could find it, because it's there. And we're increasingly at this  side anyway, helping you find it. And now it's about making a commitment to supporting these  people and, and realizing that yeah, shipping may cost more, it may be a pain, it may and it's may  
**0:57:55-0:58:13:**  not compare with the value price that you're going to find at the grocery store. Because guess what,  it's doing a whole lot more for your body and the planet than any of those brands.  And I think that's a really good point. I think customers, especially our growing customer list  
**0:58:13-0:58:32:**  is so excited to be able to participate. Yeah, in a climate solution, a practice that is,  you know, helping the climate and helping our farm. People love that.  And I mean, just just appeal to the to the selfish nature of people wanting to, you know,  
**0:58:33-0:58:49:**  feed their children nutrient rich food. I mean, when when the soil is exhausted, as  it it often is in conventional agriculture, and mined over and over and over again,  and not put back not not having this this richness restored to it. Well, what kind of food is it  
**0:58:49-0:59:04:**  producing? You know, what kind of vitamins and minerals and you know, are you getting?  Well, that's why it's really important for us to be working with Jill, right? Yes.  Like that's one of the exciting things about working with Jill, she's going through and  
**0:59:04-0:59:20:**  going to be able to tell us like, these are the things that this is what's there. This is the  result of your of all of your great synergies coming together. Because that is the other thing  about regenerative. That's why it's so hard to reduce it to a list. It's not it's not a one for  
**0:59:20-0:59:39:**  one. It's a you know, it's a one and you get 10 things in return. It's in its exponential.  And yeah, so well, I'm so excited to introduce you all even more to to consumers. And we're going to  have a webinar and people are going to get a chance to ask you questions and you are going  
**0:59:39-0:59:57:**  to be able to show well tell at least tell your your experiences on the farm and the practices  that you're doing and and people will be able to to really start that process of committing to buy  buying directly from people that are that are changing the world and through that process,  
**0:59:57-1:00:18:**  they can change the world too.  You've been listening to Tasting Terroir, a podcast made possible by a magical collaboration  between the following companies and supporters all working together to help farmers, chefs,  
**1:00:18-1:00:37:**  food companies and consumers to build healthier soil for a healthier world.  Risotera owned by Dr. Jill Cloperton. Risotera is an international food security consulting company  providing expert guidance for creating healthy soils that yield tasty nutrient dense foods.  
**1:00:37-1:00:57:**  Check us out at risotera.com. That's R-H-I-Z-O-T-E-R-R-A.com.  And the Global Food and Farm online community, an ad free global social network and soil health  streaming service that provides information and connections that help you apply the science  
**1:00:57-1:01:17:**  and practice of improving soil health. Join us at globalfoodandfarm.com.  And from listeners like you who support us through our Patreon account at patreon.com  slash tasting terroir. Patrons receive access to our full length interviews and selected  
**1:01:17-1:01:35:**  additional materials. Patrons will also have the opportunity to submit questions that we will  answer on the podcast. Tune in next week to hear more interviews and insights with myself, Sarah  Harper, and Dr. Jill Cloperton, as well as the regenerative farmers, chefs, and emerging food  
**1:01:35-1:01:57:**  companies in the Global Food and Farm online community and beyond. If you like our work,  please give us a five star rating and share the podcast with your friends. Thanks so much for  listening and for helping us get the word out about this new resource to taste the health of  
**1:01:57-1:02:27:**  your food. Until next week, stay curious, keep improving, and don't stop believing  that better is possible when knowledge is available.  