### Tasting Terroir  (2022-00-17)
**0:00:00-0:00:21:**  How does the health of the soil affect the flavor of our food?  How do the farmers' choices, the weather, the soil microbiome, that world underground,  shape the taste of our food?  Who are the amazing people growing food in this regenerative way, and how can we taste  the difference that they make?  
**0:00:37-0:00:42:**  These and many other questions are what we explore in our podcast, Tasting Tarroir, a  journey into the connection between healthy soil and the flavor of food.  I'm your host, Sarah Harper.  Farmers in general, they would tell you that when they have good soils, the flavor of their  crops and the quality of the crops reflects it.  
**0:01:01-0:01:08:**  We know that the quality of the crops, from a growing standpoint, I know that when I get  my soils right, my crops are reflected.  The quality of my crops are reflected in that.  I see healthier crops.  My yields are good.  
**0:01:18-0:01:22:**  Whether it's wheat berries or whether it's seeds or whatever it is, it's filled out really  beautifully.  The harvest goes well.  The question is, and we know from some of our mineral nutrient density work that we've  been doing with Rise of Tara that we already know that we do differ wildly in the concentration  
**0:01:37-0:01:42:**  of minerals in these grains, but that as our soils get better and better and better, we  see more and more and more of them using less and less and less.  We're like, okay, so there's something to this.  Now the question is, does it bake differently?  Does it taste differently?  
**0:01:53-0:01:57:**  In the case of Diana, who's in our network, does it make pasta differently?  The answer is yes, it does.  We are super excited to launch this podcast.  In our first episode, we will explain what we mean by the ability to taste the terroir  of your food, how this concept is directly linked to the health of the land and the decisions  
**0:02:12-0:02:17:**  farmers make in growing food, and many other great insights from topsoil health expert  Dr. Jill Cloperton, my co-host on this food journey.  Quick background on me, Sarah Harper.  I'm a regenerative agriculture policy expert who has worked for over 20 years in the public,  nonprofit and private sectors on what is now called regenerative agriculture.  
**0:02:35-0:02:40:**  From my experiences working in the US Senate on agricultural and environmental policy to  building bridges between farmers and some environmentalists to doing consulting work  on corporate sustainability policy, I've had the opportunity to meet and learn from some  of the best farmers in the world who are focused on building up soil health and working with  nature rather than against her to do it.  
**0:03:02-0:03:07:**  Joining me as my co-host on this podcast is my dear friend and mentor, Dr. Jill Cloperton,  a soil health scientist and plant physiologist.  Through her company, Risotera, Jill provides expert advice to farmers around the world  to help regenerate their farm and pasture land.  She helps farmers understand and apply the science of using plants to solve soil health  
**0:03:24-0:03:30:**  problems, planting with purpose instead of depending only on artificial inputs.  She also measures the nutrient density of food and is researching the link between the  practices on the farm and the nutrient density of the food it creates over time.  All of this expertise is a great background to then dive into how these practices and  the place where food is grown affects its flavor.  
**0:03:53-0:03:57:**  Join us as we start this journey.  Well, hi, Jill.  Hi, my friend.  How are you?  You know, this is a great day, Sarah.  
**0:04:06-0:04:07:**  It really is.  It's finally cooled off.  So that's the best thing.  Yes, we've been cooking this up, this podcast idea for quite some time.  And I'm so excited to get to do it with you, really bringing together the science of food,  
**0:04:23-0:04:29:**  the flavor of food, how food gets its flavor and exploring all these things with people  like you who are scientists, who understand the science of it, and the farmers who are  doing the practices in the ground that are making a change and the chefs that are seeing  the change and just all these different people that you've assembled in your community, your  online community, and being able to bring some of that knowledge out to the people that  
**0:04:47-0:04:50:**  the consumers are really interested in this kind of stuff.  Yeah, I'm not going to tell you that as scientists, we know a whole lot about, you know, how we  and I think we know about how we taste food and whatnot, but I don't think as scientists,  we really understand how we that connection between soils and taste and nutrition all  that well.  
**0:05:10-0:05:15:**  That's an area that we're still working on, which is kind of unbelievable, but it is true.  That gets us to our podcast and our podcast is called Tasting Terroir.  And by that, we are describing all the different elements that go into making distinct, flavorful,  healthy food.  So to taste is to experience something, to know it, you know, beyond just the academic  
**0:05:33-0:05:38:**  and terroir refers to the place where something is grown, the impact that the conditions of  a place have on its development, whether it's weather or the type of soil or all those things,  the practices done by the farmer, how it became what it is, the unique flavor of it.  So this uniqueness is very much connected to minerals in the soil and many, many factors,  as we've talked about.  
**0:05:55-0:06:01:**  But with that in mind, as a plant physiologist and a soil scientist, what do you mean when  we talk about tasting terroir beyond just wine?  Yeah, it's beyond wine.  The question for me was, can we taste?  Can we taste what we do with the soil?  
**0:06:18-0:06:20:**  Can we taste a healthy soil?  Can we tell if I grew all the same varieties and, you know, five different soils side by  side that were all treated differently, could I taste the difference?  Wow.  Like, could I taste that I grew this plant in this way?  
**0:06:39-0:06:41:**  Could I taste that I grew this plant in this way?  I think the answer is yes.  I do hear it from, you know, the people that have vineyards and the winemakers, the vintners.  You know, you hear from them that if we grow different cover crops between the vines, we  can taste that subtle difference in the flavor of the grapes.  
**0:07:03-0:07:09:**  I think scientifically, I think I understand how this could happen.  I've been thinking about this a lot since we decided we were going to do this podcast.  And I'm like, okay, so how does this actually work?  And I think that terroir refers to different regions too.  If we go back to that wine terroir, then you can grow the same grape in different areas  
**0:07:30-0:07:37:**  of the world and you will taste the regionality of where that grape is being grown.  Because the parent soils are very different.  So the minerals in that soil are very different.  So the mineralities of the food are going to reflect, to a certain extent, the parent  material.  
**0:07:52-0:07:56:**  Now with crops that we grow, we fertilize them and we add things to them.  So we are going to not always reflect that terroir perfectly because we've added things  to them, you know, to help them grow and to make sure that they have all the nutrition  that we think we need.  And certainly to add all the nutrition that we think the plant needs.  
**0:08:12-0:08:16:**  However, we still have the climate.  And how does the climate affect things?  So if we think about, let's even think about grass-fed beef, for example.  Is the grass, is grass-fed beef, if I took the same genetics and I put them in different  regions of North America, they're going to taste different.  
**0:08:36-0:08:42:**  I know that beef grown on the East Coast tastes different from the beef grown in Kansas.  I know it does.  And I know that the beef grown in Argentina tastes very different from the beef that I've  eaten in other places of the world.  Now, does that require it to be all the way grass-finished or does that even affect?  
**0:08:55-0:08:58:**  And grass-finished totally makes a difference.  I mean, it totally makes a difference.  And now we know from some of the work that's coming forward on multi-species pastures that  multi-species pastures also change things.  So we think about milk, for example, that if cows are fed multi-species pastures every  
**0:09:16-0:09:21:**  day, that their milk quality changes, the quality of the fat changes, the color of the  fat.  And that affects how the smell of the milk, which also affects how delicious it is and  how it stimulates our taste buds and things like that.  And that's all based on the plants that we grew up with.  
**0:09:34-0:09:42:**  We know that if we feed dairy cattle too many brassicas or too many flax seeds or things  like that, then we start to have sort of sulfate flavors in the milk or we have nutty flavors  in the milk.  Once again, that's tasting the terroir.  You're tasting what you've been doing, your practice.  
**0:09:54-0:10:00:**  So we're adopting the term terroir a little bit to mean how we're actually growing things.  So can we taste practice?  Can we taste how we grew it?  Can we taste how we fed it?  Can we taste all these things?  
**0:10:09-0:10:12:**  Is that reflected in the ultimate outcome?  And I think the answer is yes.  I think we measure it.  Do we know what we measure is reflected in the tastiness?  No.  
**0:10:20-0:10:25:**  We don't actually know that that's reflected in the tastiness because we know that people  have different tastes and that everybody can taste the same thing and they can taste it  all very differently because of just our own genetics.  And a lot of it has to do with the way we grew up and our images of things, our search  image.  
**0:10:46-0:10:50:**  So when we look at something, we go, oh, yeah, I wouldn't buy that.  Now, if I ask you to taste it and then you taste it and you go, oh, I totally wouldn't  have bought that, but I actually really like that.  Well, back to your point about the healthier fat, I remember hearing you and I think Dr.  Van Vliet in a conversation talk about that the healthier fat is often yellow.  
**0:11:08-0:11:12:**  And so if you saw it in a store, you would think, oh, that's gone bad.  But that's actually healthier and for some people more flavorful.  Yeah.  I mean, we were doing that tasting last week.  We were tasting grass fed beef and grain fed beef.  
**0:11:26-0:11:29:**  And it was fascinating.  The yellow fat wasn't that obvious in the grass fed until we cooked it.  And then when we cooked it was really bright yellow.  And you compared that with the same genetics and the animals that had been grown up on  the same pasture but then had been moved to a feedlot for six weeks to finish.  
**0:11:51-0:11:53:**  The fat was still very white.  It wasn't perfect to me, it wasn't perfectly white because it takes a long time to get  the color out of your fat.  But the flavor was like night and day.  And the difference in a, like the differences in these animals is almost negligible because  
**0:12:12-0:12:19:**  really one of them just spent more time on the grass to be finished another six weeks.  And the other ones were in the feedlot for six weeks.  Yeah, because of the same herd, same genetics, same place.  All of it.  And the taste was quite different.  
**0:12:33-0:12:34:**  Tenderness was mildly more tender.  Like just, I mean, it would have been hard for my untalented palate or my unexperienced  palate.  I didn't notice a change in the tenderness.  But the chefs that were tasting me, they were like, yeah, this is just slightly more tender,  
**0:12:52-0:12:54:**  but it doesn't have any flavor.  That's another great point to bring in.  So you're doing some good work with chefs and you have a good network of chefs in your  world.  And that's a really exciting thing that we're looking forward to bringing to the podcast  
**0:13:07-0:13:11:**  audience is their expertise paired with yours.  Like very different ends of the same spectrum.  Yeah, it's that whole idea of, you know, and I take this all from Chef Dan Barber.  It was his idea when I first met him.  It was like, well, can we taste if I taste food that I really like and it's really tasty,  
**0:13:29-0:13:30:**  is it good for me?  And I'm like, I don't know.  Intuitively, I think that's probably right, but I don't know.  And so now we're actually working on that question.  We're actually asking that question, not only can we chemically understand, like from a  
**0:13:47-0:13:55:**  chemistry perspective, understand that taste and then is that same taste reflected in the  nutrition of the product.  And so this is going to be a big project that we're working on in the next, you know, I  think for the next three or four years is we're going to be really diving into this  whole idea of what is tasty and is tasty, nutritious.  
**0:14:13-0:14:18:**  And you know, intuitively, we all expect it will be, but we're taking another step and  that is, is that same flavor, is that same taste linked back to how I grew it?  Yeah.  And can I taste regenerative soil?  I mean, I think about a baker who is using, you know, I think it was Rouge de Bordeaux  
**0:14:37-0:14:38:**  wheat.  And he said, oh, you know, usually Rouge de Bordeaux doesn't really make that good of  bread by itself.  It just doesn't do this.  It doesn't do this, at least the ones I've done before.  
**0:14:48-0:14:53:**  And then all of a sudden he was using this other grain that had been grown in a really  good soil by somebody who really tended it really well and not with a whole lot of chemicals.  And he said, I actually baked a loaf of bread with that and baked fine.  And he said, it usually doesn't do that.  And so it's obviously, there's obviously something there.  
**0:15:09-0:15:11:**  We just have to start understanding it.  And we need more scientists to sort of jump onto the bandwagon and start looking at this  connection.  Like, so if this bakes differently, and it's linked to this practice, then how do we, then  the question becomes is how do we tell people about that?  
**0:15:29-0:15:34:**  How do we help people do what they've done?  What practice is it that's going to help you get to hear?  And it may not be for everybody, I admit, but you know, for anybody who's really interested  in that, you know, that's the whole idea is how can you differentiate your own product?  How can your product be differentiated based on the practices on your farm and how you  
**0:15:55-0:15:56:**  regenerate your soil?  And how can you cut through the miles of marketing that are so confusing and frankly misleading  in a lot of cases.  And you know, that's been my frustration.  As you know, I worked a lot with farmers trying to help them explain regenerative agriculture  
**0:16:13-0:16:16:**  and bring that forward working with small brands.  And it just, they just get lost in a sea of claims that may be legally correct, but that's  not what the consumer thinks when they, you know, if they even know what regenerative  agriculture is or this better way of farming is what they're buying is not what they think  they're getting.  
**0:16:33-0:16:35:**  And because it's hard to build a whole supply chain.  But anyway, that we'll talk more about all that.  I mean, yeah, and I'm, I'm sure I actually know you're going to talk a whole lot more  about that.  And that's part of it because, I mean, this started with our whole idea of asking people  
**0:16:51-0:16:52:**  what is regenerative?  Yeah.  And, and we got all of these answers like, well, and it's wonderful, but this is also  part of regenerative is regenerating the taste in our food, regenerating the nutrition in  our food.  
**0:17:04-0:17:06:**  And those two coming back together.  So you don't have to give up taste for health.  And you don't have to give up taste for yields either.  Like that's the whole thing.  Yeah.  
**0:17:13-0:17:14:**  This whole idea of abundance.  Well, I just have to have abundance and who cares how it tastes.  I just need a lot of it.  Well, no, actually the whole idea of, well, we just need enough to feed ourselves.  I think that's where we all went wrong.  
**0:17:28-0:17:38:**  I think that the explicit outcome of agriculture for a long time has been abundance more, more,  more.  Yeah.  Without any concentration on nutrition.  Like, is this more and more and more any good for us?  
**0:17:48-0:17:54:**  And I go back to one of my mentors, Dr. Ross Welsh and a project he, when he started on  his journey was a project that he and Dr. Jerry Coombs were working on in Bangladesh.  And they can grow wheat, bushels of wheat.  I mean, I mean, they're always yielding, you know, over that 120 to 140 mark of wheat,  bushels of wheat per acre.  
**0:18:13-0:18:17:**  And you know, it's a lot of people here struggle for on a regular basis, but they could do  it fairly regularly.  So they started eating wheat and gave up their diets of beans and peas and things like that  because well, they took more energy to cook and energy was, you know, that was another  thing they need to regenerate energy too.  
**0:18:33-0:18:35:**  But it just was easier to cook.  So they started eating more and more of their wheat.  Well, it turns out their wheat was very deficient in zinc and iron and all these things.  And they actually noticed that their kids were not as smart as they used to be.  And that's when they called in Jerry and Ross and they started looking at this and they  
**0:18:54-0:19:00:**  realized that they had two generations of children that were deficient in zinc, which  really affects their cognitive abilities.  And so now we think about that and why wasn't agri, why isn't the explicit outcome of agriculture,  food that's good for you?  So instead of growing food that's good for us, we just grow an abundance of food and  
**0:19:19-0:19:24:**  then we add, oh, well, we'll add a little zinc and we'll add a little iron and we'll  add this and we'll add that and then we'll make it good for you.  We're not going to grow it good for you.  We're just going to make it good for you.  No, we should be growing it good for us because then we really get regenerative because once  
**0:19:36-0:19:44:**  we start growing it good for us and we start growing the nutrition, we start talking about  climate change, we start making the whole water cycle different.  We start having clean water.  We start having every drop of water going to the ground.  We start having water holding capacity.  
**0:19:55-0:20:00:**  We start having all these really good things and the whole system becomes much better.  The virtuous cycle.  And then do we taste that too?  I don't know, but I think we do.  Yeah, before we go too much further, I want to make sure and give the audience a chance  
**0:20:08-0:20:12:**  to learn more about your background and how you're able to know a lot of these things  about the nutrition in food.  So just share with them a little bit about you, about your background.  Oh, my background.  Well, I mean, since I can remember, I've had an interest in plants right from the time  
**0:20:29-0:20:35:**  that my grandfather was growing, had this gorgeous garden in his backyard and he also  bred roses.  So I remember in the morning waking up and the smell of the roses from the garden, and  that's something that you don't have as much anymore, but it actually would waft all the  way to the second floor of my bedroom when I stayed at his house.  
**0:20:51-0:20:57:**  And I can remember waking up to the smell of roses just marvelous.  To this day, I love roses and I think it's because it takes me back to those days as  a kid waking up to this fragrance of roses.  And then he used to leave cucumbers hiding in amongst all the vegetation for me to find.  And so he tasked me with going out to find a cucumber.  
**0:21:19-0:21:23:**  And I mean, I was less than five years old when we were doing this.  And so I would be rummaging around, you know, Grandpa, grandpa, I found one, you know, and  he of course, he knew exactly where it was.  But just from that time on, and then we'd go in and we'd make cucumber sandwiches with  the cucumber I found.  
**0:21:40-0:21:46:**  And they always tasted delicious.  And so I went on to, you know, work in botany.  I have a PhD in plant physiology, biochemistry, and went on to try and understand the effects  of the environment on plant physiology and how, mostly how mycorrhizal fungi, how fungi  in the soil bring in all these nutrients and how that affects plants.  
**0:22:13-0:22:17:**  And then how that changes the whole environment of the roots.  And I really concentrated on roots rather than above ground, because I've always believed  that roots are where it all happens.  I mean, roots are the whole nutrition aspect.  They keep the plant healthy.  
**0:22:33-0:22:37:**  It's how we, and it changes the soils.  And I was really lucky along the way.  I mean, I was mentored by two brilliant Australian scientists, Dr. Albert Rivera and Dr. Glyn  Bowen really early on.  Like just, I mean, I hadn't even graduated when they sort of mentored me a little bit.  
**0:22:53-0:23:01:**  And then, and Dr. Dennis Parkinson, who was a mycologist who really spawned my interest  in fungi and this whole idea of what fungi could do.  But I mean, Dr. Albert Rivera really coined the term rhizosphere and how the rhizosphere  works together.  And that sort of came together.  
**0:23:15-0:23:22:**  And I hit it at a time when I just started university where I got to meet all these amazing  scientists like Dr. Jack Harley from Oxford who wrote the first book on mycorrhizae.  And I got to listen to lectures from him and then later with his daughter, Sally Smith.  And I'm sure I'm going to forget people here, but I just was so lucky to have had  the input in my developing scientific years from people also like Lynette Abbott out of  
**0:23:54-0:23:58:**  Western Australia, who has this passion, who really coined the term soil health.  Most people don't know that, but she did.  And I can't thank these people enough for sort of like keeping me going along the way.  And then it was really Ross Welsh who took me aside and really started helping me understand  the links between practice and nutrition.  
**0:24:17-0:24:22:**  And he said that was the one thing he really regretted in his career was that he never  got a chance to really look at practice and how it linked to nutrition.  So, you took up that.  I did.  I grabbed the torch.  
**0:24:30-0:24:31:**  That's good.  That's good.  That's what every scientist wants, right?  A clearly defined path to continue on.  Yeah.  
**0:24:37-0:24:38:**  Yeah.  So, I grabbed the torch.  And even though I haven't really worked on it fully until the last couple of years, I've  always been sort of dabbling in that area and sort of asking farmers, well, does it  taste, you know, and asking people, does it taste different?  
**0:24:54-0:24:59:**  But then I realized that we really, the people who have embraced regenerative agriculture  and who really grown their soils and who have made these changes, and there's lots of them.  I'm glad you said that.  Because that's the thing I hear all the time in talking with emerging brands and companies  that want to bring regenerative to the public.  
**0:25:15-0:25:19:**  And they even portray to the public, well, if just the farmers would come along and I'm  over here screaming in the corner, there are tons of farmers.  There are more farmers doing this than you can manage in your supply chain.  And that's the problem.  They don't want to manage a separate supply chain.  
**0:25:31-0:25:33:**  They don't want to deal with the complexity of it.  But don't say it's not that there aren't any farmers doing it because there are around  the world.  Oh, I know.  I heard that when I was in Brussels at a conference on food security and nutrition.  
**0:25:45-0:25:48:**  And there was, well, you know, we need to bring the farmers along.  And I stood up and I was like, no, actually, you need to actually listen to the farmers.  You need to come along.  You need to bring the processes along.  That's what you need to do.  
**0:25:58-0:25:59:**  Yeah.  And I was like, it's not farmers.  Farmers have embraced regenerative agriculture.  They are rebuilding their souls.  They are doing all these things.  
**0:26:07-0:26:13:**  You just are so isolated in your silo that you don't realize this whole movement is going  on around you.  And you have to pay for it.  They don't want to pay for it.  Well, but also as scientists, we haven't connected there.  
**0:26:22-0:26:23:**  Right.  Because we're not supposed to connect there.  I mean, I remember applying for grants early on and we were doing nutrition.  But we were linking it to soils.  And they said, well, you know, but this is not really in nutritional science.  
**0:26:38-0:26:39:**  We don't.  And so you should apply in soil.  So we'd apply in soils.  And you go, yeah, but that we don't do that in soils.  And I'm like, look, this is the integration of these two.  
**0:26:48-0:26:55:**  Because the outcome of working on soil health, the outcome of soil health is more nutritious  food.  So how are they not linked together?  But the problem was is that we're so used to pigeonholing all these disciplines that  we don't see the requirement for interdisciplinary science.  
**0:27:09-0:27:10:**  And that's where we need.  We need everybody working together.  We need us all to come together.  That's back to so much of what you have helped me see is how amazing the whole world underground  is the microbiome and how it all works together in harmony.  
**0:27:25-0:27:30:**  Like one thing gives this this chemical and the other thing takes it up.  And it's all this massive it looks like chaos maybe to those the uninitiated.  But it's but when you really understand it, it's a massive amount of harmony that could  only exist because there's no one person directing it all.  They're all synchronized together.  
**0:27:46-0:27:53:**  And maybe that's a system that is hard for us people to do or to think about because  we're used to just like clear it all away and put what's supposed to be there and manage  it.  You know, that's very different than I know in nature.  I was listening to the creative director for the Silk Road ensemble this morning on the  
**0:28:07-0:28:09:**  radio.  And she talked about and she said, you know, they were talking about, well, a Japanese  flute working with, you know, a sitar and some of these other instruments like you don't  think that song would they would even belong in that song.  And yet after you hear it, you go, of course they do.  
**0:28:31-0:28:35:**  And that's my point here is that we need that creative.  It's not about everybody doing the same thing, repeating the same thing.  We have to be able to have that creative spirit where what you do on your farm to regenerate  soil is uniquely yours and good on you because you're working with your environment to do  this.  
**0:28:55-0:28:58:**  And somebody else on their farm is working with their environment to do this.  And in the end, we're getting all this great food.  We're all growing all these different varieties.  The varieties are fine.  We can't just grow one variety.  
**0:29:07-0:29:13:**  We need to grow many varieties and then we can blend all these different varieties and  these different or even the same variety growing in all these different places together to  get it instead of fortifying with ingredients.  Why don't we just blend grains from different areas of the world together to get the nutrition  we want?  
**0:29:25-0:29:30:**  Just like farmers in North Dakota and South Dakota were selling grain over to Europe because  it was high selenium because they have high selenium soils and it was being reflected  in the quality of their grain.  We can use all of that.  And that's part of the terroir.  
**0:29:40-0:29:46:**  That's part of the connection to the terroir is that my soils are going to have unique  characteristics that your soils do not.  But if we blend them together and we regenerate all our soils together, it's going to be so  much better for all of us.  And we have to work together.  
**0:29:59-0:30:03:**  We can't just work in one little cluster here and one little cluster there.  It's got to start to move out from the clusters.  And it can't be, well, do I have to do exactly what so and so did?  The answer is no, you don't.  You have to do what you can do to regenerate your farm.  
**0:30:17-0:30:21:**  You have to do what you can do to make tasty food on your farm.  And maybe you're going to have slightly different genetics than somebody else.  That's okay.  Because the other thing that we found growing 84 different genetic varieties of wheat on  the same farm over the same season is that they all took up different amounts of nutrients.  
**0:30:36-0:30:37:**  Wow.  That's amazing.  I know.  And it's like, so there's no standardization here.  This is embracing the very wonderful French term, which is vive la différence.  
**0:30:51-0:30:58:**  And we all need to embrace the difference and not about just, we all need to be the  same.  We all need to be different.  We need to grow different varieties.  We need to grow varieties that are adapted to our own climates.  
**0:31:06-0:31:12:**  And what's adapted over there might not grow here, but maybe I can grow the same amount  and of different quality in my own backyard.  And maybe I need the varieties that grow best in my really dry, hot climate instead of trying  to grow something that was developed in Florida with a lot of water.  Several of that came to me last week.  
**0:31:32-0:31:41:**  There was a blueberry grower from Florida who was talking to a group of chefs and he  was at Blue Hill restaurant talking to a group of chefs.  And chef Dan Barber was talking about how these blueberries were so amazing.  And we're going to get him to talk.  He's going to talk on tasting terroir.  
**0:31:56-0:32:02:**  So I'm not going to give his name away, so you're all going to have to listen.  And he was talking about his soil and how he was growing the same variety as everybody  else around him.  He wasn't growing special varieties or anything like that, but he believed that what he was  doing, like his mulching and all these other things were affecting.  
**0:32:17-0:32:21:**  And he said, I don't understand how that works, but I think it works.  And then it's just, to me, I said to him, I said, well, your mulching works because  when you mulch, so this is another connection and things that just little things here and  there, but when you mulch, you insulate the roots from temperature, which is why we want  cover crops and why we want more residue, but you actually insulate the roots from the  
**0:32:42-0:32:43:**  effects of temperature.  Well, blueberries don't like really hot temperatures.  So now you throw that mulch on top of them.  So you're mowing between the rows and you throw all the weed mulch and everything else  on top of them.  
**0:32:54-0:32:59:**  You insulate the roots so the roots stay cool when the roots stay cool.  Even if it's hot outside, they keep pumping.  So the transpiration steering keeps going because the roots are cool enough.  They don't care.  We can keep cooling you off.  
**0:33:08-0:33:10:**  It's like on a hot day, you have to keep drinking, right?  So that you can keep sweating.  And so the same thing on a hot day, if we keep the roots cool, the plant can keep sweating,  can keep transpiring.  Well, in that transpiration stream comes all the calcium and the boron that don't normally  
**0:33:27-0:33:32:**  move at all unless they're pulled up by the transpiration stream.  So now I get fruit set.  I keep the skins in my berries really good because I got a lot of calcium going into  them.  They get the boron so they stay on the plant much more easily.  
**0:33:45-0:33:46:**  They just don't drop off.  All these things.  And I'm sure that you would be able to taste.  Maybe you won't taste the calcium per se, but you'll taste the effect of that mulch.  And you'll get the calcium.  
**0:33:57-0:33:58:**  And you'll get the calcium.  Yes, you'll get it.  And maybe that's why it tastes so good because people go, oh, this blueberry tastes amazing  because you also have all the ingredients to make those anthocyanins and those antioxidants  that are rich in the skin of the blueberries.  
**0:34:13-0:34:19:**  We get all this mineral nutrition because the blueberries are well mulched so they can  keep transpiring.  They can keep sucking up the zinc.  They can suck up the iron.  They can suck up all these other things that can make all the amino acids that give it  
**0:34:26-0:34:30:**  that slight tart laser in the organic acids.  Maybe we don't taste the terroir in the same way we think, but we taste it through the  nutrition of the plant that allows them to make these molecules that we taste and make  the flavor.  And that we crave because we need them.  
**0:34:44-0:34:45:**  Yeah, we crave when we have it.  Right.  Yeah.  Right.  It strikes me as you're talking about all of this that really it's like seeing what  
**0:34:52-0:34:57:**  we want to see is a system of growing that's more like a garden and less like a factory.  So you're still tending it.  You're still involved with it.  You're interacting it.  You're noticing what the plants need and you're helping.  
**0:35:03-0:35:04:**  It's not you're absent.  You're not just like throw a field to chaos and, oh, throw a few seeds out there and hope  it works.  That was how I described Iowa farmers actually coming from Kansas.  But anyway, so you are involved in the system.  
**0:35:19-0:35:20:**  You are a part of it.  You are tending it.  But a factory is much more in control.  And back to the specialization they talked about, like each person just hits their widget  or pushes their button.  
**0:35:31-0:35:37:**  Each person plays a very separated piece of the supply chain puzzle.  But the loss of the organic interaction, it stops being an organic system.  Yeah.  I have a friend, a scientist, Rennie Anker, who's at Guelph, University of Guelph in Ontario.  And he talks about Betty Crocker farming.  
**0:35:57-0:36:02:**  So some of the millennials are not going to understand Betty Crocker.  Betty Crocker was, or Duncan Hines, but it was like a cake in a box.  I'm sure there are other examples of this.  But it was everything.  All you had to do was add water and stir and then throw it in the oven and you bake the  
**0:36:19-0:36:20:**  cake.  Right.  And they still have cake in a box.  I don't know what it's called, but we used to laugh because it used to be like seeds  in a box with the seed companies and Roundup Ready seeds and all these other seeds.  
**0:36:34-0:36:41:**  You just buy the seed, buy the chemicals, put them in and voila, there's your crop all  taken care of.  And you just go out there and you harvest it.  And I think what you were talking about is you have to manage it in your head.  You actually have to think about what am I growing next?  
**0:36:54-0:36:57:**  So I've grown peas.  So what's going to come after peas?  Or in my case, and I'll use an example from my own farm, I grew a lot of winter rye in  my cover crops because I was trying to change the soils a whole lot and grow a lot of roots  and things like that.  
**0:37:12-0:37:15:**  And it just turned out that the rye grew better than pretty much anything else.  So then the next year, when I, so then that fall, when I went, you know, that's later  on that summer when I went to grow milo, I struggled.  My milo is taking its time.  It is lethargic.  
**0:37:28-0:37:32:**  It's like, Oh, something about this is not quite right.  And I realized it was like, my rye is inhibiting.  I have, she have an allelopathic reaction on my milo.  Well that's, I have to rethink that.  I didn't fail.  
**0:37:45-0:37:49:**  And too many people go, Oh, well, cover crops don't work.  No, that is because I chose wrong.  I mean, I'm good at choosing, but I chose wrong.  Each plant does a specific thing and has a specific interaction.  Yeah, the rye can be very allelopathic and especially allelopathic to warm season plants.  
**0:38:08-0:38:12:**  And I didn't get my mix right.  And because I'm in South Central Kansas on the border with Oklahoma, it's dry and the  residues are there and the roots are there.  And we're going in no till.  And so here's my effect of terroir.  
**0:38:27-0:38:33:**  My cover crop was inhibiting the growth of my other crop.  And I was inhibiting weeds and a bunch of other things, but you know, this is about  choosing wisely.  And I, and getting your plants so that they all grow together because plant communities  don't just grow together.  
**0:38:49-0:38:54:**  I mean, some plants don't like to grow with others and some plants, like some of the weeds  that we have, like, so for the farmers that are in rangeland, like leafy spurge actually  sends out root signals that inhibit things from growing around them so they can exploit  all the resources around their roots.  Plants aren't above doing that.  
**0:39:10-0:39:14:**  Like, you know, getting the elbows out and going, Hey, stay over, you know, keep your  own space.  And those are the plants you don't want in your community because you want plants that  allow roots to move together and allow the roots to weave together so they all share.  And I think that's another part of terroir is that when we get plant communities, right,  
**0:39:32-0:39:37:**  like when I get my companions, right, so they support my cash crop, I think that the whole  community is working together because we know that they survive drought a whole lot better.  So they're sharing resources.  How will that not be reflected in the grains or in the food that I grow from those like  the beans and the peas and the sesame and all that?  
**0:39:51-0:39:53:**  Well, it will, I think.  And I think it's reflected in my beef as well.  And even the bottom line, I mean, it's great to have the effects of the nutrition for the  consumer and, and but even the bottom line for the farmer, because they lose crops to  drought all the time, especially drought continues.  
**0:40:08-0:40:10:**  And it seems counterintuitive.  Like if you plant a cover crop, I know a lot of farmers that haven't worked with it as  much are fearful that, well, that cover crops going to take up moisture, I need that moisture  for my cash crop next year.  But it's, it's, it's the opposite.  
**0:40:22-0:40:23:**  It's that abundance principle.  And it's so weird.  I mean, I know that green cover did all these experiments where they put moisture probes  in the ground, and show very clearly that 12 species cover crop is less moisture than  a soybean crop.  
**0:40:35-0:40:39:**  And you can't you're like, whoa, and holds it in.  Right?  Hold the moisture in.  Put your hand underneath that cover, you can feel the moisture and you can feel the coolness.  And it's like I said, you insulate the soil, there's no evaporation off the soil itself.  
**0:40:54-0:40:57:**  Soil never really heats up.  So it keeps working.  And that means roots can go deeper.  That means roots get more nutrition.  Yes.  
**0:41:04-0:41:05:**  Do they transpire?  Yes.  But that's the whole point.  If we transpire, then we build up moisture in the atmosphere, which eventually comes  down as rain again.  
**0:41:12-0:41:17:**  So we start working on this whole water cycle in a really good way.  So I think the whole point here of tasting terroir is that it's all connected.  What we taste and the flavor in our food is connected to what we do on the land.  And it's connected then to climate and, and all these other big regional variations that  sometimes we only have this intuitive understanding of, but we don't really...  
**0:41:40-0:41:42:**  And do we need to understand everything explicitly?  I'm not sure we do.  I think it's okay to know.  And I think that I don't know that there could be anything bad about enjoying natural flavor.  Like if something's really good and you are loving it and you know it's grown in this,  
**0:42:00-0:42:04:**  I mean, I think you could probably trace it back and go, I love the flavor of this, like  these blueberries and everybody's like, Oh my gosh, they were so amazing.  And they were grown in this really interesting and unique way without fertilize, like without  any real additives in the same variety.  Neighbors doesn't taste nearly as good as this.  
**0:42:20-0:42:21:**  Why?  Because of the way it's grown.  You've been listening to Tasting Terroir, a podcast made possible by a magical collaboration  between the following companies and supporters, all working together to help farmers, chefs,  food companies, and consumers to build healthier soil for a healthier world.  
**0:42:42-0:42:48:**  Risotera owned by Dr. Jill Cloperton, Risotera is an international food security consulting  company providing expert guidance for creating healthy soils that yield tasty nutrient dense  foods.  Check us out at risotera.com, that's R-H-I-Z-O-T-E-R-R-A.com.  And the Global Food and Farm online community, an ad-free global social network and soil  
**0:43:09-0:43:15:**  health streaming service that provides information and connections that help you apply the science  and practice of improving soil health.  Join us at globalfoodandfarm.com.  And from listeners like you who support us through our Patreon account at patreon.com  slash tasting terroir.  
**0:43:31-0:43:36:**  Patrons receive access to our full length interviews and selected additional materials.  Patrons will also have the opportunity to submit questions that we will answer on the  podcast.  Tune in next week to hear more interviews and insights with myself, Sarah Harper, and  Dr. Jill Cloperton, as well as the regenerative farmers, chefs, and emerging food companies  
**0:43:53-0:44:01:**  in the global food and farm online community and beyond.  If you like our work, please give us a five star rating and share the podcast with your  friends.  Thanks so much for listening and for helping us get the word out about this new resource  to taste the health of your food.  
**0:44:16-0:44:25:**  Until next week, stay curious, keep improving, and don't stop believing that better is possible  when knowledge is available.  