---
title: The Farm Robots Changing The Food Systemfor The Better
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### Tasting Terroir  (2022-10-06)  
### Author(s): Sara Hessenflow Harper  

**0:00:00-0:00:20:**  we're going to make food honest, either directly or through everyone else suddenly being pressured to count what they're doing because of the capabilities we're unleashing now. And so if a consumer wants their food to start with being honest, meaning chemicals and how it was raised, then I think that's step one, actually.  Flavor, I agree with you. That's why people buy things, but they also buy them for help. Right. And so you've got to have both. And there's no reason those two things work together actually, right. And that's what we're discussing. But that that really is Greenfield's working towards being a consumer brand now. And we think the biggest following the world sitting there waiting for us, because I don't think anyone could trust the food right now.  Welcome back to our podcast Tasting Tarawaar, a series of conversations that introduce you to people that are making food healthier, and possibly more flavorful for you, and easier on the planet. I'm your host, Sarah Harper. That clip was from an interview I did with another one of my favorite people, Clint Brower, a farmer in Chaney, Kansas, and co founder and CEO of Greenfield,  
**0:01:20-0:01:50:**  Robotics, a company that makes robots that kill weeds without tillage or chemicals. He is also helping to build a regenerative supply chain of farmers for a top pet food company. More from Clint on this and several other topics in a few minutes as part of our feature interview this week. In our discussion last week with California farmer Derek Azevedo, we explore the challenges, trade offs and pressures inside the quote, messy middle of our food system. The part that connects the farmer all the way to the  end consumer. Specifically, I found some of Derek's insights on how the processing system prevents some of the most flavorful foods from getting to the grocery store, and why the food system is so slow to change to be very interesting and valuable for consumers like you. Derek's insights really highlight why it is so important for consumers to buy directly from regenerative or soil health conscious farmers, when possible, and luckily, that is becoming more possible every day.  As you may have already noticed, most of the folks we are interviewing on this podcast are farmers that are investing in the ability to cut through that messy middle and bring you healthier, more flavorful ingredients and food. As more of these opportunities emerge for farmers to find their market directly, an even greater focus will be put on the practices that they use and the outcomes that they are able to achieve. This week, we will be looking at some new technology that has the potential to scale up  
**0:02:50-0:03:19:**  the benefits of regenerative agriculture, this soil health building way of farming, in a very big way. We've talked about the important role that no-till farming plays in creating healthier soil, and the fact that this is a challenge for the organic as well as the conventional farming systems, since both of them rely on tilling up the land in order to control weeds ahead of planting. What if organic or conventional farmers could plant crops without tilling, and without using  chemicals? What if they could do it at a scale that could bring prices down for consumers? Well, they might soon be able to do that with the help of some amazing robots that mechanically cut the weeds in between the crop rows. This amazing breakthrough was created by Greenfield Robotics, a company located in Chaney, Kansas, co-founded by my good friend, Clint Brouwer.  Clint is one of those guys who seems to have endless energy and a passion for using it to make the world around him a better place. With a background in farming, technology, marketing, and many other things, Clint has emerged as a force for good in changing the food system. Clint has actually three full-time jobs, and I'm not even kidding. He's making big leaps forward in all of them.  
**0:04:07-0:04:23:**  In this week's episode, we will hear more from Clint, both about how his robots are about to bring forth a regenerative agricultural revolution, and how he is applying regenerative principles on his own farm as part of building a regenerative supply chain for a top pet food company.  We start off our conversation with Clint by exploring his definition of regenerative agriculture, a mindset and a set of principles that results in restoring soil health, as we've discussed in other episodes. We'll get to hear from him how he applies this mindset on his own farm, and how the robots he's building help apply it elsewhere.  Here's my interview with Clint Brouwer.  
**0:04:52-0:04:54:**  Hi, Clint. How are you?  Nice to hear. I'm good.  Good. So first of all, share with everybody your name and where you're at and what you're doing, what you're working on.  
**0:05:02-0:05:20:**  Basically working on eliminating chemicals at agriculture, and we're doing that three ways. One, my farm. Two, we have a regenerative supply chain with candidate pet foods. And three, I have a robotics company that actually is an enabler to get chemicals out of regenerative ag. So those are three things we're doing here in Kansas.  We're talking with folks to try to help them understand regenerative agriculture because it's a term that's used in a lot of different ways. And we are super lucky to get to work with people like you in our community that are doing a lot of great regenerative principles. To start off, how do you define regenerative agriculture?  I'm going to define it for about 250 million acres in the United States alone. And so for that, it basically means this. One, you do a crop rotation. Two, you don't till your no till.  
**0:05:48-0:06:03:**  Three, essentially you use cover crops when you're not growing your cash crops. So when you're not growing something all the way to seed and you're just growing a multi-species, preferably version of something you're not going to collect for seed.  And the whole point of that is to help your soil. And then the last stage of that, once you have those cover crops growing, whether it's winter or summer, you want to graze those with ruminants. And ruminants is a fancy word for sheep or cattle, basically. Crazy people have goats.  How did you come to learning about and embracing regenerative agriculture and what it is to you?  
**0:06:25-0:06:39:**  Yeah, it's interesting. I set out in 2010, 2011 to start trying to get chemicals out of farming. And so I did greenhouses and all this stuff and distributed into grocery stores and restaurants and direct to people's doorsteps and actually to corporations.  And I figured out that, oh, gosh, this isn't going to scale very well to eliminate this. And I talked to a friend of mine who said, look, you need to get a no till and if you can figure out how to get the chemicals out, then this solves a ton of problems.  And so that sort of led me down the path towards regenerative. And I was pursuing something I called integrated agriculture. And then one day somebody said, hey, you know, there's something similar to what you're already trying to do that someone's already kind of blazed this trail.  
**0:07:04-0:07:10:**  I'm like, oh, so except using chemicals. And so but that's, that's how it came about.  And how is it that you're practicing regenerative in your in your three different businesses?  Yeah, on the farm. I mean, I believe next year, we'll have up to an eight season crop rotation now.  
**0:07:20-0:07:21:**  Wow.  Which is virtually unheard of here.  Yeah.  
**0:07:23-0:07:32:**  And so that's that's step one. And that breaks a lot of insect cycles and stuff like that. So I'm excited about that. That's a far cry from when this farm was weed only.  And, yeah.  So that's that's one. And so the second thing is we were, you know, we're getting and sometimes I don't get things done on time because of the robotics company.  
**0:07:41-0:07:48:**  But we're trying to make sure that we have cover crops planted as quickly as possible after each harvest or using robots before harvest.  Getting to that point probably this year and basically get those cover crops always growing and multi species is most of what I do unless we're doing a test on a single species for the robots.  And the third is we graze. And so I don't have enough animals to graze all the stuff yet because we're still prototyping the thing that grazes that.  
**0:08:08-0:08:17:**  But the idea is that we graze every acre once a year, meaning rotationally grazed half the year cash crop roughly half the other year.  And so that's what we're doing on my farm.  That's great. And what about with Greenfield Robotics?  
**0:08:22-0:08:26:**  Yeah, Greenfield basically is the enabler to make this go easier.  So, you know, our first robot, we have, of course, a bunch of customers and then on my farm.  So post plant in milo that I grow or if I was growing corn or cotton.  
**0:08:35-0:08:44:**  Yeah. But if I did, you know, this eliminates a lot of the herbicides and soybeans, obviously, because your robots kill the weeds.  They kill the weeds between the rows.  Mechanically. Right.  
**0:08:48-0:08:51:**  Yeah. Yeah. Lasers. Nothing could start a fire in a no till environment.  No, not good.  No knives. Yeah. Yeah. That's oh, that's great.  
**0:08:56-0:09:01:**  Yeah. I mean, those things work well for a tilled specialty crop and those folks that do that.  It's impressive as hell, but it just won't.  Right. Next spot gets rid of all the herbicides.  
**0:09:06-0:09:13:**  So it starts before you plant and all the way through or in year three, you're testing that in the multi version of that will be coming.  Yeah. Soon. That's awesome.  And it is something like, well, exactly what you've created is is the key to really scaling up the ability to have both no till and no chemical, because, you know, a lot of people would like that.  
**0:09:27-0:09:29:**  Cover cropping and cover crop.  Right. I mean, right now, terminating a multi species cover crop is actually not always easy with chemicals.  And certainly without chemicals is impossible.  
**0:09:38-0:09:40:**  Things like hairy beds, very hard.  They come they can come back and attack your crop before your crops done.  So the thing we're developing actually would incent you to do a multi species cover crop because it takes care of anything.  
**0:09:50-0:10:01:**  And then in Canada and the supply chain that you're building, that's another way that you're bringing regenerative forward, creating a market for farmers that are wanting to to farm this way.  Yeah. Look, we're fortunate enough to do a test in 2015.  And the team, you know, Canada bought into this and we started creating a supply chain back then.  
**0:10:10-0:10:15:**  And there's it's a different team now than it was back then because people change a company, but they stuck with it.  So often they stuck with it.  It's growing. It really throws it all up in the air.  
**0:10:20-0:10:22:**  It's pretty cool. Yeah, that's right. That was a shock, actually.  And we stuck with it and it's growing.  And and, you know, the pet food company.  
**0:10:26-0:10:29:**  I mean, pet company.  I just. Yeah. You know, that's great.  I mean, our pets deserve regenerative food, certainly.  
**0:10:35-0:10:38:**  But so do people.  Well, I, you know, look, I mean, they're humans, too.  Yeah. And their company kind of rallies around doing good things.  
**0:10:44-0:10:48:**  And so not just pet food, but doing it right, doing well.  And they do things that beyond the regenerative supply chain, they're pretty darn cool.  Yeah. So I give them a lot of credit. They're very thoughtful group of folks.  
**0:10:56-0:10:58:**  And I've enjoyed working with them, honestly.  And so it's cool that we're in the tens of millions of pounds shipping now.  That's great. Yeah. I think it's a pretty good example for folks.  
**0:11:06-0:11:11:**  And, you know, if they lacked imagination, they can just look to what we're doing and go, wow.  You know, this guy and the pet food company are making this work.  It's not all of their ingredients. It's not there.  
**0:11:18-0:11:21:**  But we're making progress like every year.  Wrapping it up, if you had to summarize regenerative agriculture, how would you complete the sentence?  Regenerative agriculture is a work in progress.  
**0:11:31-0:11:34:**  I think that it needs much more widespread adoption.  And I'm not, you know, I have some ideas on how we can bring that into being.  But regenerative ag can solve two major problems.  
**0:11:43-0:11:48:**  One is carbon. And if we don't get this and look, you know, we raise venture capital.  We talk to investors all the time.  And I see the things that people are trying to get rid of carbon with and they're not going to work.  
**0:11:53-0:11:58:**  Not in time. And farmers will change much faster than corporate middle managers.  I'll be honest.  So but we still need to create the incentives and have the tool set to make it work in scale.  
**0:12:07-0:12:19:**  Yeah. Right. And so that that's I think that that is really the big challenge right now is making it scale and scale quickly in time to defeat this carbon problem.  And along with it, a lot of nutrition challenges with getting more nutrient density into food and you're right.  And that's really good.  
**0:12:28-0:12:31:**  And, you know, and then I think the last piece of that, of course, is chemicals.  If you scale at all and still people are getting Parkinson's all over the place.  Yeah. You haven't really achieved a lot.  
**0:12:36-0:12:41:**  Clint, we've talked about, you know, regenerative agriculture and what is regenerative and how you're applying it.  And that's that's really helpful for people.  But I think a lot of people still are are looking at the things that they experience, which are flavor and taste.  
**0:12:50-0:12:52:**  And then, of course, the health of food.  And so, you know, you've had some some interesting experiences, not just as a commercial farmer,  which you are and as an inventor of robots that help reduce chemicals and intelligent, all that, which you are, too.  
**0:13:06-0:13:13:**  But also just as somebody who's grown your own food and tasted it yourself and had different experiences and different types of growing systems.  So maybe let's start with just sharing a little bit of your experience on that, those different systems and the difference you you saw in taste.  Yeah, I've grown food in a bunch of different ways or ingredients or whatever you want to call them.  
**0:13:26-0:13:32:**  And I actually started out, of course, I grew up with a garden and all that kind of stuff.  But let's just start since I got back from California about 12 years ago and I actually started growing without chemicals, vegetables outdoors.  Right. So I grew 100 plus types of vegetables for CSA that I started and then ended up building two greenhouses that we grew in the soil.  
**0:13:49-0:13:56:**  And then my cousin and I together started something that was a hydroponic facility as well.  And so we distributed into all these grocery stores, all the whole foods and all the high fees in Kansas City at one point with that and grew a lot of the same things in the hydroponic facility as far as greens go.  So and then, of course, the last thing is we grow, of course, now my farm is mostly growing regenerative.  
**0:14:16-0:14:20:**  You know, we're headed, we're doing our best regenerative.  So we we grow sheep by grazing them on our cropland, grass fed sheep.  And then we of course, we grow grains, wheat, sorghum, barley, soybeans, so on and so forth.  
**0:14:36-0:14:40:**  So and we seem to be heading more and more towards specialty on that front as well.  But we're not there yet. And did you did you notice a difference in flavor between the hydroponic and the stuff grown in the soil?  You have a world of difference. It's that's kind of the the it was really interesting.  
**0:14:54-0:15:00:**  And there is one crop, by the way, that I highly recommend you buy hydroponic and that is arugula.  Oh, really? Arugula grown hydroponic is amazing.  It's got just the right amount of bitterness if they didn't let it grow too long or if it's not the third growth.  
**0:15:10-0:15:19:**  And we sold that very well in a clamshell. And when I had people would walk up to so I spent 30 some weekends in grocery stores.  Wow. Years ago, years and well before I started to go to robotics and talking to people talking to thousands of people right in grocery stores.  And it was interesting demoing that you were like, oh, I don't like arugula. You need to try. And they would. And they would buy it most of the time.  
**0:15:42-0:15:50:**  Whereas if it was arugula that grew on the ground outdoors or in a greenhouse, which we sold to houses and stuff.  No way. Right. It was arugula. Right. It was peppery. It was bitter. Could be bitter. This kind of thing.  But the hydroponic arugula was fantastic. Other than that, most things grown in the soil have a better flavor, in my opinion.  
**0:16:05-0:16:10:**  You know, and I'm sure there's other exceptions as well. Really, what I started out doing is growing a lot of different tomatoes,  growing a lot of different tomatoes. And that was starting in 2010. I've grown so many different varieties.  That was interesting. Growing heirlooms was my focus. And most people just had no idea the difference.  
**0:16:25-0:16:32:**  And of course, in this region, which wasn't normal even out in California at that time, people would be like, why do your tomatoes look so weird?  Right. They couldn't. Like, I think everyone kind of knows that now. But it was really a hard sell. Right.  They'd like reach for the big red ones, you know, and you'd be like, well, these over here are actually a lot better.  
**0:16:44-0:16:48:**  I think that's you know, I think Jill's talked about this on some of her presentations, too.  Your seed selection, of course, has a lot to say as well.  But we could grow those tomatoes on we have a field around a farm, a two acre field that my dad always just didn't know what to do with.  
**0:16:58-0:17:05:**  So he just put basically weed in it every year and tilled it every year and would add synthetics just like the rest of the farm was back then.  Then right adjacent to it, literally, you just step over a fence and it is soil that had never been tilled.  That had historically had been quite a while, but it had everything from horses, pigs, cattle, you name it, and they could go on the barn.  
**0:17:22-0:17:28:**  Those two pieces of soil right next to each other. I had them soil tested my first, first or second year.  The first one with all the synthetics had a pH of about five point five.  Wow. All the nutrients, magnesium, stuff like that was really low.  
**0:17:36-0:17:47:**  The other one had a soil pH of, I believe, six point three or six point seven, maybe even and just loaded with nutrients right next to each other.  What was the difference? Right. Yeah. And so very interesting.  So we would grow tomatoes on both of those. And it was interesting.  
**0:17:56-0:18:01:**  Of course, you get a lot more yield. You have healthier looking plants on the other. You don't even have to add fertilizer.  There's nothing to do there. Right. Literally, at that point, just plant the things and go and eat it relatively well.  And then what you know, I pour those tomatoes and just a world of difference to terms of yield.  
**0:18:15-0:18:21:**  The only thing I will say that will kind of get against the grain of what you talk about here just a little bit is this.  I found that sometimes the tomatoes, when they're super stressed, were the best tasting.  And believe me on that five point five pH running, of course, tomatoes are acidic.  
**0:18:31-0:18:38:**  They like acidic soil to some extent anyway. Yeah. But and in the stress of the summers, you wouldn't get many.  But what you had were amazing. So they were better in the less healthy soil?  Sugar. Better in terms of sugar. Clint, have I not instructed you?  
**0:18:50-0:18:56:**  No, no, no. It isn't. It isn't. Well, it's really. And it was just sugar. Right. Yeah.  Yeah. By the way, anybody's raising tomatoes, you want to pick your tomatoes within 30 minutes to an hour of the sun coming up.  That's when you have the highest sugar content. Oh, interesting. In the summers when it starts raising, the temperature is raised.  
**0:19:07-0:19:10:**  The plant takes back some of it. That's what I was taught. And you can draw.  I mean, if you pull off the same plant at night in the morning or eight in the morning versus two in the afternoon world of difference.  So interesting. So interesting. Yeah. Well, no, it's it's a very good point because I think that's the tendency.  
**0:19:24-0:19:32:**  And I certainly I'm human. I can fall into it, too. Like we all have narratives and things that we think make sense and want to be true.  And then we try to just push everything in into that. And so I really don't want it to be that I you know,  it is an open question as to what's the impact of healthier soil on flavor, certainly on health.  
**0:19:44-0:19:51:**  We'll know that. And and flavor is something that changes like people's taste changes depending on what they eat.  And if you eat more sugar, then you need more sugar to taste, to taste something sweet.  If you eat less sugar, then you you know, you fruit tastes very sweet, you know. So it's all a very kind of squishy area.  
**0:20:05-0:20:12:**  It's not it's not. Right. Exactly. And that's that's the time, I think, to have those explore those questions,  especially with people that know something about its flavor, its texture. It's the whole I guess, our texture.  But it's yeah. Look, I mean, I eat grass fed, but I also have a farmer that grows their 4-H calf that is hand fed grain that I get to split every year.  
**0:20:30-0:20:35:**  You want in existence. Right. And it's grain fed and it is more.  So I raise grass fed lamb, which I love. And I'll eat grass fed beef, which I love.  And it has different flavors. But I'll also eat that awesome grain fed beef.  
**0:20:45-0:20:51:**  Well, that's the that's the other thing. It's you know, I think it's it's about what we do most often.  It's not about the treat. It's not about never having something that just tastes really good, but isn't good for you.  I mean, it's about do you have that every day or do you know.  
**0:21:03-0:21:09:**  And I have a sweet tooth. I'm battling. So I understand. I mean, the struggle is real.  But but I am interested in so, you know, we've already talked about, you know, what you're able to do with with regenerative agriculture on your farm, but your robots and what they're able to empower.  I think they're on the verge of empowering this whole ability to taste a place, whether or not the taste is right off the bat preferred.  
**0:21:31-0:21:38:**  But I know that different varieties matter. But then also I've learned from Jill, of course, these microbiomes are amazing and they're different.  They're very different from place to place. And so it makes sense just kind of logically that if you have a system empowered by something like your robot,  so you're able to do no till and no chemical, very hard to do on a commercial scale without something like your robots dealing with the weeds,  
**0:21:57-0:22:05:**  that that system could empower the ability to have more of the nutrients coming in naturally as opposed to artificially.  And therefore, nutrients affect taste, minerals affect taste. And so I'm super excited to kind of do a taste test within our network of North Dakota wheat and Kansas wheat.  You know, I know from a lot of people that bread can be kind of like a wine in terms of being able to taste different notes of this and that.  
**0:22:26-0:22:33:**  And especially when it's done with whole grain and really you're really putting the wheat forward as opposed to the other stuff.  So I don't know what what are you thinking about? I know you focus a lot on climate change and the ability to get chemicals out of the system for health.  Have you thought about flavor and the impact that your system could maybe have on on that too?  
**0:22:48-0:22:56:**  Well, first off, you know, if we go back to the tomatoes that were growing in the five point four or whatever was five point three, five point five pH really low.  They weren't yielding with it. And there was nothing resilient about that. Right. And in the end, you know, the ones in the better soil were doing better.  Of course. And so, you know, you have to you have to be you know, just to take one more extreme case on that.  
**0:23:10-0:23:15:**  When I went to Whole Foods, I took my heirlooms from the field and said, have you tasted any sweeter?  And the guy said, yes. But shocked me. He ran the Rocky Mountain region for Whole Foods.  My first meeting do tell. He said, these guys grow tomatoes in dry creek beds in California.  
**0:23:30-0:23:35:**  And they're so stressed that they get only a few tomatoes. They're like 11 or 12 a pound wholesale. Oh, wow.  No one buys those. But so there's a there's you know, when I talk about that, that's those are extreme things.  How do you get healthy, nutritional, you know, and then be able to differentiate based on climate and soil.  
**0:23:51-0:24:04:**  And so with our robots, you know, what we're seeking to do now is a little one that we've made so far that folks have seen, you know, does a pretty basic thing and eliminate some of the herbicides post plant without tillage.  So if you're an organic farmer, most of the time you're cultivating almost always right. You're cultivating at some point at any scale.  So that's a large scale, you know, which is mostly what shows up in grocery stores. Right. Right. So we solve that problem.  
**0:24:22-0:24:33:**  We help with it. Let's put it that way. The next one that's coming out that we've been testing for three years now eliminates any need for tillage period and any need for any chemical burn down or herbicides period.  And we proved it this spring and early summer and we had a documented. So we'll we'll be have a prototype of that running next year in my fields.  And so it and it works with cover crops. And so it's made everything we do at Greenfield is made to work with regenerative ag.  
**0:24:49-0:24:55:**  Are you asking or you're cultivating? We're just not going to work with you. It's just not where we're at.  My belief is everyone's going our direction anyway. And so that's kind of the way we're we're doing it. And the reason we do it one, get rid of chemicals to keep the carbon in the ground.  And the reason you keep the carbon in the ground, I believe, is what we're talking about here, which is the soil microbial activity.  
**0:25:13-0:25:22:**  When you keep those roots down there and you get them to react and help you grow the plants you have and the future plants and keeping that going.  And so with our robots, you know, when you spray herbicides, there is an impact on that micro microbial community, even if you don't till that will help improve sort of the vibrancy and the different variations.  You have fungi and bacteria underground just by that alone.  
**0:25:43-0:25:53:**  Well, and with with organic with the organic system, too, because, you know, a lot of people think that organic means no chemical. It just it means no synthetic chemical.  I mean, you can use natural things. Potassium chloride synthetic.  Right. Right. So, I mean, your system can help both. Obviously, what I'm excited about in terms of the flavor piece of it, which is the least well known.  
**0:26:07-0:26:19:**  But that's often that's often where people first are thinking, you know, sure, there are a number of people that are very focused on health, but there are even more people, I would say, that are focused on does it taste good?  And that, you know, that's not a bad thing. Of course, that makes sense.  You've got to. Yeah. I mean, but it's kind of like white bread tastes super good.  
**0:26:28-0:26:39:**  Right. I know. Until you sort of learn, oh, there's more complexity, right? It gets back to the tomatoes. There is flavor beyond sweetness.  Yeah, absolutely. And that's the thing about you. Well, some of the subtle differences between like this North Dakota or Kansas wheat, you're not those are going to be completely papered over if if the primary thing that you're tasting is sweet.  You know, if that's just overloads everything else. And also all that great nutrition and flavor and texture and all of that is going to be gone if it's milled into a white powder that turns right into sugars.  
**0:27:08-0:27:23:**  So eat it. So there's all these different pieces that come together to give us, you know, maybe this rich artisanal food system that we you know, we had a long time ago because we we couldn't we just didn't have as much processing ability.  And certainly with that has come shelf stability and all that. But I have been finding an interesting theme to and talking with like Derek as Vito last last week about the processing stuff.  And, you know, processing has given us shelf life, but it's taken it's taken away so much to get that back. We have to change our habits to we have to be willing to buy food maybe more often and not expect it to last for a month.  
**0:27:52-0:27:56:**  I mean, shelf life, if you think about it, everything was based around refrigeration.  Yeah.  So you have to consolidate. And so now you've got people going for refrigerated and now you bring all the things you need shelf life. And that's how you make money.  
**0:28:05-0:28:13:**  I'm not sure those distribution mechanisms need to exist in the core current form for very much longer. We are much more efficient now moving things right to your doorstep.  And so that'll be interesting. But yeah, you know, getting back to the topic at hand here, though, you know, so we grow sorghum, we grow for pet food, actually, pets are pretty well off.  Yeah.  
**0:28:26-0:28:36:**  Robots and all the pet food. We're doing a human food trial right now. So we'll find out if that works in about a week with a different type of sorghum. So so that's exciting.  We're launching a barley program around here. We have a decided hold or all this or which variety or any of those. But I think there's a lot of variation to come.  You know, if you think about like when you were a kid, the type of things you eat versus now, that subtlety you much more appreciate than you did.  
**0:28:56-0:29:03:**  Right. I mean, think about the first time you I don't know how you grew up, but I grew up eating a lot of times iceberg lettuce.  Right. Which, by the way, still has its place. But then the first time you bite into bib, real romaine, this is a different deal.  Yes. As you have been going through all of this at the expert level, but as a consumer, how do you see these these changes making their way out to the consumer and how is the consumer empowered to speed up the kind of thing system that they want?  
**0:29:29-0:29:38:**  Well, here goes my pitch. I'd like to see consumers follow what we're doing at Greenfield. And I'll tell you why.  Because we're going to make food on us, either directly or through everyone else suddenly being pressured to count because of the capabilities we're unleashing now.  And so if a consumer wants their food to start with being honest, meaning chemicals and how it was raised, then I think that's step one, actually.  
**0:29:59-0:30:05:**  Flavor. I agree with you. That's why people buy things, but they also buy them for help.  And so you've got to have both. And there's no reason those two things work together, actually. Right.  That's what we're discussing. But that that really is Greenfield's working towards being a consumer brand now.  
**0:30:15-0:30:22:**  And we think the biggest following the world sitting there waiting for us, because I don't think anyone can trust their food right now at the shelf.  Yeah, absolutely. I think the marketing just around regenerative. I mean, it's not just regenerative.  It's every aspect you can imagine. And it's not just food. It's every product. You've been in a lot of different industries.  
**0:30:34-0:30:40:**  You know how it is out there. But I think there is the last two generations being digital natives.  They've grown up with all of this stuff around them all the time, and they've gotten very skeptical about the glossy looking ad or the beautiful looking farm or the stuff that does appeal to what you wish it would be.  But knowing that just because you have a beautiful marketing doesn't mean that the product is what they say it is or that it's selling.  
**0:31:04-0:31:10:**  And so this ability now to track things. I mean, my gosh, my my husband loses his key.  So I put a little tracker thingy on it and you can you know, we can find it on your phone wherever wherever it is.  I mean, now our ability to track things in our everyday lives is so great that we're used to that concept and we kind of expect more access to it.  
**0:31:23-0:31:33:**  And like what you're doing is not just honest, but traceable, traceable all the way through in a way that that hasn't been as available in the past.  And maybe you could talk more about that and how it because it's not just the work you do.  You work with other farmers and other partners to kind of build these supply chains that you're working on. Right.  
**0:31:43-0:31:50:**  You know, it's interesting, right? So the challenge with these all these things is what facilities are in place.  You know, you can grow the crops. That's not a problem. You can source the seed, you can grow the crop, you can do it the right way.  But what happens after that is always the challenge.  
**0:32:00-0:32:05:**  Right. And so how do you separate and delineate your supply chains?  And so, you know, with with the pet food with Canada that we've been doing, how do you, you know, make sure that the stuff that's grown regenerative, you're aware of and test it properly for toxins and distribute it properly and make sure it's safe.  First and foremost. And then the other thing is, over time, how do you differentiate that in storage in a lot of times it's as simple as seed storage scheduling in your plant, what you're making, anything like that.  
**0:32:34-0:32:43:**  And I think that's the real challenge out there is how do you go from this to that? Because you can't just drop all that.  Right. Because this is what people are buying today. Right.  And if you're a new brand and you don't have that legacy stuff, who's going to do all that post harvest processing, storage and distribution for you?  
**0:32:58-0:33:02:**  Yeah. Right. And that's really the fundamental challenge.  So when we in my opinion that exists, I mean, you know, I guess I'm looking at from a greenfield perspective, we can raise any crop we want now.  It's just a matter of months now without chemicals. Right.  
**0:33:12-0:33:18:**  But how do you carry that through to consumer in a way that's cost efficient enough? Right.  I have a loaf of bread in my possession right now that costs thirteen dollars to my house.  Got to go. And I know the guy started it and and we're meeting next week.  
**0:33:30-0:33:35:**  But it's I'm sure he's smart enough to know a thirteen dollar loaf.  Brad has a extremely limited audience. Yeah. I would imagine it got to 13. Hello. We'll find out when I meet with them.  But because of all the handling costs, all the things that they've had to do to get to this point.  
**0:33:50-0:33:55:**  Right. And one did not lose money hand over fist on it in the interim and sort of proof of concept.  So that really it's an interesting thing because actually building facilities and all that is one of the easier things to capitalize than taking all the risk on the crop front.  Right. So but it doesn't exist yet.  
**0:34:08-0:34:14:**  Well, that's very obvious. That's a theme, too. That's that's come up throughout our show.  And obviously our community, the accidents have had to build a mill to mill their flower to get it to market.  Jennifer Koehler in Ohio has had to add a rice mill to mill her the rice that she's getting from Adam Chapel, you know, generatively grown to get it out to market because people weren't willing to do it for them.  
**0:34:36-0:34:39:**  The infrastructure didn't want it. They didn't want to change it.  They didn't want to specialize or and same with, you know, Diana Lozinski in North Dakota. And, you know, you guys are having like there's this real theme of in order to get this better product out,  the farmers are or partners of the farmers are having to build the processing and the distribution, which is incredibly expensive and risky.  
**0:35:03-0:35:17:**  And that was part Derek said last time to like that's why it's so important for consumers to zero in on these brands that are making it possible, bringing it to them in a form that they can use because they hear all the time.  And I hear all the time. I'm sure you do. It's so maddening.  Oh, if only more farmers would if only more farmers would change the way they grow.  
**0:35:25-0:35:36:**  And certainly there's room for improvement there, certainly. But more farmers would change very quickly if there were a processing system that would take and reward what they're doing.  And, you know, so the fact that all of these great people, they're fantastic people have to take on this additional role of becoming a mill owner and operator.  It's it's inspiring, but it's incredibly frustrating to me, too.  
**0:35:52-0:35:56:**  Yeah, yeah, I think so. And it's a lot of risk for a farmer to take.  It's amazing what those guys are doing, by the way, all three.  Well, you too. And that's to your point about the call to consumers to follow along on these brands to understand the difference.  
**0:36:06-0:36:16:**  There's a massive difference between a small startup brand or entrepreneur brand that has a good idea, has a good recipe, has a better, you know, a better cookie or whatever.  There's a huge difference between that and a farmer generated brand that has taken on the added risk of milling their own ingredient, because now they can know from the very beginning of that seed all the way through to the ingredient, what's been done and how it's been managed and the care that goes into it.  They are the real version of the beautiful sunrise video clip.  
**0:36:39-0:36:42:**  But how do they tell how do they get through the marketing?  Well, I mean, marketing background, you understand that.  I mean, we are my belief is Greenfield when people when we really start marketing, which we just have started a few minutes, we're getting out to it is people will gravitate to robots because we for some reason think technology is the greatest thing ever.  
**0:36:59-0:37:01:**  Absolutely. They're very cool.  Personally, I think it's pretty cool. You know, Derek and Yeah, of course, of course.  But that's what culture we like new shiny things, right? And so believe me, when we release the next robot, it's about as shiny, cool as it gets.  
**0:37:13-0:37:17:**  And I think there's this massive latent demand, just like Tesla in court for electric vehicles.  You know, I lived in LA, you know, was around enough people knowing it was a constant conversation about electric cars not existing because the incumbents couldn't figure out how to do it.  They didn't want to it and have a wherewithal. It didn't make any sense for them.  
**0:37:32-0:37:39:**  So along comes Elon Musk, who basically lays it on the line, gets it done. And now everyone's racing to follow him.  But remember, no one knew who that dude was 11, 12 years ago. No. Yeah. Right. That's a very good point.  Yeah. Outside of Silicon Valley, nobody knew. I taught entrepreneurship class. Not one kid in that room knew right back then.  
**0:37:54-0:38:08:**  Everyone knows. Right. And my point is, he tapped latent demand for electric vehicles. What we're doing in Greenfield is tapping a latent demand for chemical free, absolutely transparent food.  So that's where we're going. And if you look at the number of followers Tesla has versus General Motors versus.  Why would you follow General Motors? I think that that all these things we're doing, Sarah, and what you're doing here, what Deanna's doing, what Derek's doing, what Jennifer's doing, what Jill's doing.  
**0:38:26-0:38:36:**  It's inevitable. Co-founder of Greenfield, Carl, he's just an advisor now, but he used to say to me, Clint, what we're doing is inevitable.  Because it is. Yeah. And so anyone who wants to doubt it, or I'll put them in the same category of all the people in the deal with for 25 years that basically said, and then they doubt and then they say you're tilting at windmills.  And then of course you run. And so, and of course they don't call you up by the way, you're telling me.  
**0:38:55-0:39:06:**  And so it's just a matter of time because of what you're doing this for the flavor is truly unique and it's different. It's better. It's healthier for you.  Even if the herbicides are in, it's still better for you than, you know, without right. You get better nutrients and it's just better period.  And of course there will always probably be a place for Wonder Bread. Of course. Yeah. It's always going to be there.  
**0:39:21-0:39:34:**  I mean, if you study grain milling history, you know, a little bit, I mean, that was a big, the wealthy people wanted to be, you know, and I haven't went and charted the timelines, but wealthy people back when they came out of white, you know, white milling.  I think that's probably when you saw the paintings, they all started getting really fat.  Looking unhealthy. I don't know, but I, you know, I'm not disparaging Wonder Bread at all. I ate as a kid and you know, but it's, you know, I just think what we're looking at here is you should have all these choices and they should be honest choices.  
**0:39:53-0:39:57:**  You should know where you're going to buy. I'll eat a hot dog once in a while.  Yeah, exactly.  Let me drink a cup. The point is not to drink it all the time. Yes. And to try other things that are healthier for me. That's all we're trying to bring into existence is you have options. You can trust your options. If you want to make bad choices, that's up to you.  
**0:40:13-0:40:33:**  Yeah. And I think that because I've seen, you know, a lot of consumer research for, you know, five years or more, that just always talks about this strong desire that consumers have for, you know, particularly again, this younger generation, they they've lost a lot of faith in institutions, which I don't know why.  But so they they shifted more toward, well, I can I can make smaller change, but real change in how I purchase things and what I buy. And so that's part of why part of what drives this desire to know who's doing what.  You know, and that's a noble thing. So to be able to put real metrics and real authenticity to that, that's that's what I am so excited about with. And I think your robots are going to empower that for not just not just the supply chains you're building, but for all the people that use those robots, because then they can create those systems and bring that cost down and add that those values into their supply chains, too.  
**0:41:15-0:41:23:**  Well, and I think let's talk about the other side of this. We're in the worst drought in the history of where I'm at. Right now, I haven't planted any fall crops.  Wow.  There's simply no moisture, even though I've been regenerative from no till for four or five years, depending on the piece of ground. And we raise sheep and the whole deal, but there is almost no moisture and you certainly can't get deep enough with the drill to put it in.  
**0:41:38-0:41:40:**  And you're in South Central Kansas.  Yeah, that's right.  But basically from here and everywhere west, you can forget about for the most part, even in southwest Nebraska, where we also do have operations.  
**0:41:50-0:41:53:**  They got two inches of rain and it's like not gonna last.  Right. They need nine inches of rain over four weeks to even get back to where we can pick and grow the crops you're used to growing. That's what I've been told.  When we grow, like you're recommending, we do no till because we want to, it's about the microbes. When we do cover crops, when we do it the right way, when you rotate your crops and we get these unique flavor properties because of that and the seed we choose,  
**0:42:17-0:42:19:**  you're also storing a lot of carbon underground.  And that absolutely has to happen.  But I really think at the end of the day, there's 250 million broad acres in the United States alone. There's, I think, a couple billion globally, you could argue.  
**0:42:32-0:42:44:**  That's a lot of carbon. If you can put a thousand or two thousand pounds of carbon underneath the ground annually and you compare that to a gallon of gas is about 20 pounds of CO2, the numbers add up pretty quick.  And that's really what we need to be doing.  Well, especially since that's the same practices that you're talking about also store more water underground. So at the same time, it's making that system more resilient in the short term.  
**0:42:56-0:42:59:**  So it's just great all around.  Yeah, it is. The crops we raise this summer would have never made it if it wasn't no till. On the soil they were on, there's no way. Five years, forget about it. We never made it.  Well, this has been great. Are there any final thoughts you want to kind of wrap up with or remind consumers about and maybe share your website?  
**0:43:19-0:43:38:**  Actually, there is a really important thing just in terms of food and flavor. When we have a hydroponics, one of the things my cousin did a little study and it was about nutrient profile and flavor from the time we harvested it to the shelves versus coming from a long distance.  And it was amazing, but mostly for what we were growing hydroponically, the difference in details. But basically, there's a certain amount of time that it would just go off a cliff in terms of the value to you as a human and probably the flavor and all that.  And it was very interesting. And my big takeaway from that was proximity matters on some of these things. We're talking about fresh produce, right? And so proximity might actually matter as much or more than how it was grown in some scenarios.  
**0:44:09-0:44:23:**  For example, I think hydroponic lettuce is growing 30 minutes from the grocery stores and you bought it two or three days after it was harvested, you're better off than whatever you got from California. It might have been grown using a better method, but by the time it gets trucked there, they've lost a lot of that value.  And so those are interesting things, right? I'm not a huge, given I have greenhouses, I know the downside of it, I'm not a huge proponent of that style growing, but I think it has its place because of what I just said, that freshness matters too.  That's a very good point. And it's why we know that when we have a garden and we go out and pick something from it and bring it in, there's just nothing better. You can't get any better taste.  
**0:44:47-0:44:56:**  No, you can, you will never beat your own garden. That's a fact. Or if you have your own greenhouse. I'm always surprised people don't build more kind of just small greenhouses for themselves.  I think it's just a real mystery of what it takes or how complicated it is.  I think so. Yeah. And I always encourage people to just go build a small one and don't try to grow in the summer, grow in the winter. If you're in this where we're at, you know, in North, grow in the winter because actually we grow greens, we've already planted.  
**0:45:15-0:45:28:**  So you'll like this. We have cereal rye walkways. So you walk on cereal rye just started coming up. That's nice. And then we have the stuff we're growing in the soil, in the ground, the greenhouses and all that food goes to greenfield employees.  Oh, cool. That's great. So we're building robots and the greenhouses are right next to it. And so that's that's what we're doing.  And so another greenfield employee and myself, you know, we in the in the early mornings every other day, go out there and plant stuff and get it going. And I tried it last winter.  
**0:45:45-0:45:55:**  The interesting thing is it doesn't take a lot of energy to heat a greenhouse in the winter for greens. And that's what we found out. Actually, greenhouses are much more productive in the winter.  I used to grow tomatoes when there was snow everywhere. Oh, wow. Don't do that.  I was a mistake. But you could grow basil or not basil. No, basil needs to be kept in the winter when you've got high humidity. Basil needs to be kept most likely over 60 degrees.  
**0:46:14-0:46:26:**  So try to get overnight when it's 20 ambient or with wind is a lose. I mean, you just going to cost you. Yeah. A lot of car. So which greens, which greens should they grow? Yeah. Spinach is number one.  Oh, yeah. Okay. But right now, if you ask good, romaine radishes, carrots, we're about to try leeks, onions, thinking about potatoes. I don't know if they're gonna work. So it's probably a little late for that. Oh, we do bok choy. Oh, good. Yeah.  Yeah. Asian greens. We do Chinese cabbage will be done by somewhere between Thanksgiving and Christmas. So it's huge. You know, we make soups out of them. Cabbage runs with cabbage in the ground. Yeah. So most of your greens and that, you know, what we do is we turn the thermostat to 35 degrees.  
**0:47:01-0:47:17:**  Green. And so it doesn't freeze. We keep it there. And so we cut firewood off my farm and or with propane right now, you know, but I think if we if you build a greenhouse do the God method, do we circulate dig underground if I had to do it again, I'm doing that way.  You probably have so eating cost at all, if any. That's fantastic. It sounds so wholesome when you're chopping wood to fuel the greenhouse. Yeah.  Really good. Sarah, I always tell you, I've done a lot. I've done a lot of crazy things, including have a burning log in my arms running. First time I lit up my stove and didn't know what the hell I was doing and the wind showed up and I didn't understand angles coming off buildings pushing.  
**0:47:47-0:48:04:**  But you do now you do know a lot of nearly useless stuff. You were just smarter than me to research it right in the first place. No, that's great. That's great. And where can people find your, your company and what you're doing with the supply chain and follow you?  Yeah, greenfieldincorporated.com. It's you over what we're up to now till two, two weeks ago, we had one of the worst websites ever to get venture capital in history. But now we have a decent.  And you're on social media to your on, you know, Facebook and Instagram and all of that.  
**0:48:22-0:48:26:**  LinkedIn really. So why if they want to follow me personally, it would be LinkedIn.  Okay.  The green fields on all of those greenfieldincorporated.  
**0:48:31-0:48:32:**  com.  Okay. Okay. All those places.  Well, great. Well, thanks so much for what you're doing and for taking time to share what what all this exciting stuff is leading to.  
**0:48:42-0:48:52:**  And as you know, I'm a huge fan and so I'll continue to cheer along the sidelines and encourage people to to come your way because I think it matters quite a bit.  Likewise, likewise.  You've been listening to Tasting Terroir, a podcast made possible by a magical collaboration between the following companies and supporters all working together to help farmers, chefs, food companies and consumers to build healthier soil for a healthier world.  
**0:49:23-0:49:36:**  Rise of Tara owned by Dr. Joe Cloperton Risa Tara is an international food security consulting company providing expert guidance for creating healthy soils that yield tasty, nutrient dense foods.  Check us out at rise of Tara dot com.  That's our H I ZO T E R R A dot com.  
**0:49:45-0:49:59:**  And the global food and farm online community, an ad free global social network and soil health streaming service that provides information and connections that help you apply the science and practice of improving soil health.  Join us at global food and farm dot com.  And from listeners like you who support us through our Patreon account at patreon dot com slash tasting terroir.  
**0:50:12-0:50:17:**  Patrons receive access to our full length interviews and selected additional materials.  Patrons will also have the opportunity to submit questions that we will answer on the podcast.  Tune in next week to hear more interviews and insights with myself, Sarah Harper and Dr. Joe Cloperton, as well as the regenerative farmers, chefs and emerging food companies in the global food and farm online community and beyond.  
**0:50:41-0:50:48:**  If you like our work, please give us a five star rating and share the podcast with your friends.  Thanks so much for listening and for helping us get the word out about this new resource to taste the health of your food.  Until next week, stay curious, keep improving and don't stop believing that better is possible when knowledge is available.  