<script src="https://cdn.podlove.org/web-player/embed.js"></script>
    <script>
        document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', function () {
          if (document.readyState === 'interactive' || document.readyState === 'complete') {
            podlovePlayer('#player', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/Tasting Terroir/The-flavor-of-your-foods-philosophy.json', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/Tasting Terroir/config.json').then(registerExternalEvents('player'))
          }
        })
  </script>---
title: The Flavor Of Your Foods Philosophy
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### Tasting Terroir  (2022-09-07)  
### Author(s): Sara H Harper  

**0:00:00-0:00:32:**  You know, there's not a label on the shelf in the grocery store today that I see any  merit to, whether it's certified organic or grass finished or free range or local or whatever.  They all seem to have their issues, and so I just think if we're going to certify Regen,  
**0:00:32-0:00:48:**  I think we need to come out from a different angle.  I think for me personally, it's more about principles than it is practices.  Welcome back to our podcast, Tasting Terroir, a journey exploring the link between healthy  
**0:00:48-0:01:00:**  soil and the flavor and health of your food.  I'm your host, Sarah Harper.  That clip was from an interview I did with farmer Gail Fuller, owner of Circle 7 Farms  
**0:01:00-0:01:14:**  in Kansas.  Gail has been working hard to bring life back to a depleted piece of land and in the process,  bringing life back to the community that surrounds him and improving his own life as well.  
**0:01:14-0:01:27:**  You'll get to hear more of my full interview with Gail and his definition of regenerative  agriculture later in this episode.  Last week, we began the process of understanding regenerative agriculture through the eyes  
**0:01:27-0:01:43:**  of real farmers who are actually making better food by building healthier soil.  We started out with an interview with Tanis and Derek Axton of Saskatchewan, Canada.  While I believe these interviews with farmers are interesting in and of themselves, worth  
**0:01:43-0:01:56:**  listening to, I wanted to take a minute to explain how I believe their knowledge can  help you as a consumer.  If you have found your way to this podcast, chances are you care a lot about food, either  
**0:01:56-0:02:12:**  the flavor of it or the health of it or some combination of the two.  But let's face it, it is hard to cut through the many, often misleading marketing claims  that are being made about, quote, better for you food and in particular about regenerative  
**0:02:12-0:02:25:**  agriculture.  As you learn more about the core parts of making food ingredients healthier and full  of unique flavor from some truly great farmers in our network, you can use what you've learned  
**0:02:25-0:02:43:**  to evaluate the glossy promises made by the brands that you buy from.  You can put pressure on them to actually live up to the claims that they make.  But you can only do that if you have at least a bit of the insider's knowledge so that you  
**0:02:43-0:03:00:**  can see the difference between a natural fruit brand that ordered an unknown group of farm  members in their supply chain to add a cover crop.  The difference between that and, well, the farmers you'll get to meet on this show.  
**0:03:00-0:03:18:**  As a reminder, regenerative agriculture is a farming philosophy that describes a number  of soil health principles that farmers apply in different ways to help them restore depleted  farmland, bringing life back to the soil, and with it, often better flavor to your food.  
**0:03:18-0:03:35:**  These principles include things like reducing the disturbance to the microbiome by planting  crops without tillage, keeping the land protected by planting cover crops that prevent the land  from blowing or washing away, and adding a lot more biodiversity than is typically there  
**0:03:35-0:03:48:**  on a conventional farm.  For a longer discussion on this topic, please do listen to episode two in our podcast series,  Making Soil Healthy Again.  
**0:03:48-0:04:03:**  This episode is called The Flavor of Your Food's Philosophy.  As you'll see, if you're buying food directly from regenerative farmers or brands that work  directly with them, you are able to understand the holistic way of thinking that goes into  
**0:04:03-0:04:19:**  what and how they make your food, and this could be why it often tastes so much better.  Most food brands today know very little about the farmers who grow the main ingredients  in their product, let alone what goes into the decisions they make.  
**0:04:19-0:04:33:**  How are they picking the best flavors in their category if they don't even know what's possible?  Truth be told, most brands don't really want to know because it adds a level of complexity  that they'd just rather not deal with.  
**0:04:33-0:04:50:**  So instead, they highlight a few trendy practices or certifications that make it look like they  know more than they do about their ingredients.  Our ability to taste terroir, the place, the unique place of where food is grown, is linked  
**0:04:50-0:05:01:**  to the health of the soil, and as a result, to the ways of farming that restore life in  the soil.  That doesn't come from cramming in a few prescribed practices.  
**0:05:01-0:05:17:**  It arrives as an outcome of a restorative mindset that focuses on, as Gail puts it,  what to grow rather than what to kill.  This process of regenerating the soil can affect the flavor of food because over time,  
**0:05:17-0:05:30:**  healthy soil depends less, if at all, on the man-made inputs of fertilizer and pesticides  and is able to more fully reflect the unique nutrients and conditions of the place it has  grown in.  
**0:05:30-0:05:41:**  But taking a piece of land from depleted and artificial to full of natural life doesn't  happen overnight.  As we will hear more about from my interview with master farmer and member of our global  
**0:05:41-0:05:54:**  food and farm community, Gail Fuller.  From his transition away from conventional farming to his deep commitment to rebuilding  rural economies, Gail Fuller has a lot of wisdom and wit to share.  
**0:05:54-0:06:06:**  A quick internet search of his name brings you many great interviews and profiles of  how he has shifted his thinking about life as well as farming.  Check out the one done by farmer's footprint, for example.  
**0:06:06-0:06:22:**  In addition to selling his grass-fed and finished meat, Gail runs several events at his farm.  He represents one of the things that I have come to love about regenerative farmers.  Their reflective and humble nature and their understanding of just how interconnected the  
**0:06:22-0:06:38:**  farmer and the community are with a life in the land.  So let people know where you're farming and what you're farming, what your farm looks  like.  
**0:06:38-0:06:49:**  Sure.  The farm is located in Severy, Kansas.  We are one hour east of Wichita and we are on the very eastern edge of the Flint Hills.  
**0:06:49-0:07:10:**  We direct market grass-finished beef and lamb, pastured pork, chicken, eggs, and we have  ducks seasonally in the fall and winter.  We also have a couple of small orchards hoping to market peach, apple, pear, apricot, plum,  
**0:07:10-0:07:18:**  figs, cherries, etc.  But Mother Nature hasn't allowed that yet.  She has a vote.  
**0:07:18-0:07:31:**  Mother Nature, contrary to popular belief, Mother Nature has a vote.  Somebody said, you know, Mother Nature bats last and she's a bat right now.  All right.  
**0:07:31-0:07:45:**  Well, we're talking about regenerative agriculture on this Earth Day and excited to be able to  share some of the perspectives of folks that we're in contact with quite a bit in Jill  Claperton's Food and Farm Network.  
**0:07:45-0:07:55:**  And so, we'd love to get, as somebody who's gone from conventional to regenerative and  still on the journey, love to get your definition.  What is regenerative agriculture?  
**0:07:55-0:08:08:**  Well, first of all, you're correct, still on the journey.  I've been doing this for 20 plus years, but I feel like I'm still on the first grade.  So lost to learn.  
**0:08:08-0:08:23:**  It's interesting because it seems to be all the rage right now, everybody having to define,  verify, certify regenerative agriculture.  I was on a Facebook thread asking this question a year or so ago, and there was just tons  
**0:08:23-0:08:36:**  of answers about our muscular mycorrhizal fungi and soil biology and earthworms.  But for me, it's much bigger than that.  I think regenerative agriculture is about, first of all, it's just about regeneration  
**0:08:36-0:08:49:**  in general.  And I think for us in agriculture, it needs to be about regenerating our rural communities.  Obviously rural America is dying, and I think it's just as important while we're regenerating  
**0:08:49-0:09:08:**  our soils and our farms that this goes hand in hand with community regeneration.  And I think something for me personally that's really come to the forefront in the last six  to 12 months is also regenerating farmers.  
**0:09:08-0:09:34:**  I've put a lot of focus on my farm and my soil, and I've learned that I can change a  lot on my farm, but I didn't put enough focus and emphasis on me and realizing how broken  I was, I deal with depression, getting to be my age, the body starting to slow down.  
**0:09:34-0:09:52:**  I spent so many years dealing, handling pesticides and toxins, and not just that, but just living  in a toxic world of, it's always tough, it's always stressful.  And I've never done a really good job of dealing with all those stresses in my life, either  
**0:09:52-0:10:09:**  environmentally or personally or whatever.  So I've really put a big focus in the last year on regenerating me.  It's really come to light this winter, and I'm a long ways from being fixed.  
**0:10:09-0:10:22:**  I still deal with depression, I still have mental issues, I still need to get my diet  completely fixed.  I'm a work in progress just like my farm, but the more I've really focused on the spiritual  
**0:10:22-0:10:36:**  and the mental side of me and my farm, it's made managing my farm a lot easier.  Why would I want to do something to my farm that's damaging to it?  It's the same as I do with me.  
**0:10:36-0:10:53:**  Why would I want to do something to me that causes stress or inflammation?  And it really makes it easier for me to look at my farm in a spiritual sense, makes me  realize where Mother Nature is doing just fine and I just need to leave her alone or  
**0:10:53-0:11:07:**  where there's a place I can step in and maybe help alleviate some of the stress from Mother  Nature and help my farm to flourish.  So it's been a really change of journey for me, putting the focus on me instead of on  
**0:11:07-0:11:20:**  my soil, but I think it all goes hand in hand.  Well, and in some of the conversations I'm having with folks in our network for this,  the thing that keeps coming up, continuous journey and philosophy, that it's a philosophy,  
**0:11:20-0:11:31:**  it's a mindset, it's not a checklist.  And I just love for you to say more about, I mean, there seems to be such a human need,  a consumer need to like, well, what is it?  
**0:11:31-0:11:43:**  Where's the box?  And if it's not in it, and then there are all sorts of competitive needs, both with  the organic industry that has a niche and wants to keep it or enhance it and other brands  
**0:11:43-0:11:54:**  that want to move into it.  And so there is all of this focus on what it is.  And yet the most of the people that have done it that I am most impressed by, and I've been  
**0:11:54-0:12:06:**  working on this off and on for 20 years in different ways on the policy side, the people  that I'm most impressed with consistently, but that have outcomes that are really impressive  all come back to this.  
**0:12:06-0:12:14:**  It's almost undefinable.  It's almost like the act of defining it ruins it.  No, and I get it.  
**0:12:14-0:12:28:**  I'm not opposed to verification or certification.  My big concern is we tend to always come at things the way we've always came at things.  There's not a label on the shelf in the grocery store today that I see any merit to, whether  
**0:12:28-0:12:44:**  it's certified organic or grass finished or free range or local or whatever.  They all seem to have their issues.  And so I just think if we're going to certify regen, I think we need to come out from a  
**0:12:44-0:12:59:**  different angle.  And I think for me personally, it's more about principles than it is practices.  Sure, I would love to outlaw tillage and Roundup and GMOs and pesticides and all these things,  
**0:12:59-0:13:10:**  but I also understand there's processes and steps and we have to meet people in their  place.  We've got a really good friend that grows potatoes and for now he's having to do with  
**0:13:10-0:13:23:**  lots of tillage, yet his soil is fantastic because he's put an emphasis on that.  So we just have to be careful setting rules for farmers or anybody.  So for me, it's more about the principles.  
**0:13:23-0:13:39:**  Obviously I'll follow the five principles of soil health, but I think those are great  for soil health.  But I think for regen, I follow a set of principles that's more like wellness, environmental stewardship,  
**0:13:39-0:13:49:**  social justice.  Those are the questions that I ask myself when I make a management decision for me personally  or for the farm is, how many of these boxes am I checking?  
**0:13:49-0:14:04:**  Community resilience and things like that.  So I want it to be bigger than that because I really want it to be inclusive to all things  and understanding that I can follow the principles of soil health, but I can still damage my  
**0:14:04-0:14:12:**  neighbor.  That's not a good thing.  I've got to be more inclusive of everybody in my neighborhood, in my community and my  
**0:14:12-0:14:26:**  customers when I'm making management practices or whatever.  The other fascinating thing to me is when you learn more about what's going on in healthy  soil and the amazing community that's there and the harmony that's happening and the plants  
**0:14:26-0:14:45:**  talking to each other through the chemicals they put out in their roots.  There is a real spiritual element to what's happening underground and what can happen  may be above ground, but we have to value it and not try to just clear it all out and  
**0:14:45-0:14:57:**  put back only what we think should be there because we don't always know which thing should  be there.  Absolutely, and humans have a really bad track record and especially men.  
**0:14:57-0:15:08:**  We have forever been the hunters and so our job we think is to conquer.  And I think I would hope by now that some of us are learning that there is no conquering  mother nature.  
**0:15:08-0:15:27:**  We can beat her for a while, but pretty soon she's going to beat us one way or the other.  And yeah, as we learn more and more on the scientific side of all of these things connecting  and communicating and not just plant to plant, but plant to animal and plant to insect and  
**0:15:27-0:15:38:**  fungi to insect and fungi to root and all these, it's like me talking to a tiger.  Who says all of this stuff isn't talking to me?  I'm too arrogant to listen.  
**0:15:38-0:15:52:**  And so that's kind of where I am right now is I'm trying to become a part of that ecosystem  and I'm trying to do more time sitting and listening to my farm that I am talking to  or talking at my farm or managing.  
**0:15:52-0:16:02:**  I'm trying to let it talk to me and I'm trying to learn how to listen.  And I don't know that language very well, but I certainly know a heck of a lot better  than I did 20 years ago.  
**0:16:02-0:16:08:**  And I think I've always been one to kind of get on farmers for not carrying the spade  with them.  And what's your soil look like?  
**0:16:08-0:16:19:**  Because most don't even know.  But I'm kind of getting to the point now in my journey that I can look at my soil without  a spade and tell you if it's healthy or not.  
**0:16:19-0:16:27:**  How many insects are crawling or flying above this particular patch?  How many birds are sitting there?  How many, you know, whatever.  
**0:16:27-0:16:42:**  If you're void of life above ground, you're probably void of life below ground.  I really love the connection that you've made to the mental health of the people and the  farm and also the rural regeneration piece.  
**0:16:42-0:16:50:**  It seems like regeneration is more than just any one thing.  It's this holistic.  It's like everything in the system is getting better.  
**0:16:50-0:17:04:**  And because one thing is getting better here than another thing, but it's not necessarily  I'm going to control here's the program and I'm going to improve this by 30%.  It's sort of like this improved and wow, that shot up 50% in that shot.  
**0:17:04-0:17:10:**  But you still can measure outcomes.  You can still see improvement.  You just can't always predict or shape it.  
**0:17:10-0:17:15:**  Maybe.  Yeah.  And I think that's probably a little bit of the struggle with man today is, you know,  
**0:17:15-0:17:22:**  we want to set outcomes.  You know, we want, we want you, you know, we're going to plant corn this year.  We want 300 bushel corn and that's an outcome.  
**0:17:22-0:17:37:**  And we don't think of an outcome as doubling our coil population this year or beaver showing  back up on the farm or anything outside of grain yield and dollars.  But, you know, I think we've got to learn to measure our outcomes differently.  
**0:17:37-0:17:44:**  And certainly it's got to come back to me.  Am I happier this year?  Am I, am I less stressed this year?  
**0:17:44-0:17:52:**  Am I sleeping well?  You know, do I love my life?  Do I love my life when I leave the farm as much as I love it when I go to the farm and  
**0:17:52-0:18:03:**  vice versa?  Because you know, having healthy soil is doing nobody any good if the farmer still goes home  and thinks about killing themselves at night or drinking themselves to sleep.  
**0:18:03-0:18:14:**  There's, you know, if that's the case, there's still a lot of tension and stress on that  farm.  So now I want to hear a little bit more about how you practice regenerative on your farm.  
**0:18:14-0:18:19:**  Share with us what that looks like.  Sure.  From a farm perspective or from a meat perspective?  
**0:18:19-0:18:28:**  Well both, because as we know, it's, it is both.  Sure.  So, you know, as most people know, I've relocated to a new farm a couple years ago.  
**0:18:28-0:18:42:**  So we're on a completely different journey now.  Back to square one with a dead soil, with a dead system.  If you're on my farm, your first thought would be, oh, this, this is a wildlife haven.  
**0:18:42-0:18:47:**  We've got a little bit of timber.  We've got some grassland that has a lot of diversity in it.  We've got several ponds.  
**0:18:47-0:18:54:**  We got a little bit of crop land.  And you would just think this would just be loaded with wildlife, but it's not.  We have very few squirrels.  
**0:18:54-0:18:58:**  We have very few deer.  We have no turkey.  We have no quail.  
**0:18:58-0:19:08:**  All of these things.  So, you know, and when you put a spade in the soil, that shows up.  So we're, you know, we're back to square one, but we know we can take all of our knowledge.  
**0:19:08-0:19:20:**  Our goal is to do in five years here what we did in 20 on our old farm with the soil  and the ecosystem.  We've already seen pretty good improvements in our infiltration rates.  
**0:19:20-0:19:33:**  We're doing, you know, our practices are holistic in general in that we do rotational grazing  with the sheep or with all of the animals.  The sheep and the cows sometimes run together, sometimes not.  
**0:19:33-0:19:45:**  We rotate them anywhere from once a day to seven or eight times a day.  In the wintertime, we'll relax that a little bit depending on our desire and management  goals.  
**0:19:45-0:19:55:**  And sometimes in the winter, they'll park in a given area for one to two weeks.  But with any time during the growing season, we're going pretty hard and fast.  The pigs get rotated too.  
**0:19:55-0:20:08:**  That's been a little bit of a slower process.  Pigs manage completely different than cows and sheep.  And we're all still learning the pigs and I on the best way to graze pigs.  
**0:20:08-0:20:16:**  So those are kind of some of the starts to chickens.  They're also a big part of the rotation.  They follow the sheep and the cows in the summer.  
**0:20:16-0:20:32:**  They are a big part of our insecticide program.  So we don't use, we use no inputs really on the farm as far as toxins, no herbicides,  pesticides, no, excuse me, no herbicides, no insecticides, no fungicides on the vegetables,  
**0:20:32-0:20:44:**  fruit, crops, grass, livestock, any of that.  So we're organic in that aspect.  I'm not saying we will never because if we come to a point where we have to spray something  
**0:20:44-0:20:57:**  or put an insecticide on a cow to save its life or to save the farm from bankruptcy for  a year, then that's probably going to have to happen.  We do so knowing that we make a bad move, but we do whatever we can to recover as fast  
**0:20:57-0:21:07:**  as we can.  For us, it's about animal impact because we're much more grazers now than we are farmers.  Our cropland, we're in the process where it's just strictly cover crops right now because  
**0:21:07-0:21:17:**  it's completely dead soil.  There's really little chance of growing much of a yielding crop, grain crop with it because  there's just no cycling going on.  
**0:21:17-0:21:26:**  So we're going to hit it really hard to cover crops for a couple of years, get the animal  impact.  And the goal for this year is to use it for winter grazing so we have some stockpile and  
**0:21:26-0:21:38:**  don't have to bring hay on the farm.  Well, that's so cool and then what about you, the personal side of regeneration?  That becomes the more difficult part because at the end of the day, I've still got payments  
**0:21:38-0:21:51:**  that are too high and stresses and things like that and weather is always a challenge.  You know, I'm a farmer, I'm trained as a farmer, so I'm trained to work 20 hours a day and  all of those things.  
**0:21:51-0:22:08:**  In my old life, I did a lot of that especially when I was a large-scale, 3,000-acre farm.  It was nothing to put in 100 or 120-hour week in the spring and the fall.  That has been hard to get away from for me because we just, for some reason, for some  
**0:22:08-0:22:21:**  really stupid reason, we let it creep into our brains that if we're awake, we have to  be at work.  That's just the way it's supposed to be and I've worked really hard to be a sunrise to  
**0:22:21-0:22:40:**  sunset guy and by sunset means I'm usually in bed by dark and I've learned to walk away.  I try to quit at five or six o'clock now in the evening even on the long days.  You know, Lynette and I are kind of running joke anymore as we walk in the house at five  
**0:22:40-0:22:56:**  o'clock or so and we look at each other and say, are you done?  And we'll say, no, we quit because we understand we're never done but we're trying to find  ways to make time for me personally and make time for me and Lynette also.  
**0:22:56-0:23:10:**  It's important to have both of those.  I've gotten so much better about, especially on a bad day when I'm a little grumpy or the  weather is ugly or things aren't going too great, just hop on the four-wheeler and go  
**0:23:10-0:23:22:**  out on the farm somewhere and shut the four-wheeler off and walk away from it.  Just leave the phone on the four-wheeler and just go out and sit down somewhere in a pasture  and sit underneath a tree or sit by a pond and just let it out.  
**0:23:22-0:23:37:**  Whether that's shouting in a tree or just sitting quietly and thinking or meditating  and trying to get all that stress and those bad thoughts out and try to soak in the beauty  of the farm, even on a bad hot windy dry day.  
**0:23:37-0:23:53:**  You can always find something beautiful on the farm and it's trying to find that appreciation  and that gratitude for really we're the luckiest people on earth to be farmers.  We've got to get that back.  
**0:23:53-0:24:00:**  Farming used to be a wonderful occupation and we've just turned it into almost like  a prison.  We've taken the fun out of it.  
**0:24:00-0:24:10:**  We've taken the neighborliness out of it and we've taken all of the joy out of it.  We've got to find a way to get that back.  I know it's going to take a while.  
**0:24:10-0:24:26:**  It's taken a while for me but just taking those first steps of putting the focus on  me and that sounds arrogant and it's not arrogant.  The focus should be on me because if I'm not healthy, there's no way my customers can be  
**0:24:26-0:24:36:**  healthy.  Well, and it's what you mean by the focus.  When you're talking about people like you that when you're working 20 hours a day, you're  
**0:24:36-0:24:52:**  not a selfish personality because if you were, you wouldn't be working 20 hours a day.  There's a difference between what you mean by focus.  If you're just focusing on how do I feel right now and how should I feel, that's different  
**0:24:52-0:25:10:**  than how can I process this stress and how can I not let these very real stresses tie  me down and how can I get better?  Just like how can I be part of the system instead of separate from it and feel like  
**0:25:10-0:25:22:**  the weight of it all is just on me which I'm sure I know a lot of farmers feel that.  Yeah, I think we all feel that regardless of how we farm or what size or anything and  a lot of it comes back to financial stress at the end of the day.  
**0:25:22-0:25:41:**  We feel like we have to work 20 hours a day to make a payment this month or get the crop  in in time and I think when we get to that point, maybe it's time to give the farm a  hard look because again, working 20 hours a day in hindsight now, I think that is selfish  
**0:25:41-0:25:49:**  because it's taking time away from your family, it's taking time away from yourself and where's  the joy in that?  Yeah, it's a good point.  
**0:25:49-0:26:04:**  It's a different kind of selfish because at least I think of selfish differently but  it's yeah, I can see your point.  No, I agree and I agree with your comment of obviously we're not selfish, we're working  
**0:26:04-0:26:21:**  20 hours a day but that's just the mindset that we have but it really I think is opposite  because we probably are being selfish if we work ourselves that hard.  Well, that goes to a number of regenerative farmers that I've been lucky enough to kind  
**0:26:21-0:26:33:**  of observe and learn from.  They end up, you know, it takes a while but they get to a point where they're able to  really make more money even if they have a little less yield because their expenses go  
**0:26:33-0:26:48:**  lower and then the system is taking care of itself and it's healthier and so there's maybe  a chance for higher price per whatever ton pound.  Once that system gets going, that virtuous cycle, it just kind of keeps building on itself  
**0:26:48-0:27:02:**  but it seems like that really hard point is to tip when you're at that point where your  land's been depleted and you've got the loans to pay and we're going to make this shift  and maybe and trust that yeah, a lot of other people have had good experience and we're  
**0:27:02-0:27:16:**  going to trust that my expenses will come down and that especially when there's just  such a, it just seems so foreign to think about reduced price, reduced expenses is just  as good or better than yield.  
**0:27:16-0:27:31:**  Yeah and I think those will kind of lead us back to full circle where we started this  conversation but I think you know obviously that transition is it's dangerous, it's scary,  it's extremely difficult and I think that's where it's extremely important that you have  
**0:27:31-0:27:43:**  a team.  That team obviously has to include your immediate family, your spouse, kids, parents but your  bankers got to be on that team, your agronomist has to be on that team and if they don't have  
**0:27:43-0:28:00:**  the same vision, first of all, you're going to have to fire some of them or get them on  your side or you're going to, you know, your stress level, your depression levels are going  to skyrocket if they aren't and then when you do get to that other side and you know  
**0:28:00-0:28:17:**  obviously the whole goal is to making farms more profitable with less stress, less physical  and mental stress and when you get to that point then the question has to become do I  need this much land because that's the whole goal for me of regenerating a community is  
**0:28:17-0:28:29:**  how do you regenerate a community is by having more farmers.  That's what builds a rural community is having, you know, if we double the farm population  you're now building a school in these small towns instead of consolidating schools and  
**0:28:29-0:28:44:**  you need a grocery store again and all these things because you suddenly have more kids  so you're now not just growing kids, you're growing buildings and business and all of  this so you know the farmers are going to start asking themselves how much land do I  
**0:28:44-0:28:59:**  need if I've increased my profitability 20% can I cut back 20% on my acres and allow another  farmer into the community and that goes against everything that we've been brainwashed with  for the last 50 to 75 years in rural America.  
**0:28:59-0:29:13:**  Oh that's fascinating.  How can people experience your farm or follow you on social media?  Do you have a blog or all these kind of things where they can learn more about your journey?  
**0:29:13-0:29:18:**  I don't blog.  I need to but I don't.  I do have Facebook.  
**0:29:18-0:29:31:**  I've got a personal page, Gail Fuller and a business page, Circle 7 by Fuller Farms.  I'm on LinkedIn.  I do have an Instagram account but I'm thinking of dropping that so those are ways and then  
**0:29:31-0:29:40:**  we another way to enjoy our farm is to come see us.  We have an Airbnb.  We have fields, you know, our annual field school that Jill helped co-found 11 years  
**0:29:40-0:29:56:**  ago and we have other on-farm dinners and things.  That's the best way just to come see us and hang out and soak it all in in person.  And do you do, you obviously do the sales of the meat directly to consumers but do you  
**0:29:56-0:30:05:**  do catering or events or other ways that people interact with your farm or are you thinking  about that in the future?  Yeah, we don't do catering.  
**0:30:05-0:30:19:**  We do on-farm dinners.  I love to cook but I would rather let a really high big-name chef come to my farm and make  dinner for me and a whole bunch of my friends and just have it like that.  
**0:30:19-0:30:30:**  So we do three or four of those a year.  They're a lot of fun and they're always different and it's a great way to, because to me food  is the great connector.  
**0:30:30-0:30:43:**  And when you attend one of our dinners and you know as America becomes more and more  stressed, it's been amazing at these dinners because we have 40 to 50 people show up, many  of them urban, not all.  
**0:30:43-0:30:58:**  Obviously there's going to be left and right and you know all walks of life and we sit  down for an hour and a half or two hours and there's no fistfights and there's cheers and  there are high fives and there's hugs and we let the, you know we just say screw the  
**0:30:58-0:31:06:**  rest of the world.  We're here enjoying a meal breaking bread together and there's just nothing like it.  So yeah we do that.  
**0:31:06-0:31:18:**  We do like all of our educational events, food is a focus.  We bring chefs to our field school and cook our meals and we talk about food and we celebrate  the food while we're being educated.  
**0:31:18-0:31:30:**  So we always make food a focus.  We are selling product in a couple of different restaurants.  Yeah and I think that's been a bit of a pet peeve of mine as we talk about regenerative  
**0:31:30-0:31:48:**  agriculture and obviously the big thing with most of us farmers now is nutrient density  and human health and we're trying to tie all that and you go to a so-called regen event  and they throw out a bunch of crap food at you and we've got to lead by example.  
**0:31:48-0:32:03:**  If we're going to be talking about human health, we've got to be leading by example and so  we're not perfect here.  We still have to buy some stuff that's not as clean as we want but we use all of our  
**0:32:03-0:32:19:**  food that we can and then we go to our neighbors and we source as much clean food from our  neighbors because that's what it's about is making them strong too financially and physically  and then but sometimes we still have to fill in some blank spots here and there with conventional  
**0:32:19-0:32:35:**  food yet but hopefully that changes soon.  Are you seeing a growing interest around Kansas where you're at?  I mean you're right there in the middle of big ag land but are you seeing interests and  
**0:32:35-0:32:47:**  people kind of being drawn to this path that you're on?  Yeah, patience is not my strong suit.  I'm sure that's shocking to you.  
**0:32:47-0:33:02:**  Mine either.  To me, this should have happened 10 years ago but it hasn't but yeah, it's growing.  I think the financial woes in agriculture the last few years has helped speed that up  
**0:33:02-0:33:20:**  but I've really been surprised as I talk more about quality of life and mental health that  really hits home a lot and I think that's going to be a big driver for farmers.  They can just make a living but live an easier life that's going to help sell them on this  
**0:33:20-0:33:32:**  I think but I think obviously sadly at the end of the day, it's still about money.  It's still about profit.  We still have to make payments and I think as soon as we can get the markets in place,  
**0:33:32-0:33:41:**  we can flip millions of acres.  I think there's just lots of farms waiting on that market to come into play and that's  something we've got to get sped up.  
**0:33:41-0:33:52:**  I think the demand is there on the coast.  We're seeing it or you wouldn't have all of these companies trying to find a way to buy  regenerative products but until we get those two completely connected, it's probably going  
**0:33:52-0:34:03:**  to be a little slower than I want to see it.  Well, the last thing I want to do is now we've talked about all of this and so it's got on  your brain but trying to kind of summarize it all down, I'm going to ask you to fill  
**0:34:03-0:34:12:**  in the sentence, regenerative agriculture is?  Regenerative agriculture is life.  Wow.  
**0:34:12-0:34:17:**  That's good.  That's good.  Yeah.  
**0:34:17-0:34:32:**  Restoring, rejuvenating, learning.  You know, I used to talk about when I started out of the conventional world and started  cutting back on pesticides and I was doing a lot of speaking at conventional conferences  
**0:34:32-0:34:51:**  and I got started being asked to speak at organic conferences because cover crops are  pretty new there also and I was shocked because I just viewed organic as awesome outside of  tillage but I realized sadly that organic and conventional agriculture are basically  
**0:34:51-0:34:58:**  the same.  They're both systems designed to kill.  Both those farmers wake up every day, what do I have to kill today?  
**0:34:58-0:35:06:**  Is it a bug?  Is it a weed or what?  We need to start waking up every day thinking, what do I need to grow today?  
**0:35:06-0:35:10:**  Not what do I need to kill?  What do I need to grow?  That's golden.  
**0:35:10-0:35:26:**  See, this is why I do the summary at the end.  You've been listening to Tasting Terroir, a podcast made possible by a magical collaboration  between the following companies and supporters all working together to help farmers, chefs,  
**0:35:26-0:35:44:**  food companies and consumers to build healthier soil for a healthier world.  Risotera owned by Dr. Joe Cloperton, Risotera is an international food security consulting  company providing expert guidance for creating healthy soils that yield tasty nutrient-dense  
**0:35:44-0:35:54:**  foods.  Check us out at risotera.com.  That's R-H-I-Z-O-T-E-R-R-A.com.  
**0:35:54-0:36:08:**  And the Global Food and Farm online community, an ad-free global social network and soil  health streaming service that provides information and connections that help you apply the science  and practice of improving soil health.  
**0:36:08-0:36:21:**  Join us at globalfoodandfarm.com.  And from listeners like you who support us through our Patreon account at patreon.com  slash tasting terroir.  
**0:36:21-0:36:32:**  Patrons receive access to our full length interviews and selected additional materials.  Patrons will also have the opportunity to submit questions that we will answer on the  podcast.  
**0:36:32-0:36:51:**  Tune in next week to hear more interviews and insights with myself, Sarah Harper, and  Dr. Joe Cloperton, as well as the regenerative farmers, chefs and emerging food companies  in the Global Food and Farm online community and beyond.  
**0:36:51-0:37:06:**  If you like our work, please give us a five-star rating and share the podcast with your friends.  Thanks so much for listening and for helping us get the word out about this new resource  to taste the health of your food.  
**0:37:06-0:37:28:**  Until next week, stay curious, keep improving, and don't stop believing that better is possible  when knowledge is available.  