### Tasting Terroir  (2022-00-21)
**0:00:00-0:00:29:**  We're starting out with Adam Chappell's regeneratively grown rice.  I'm super excited.  He's been texting me the last two days asking how the milling's been going.  We are actually going to be milling brown rice flour, white rice flour.  And then we also have his rice that we're going to bag up and just sell as rice.  
**0:00:45-0:00:47:**  Yeah, this is so exciting.  You've been, I've been following this journey for years.  You've been, you know, you've gotten to know Adam, you've met in person.  You really have looked at his growing practices and to return to the most simple  thing, which is a farmer working directly with a brand.  
**0:01:01-0:01:03:**  What I had hoped for all day.  You're making it happen, Jen.  You're living my dream.  You made it happen actually, because if it wasn't for me knowing you through  another business that we worked with and then came, you started Grounded Growth  
**0:01:17-0:01:20:**  Network, I would have never met any of the farmers.  And now we're even, you know, Grounded Growth is part of even a bigger system,  Joe Clapperton's network, and I'm glad that Grounded Growth still exists and  that you're still here doing this because I just was thinking about it and it made  me tear up too, like, I don't think I'd be here without you.  
**0:01:36-0:01:38:**  Oh, so make me tear up.  Look, now you're making me cry.  But yes, yes.  That's what every interviewer aspires to make the guest cry.  Well, yeah, and my passion for saving the earth and being nice to it.  
**0:01:50-0:01:50:**  Yeah.  Since I was a kid, you know, I didn't know how I was going to get about doing that  as an adult, and this is my way of contributing is through supporting the  regenerative farmers who are trying to save our planet from the climate change  and in exchange, being able to support them by having my own food brand and  
**0:02:07-0:02:12:**  putting their product directly into our food and then providing that to the  consumer and then just keeps going on and on and on.  Welcome back to our podcast, Tasting Terroir, a journey that helps you cut  through the marketing claims of, quote, better for you food by understanding the  link between healthy soil and the flavor and health of your food.  
**0:02:47-0:02:49:**  I'm your host, Sarah Harper.  That clip was from an interview I did with my dear friend, Jennifer Koehr,  owner of around the world gourmet pizza company.  Jennifer has been working hard to bring the regenerative products farmers  grow to market for several years now.  
**0:03:04-0:03:07:**  And she is now actually doing it.  As you may recall from our episode last week, the big brands that you've heard  about are not really bringing regenerative ingredients to your door.  They're doing a lot of marketing about it, but they're not really buying in a  big way the ingredients that could make the products you buy regenerative.  
**0:03:26-0:03:32:**  To find this regenerative food source, you need to think small and local, like  the farmers we've interviewed in the podcast so far, who are not only growing  food in a regenerative way, but also creating ways for the public to buy  directly from them.  This week, we explore how a small food manufacturer sees the issue and how her  
**0:03:49-0:03:53:**  dedication and perseverance are almost single handedly bringing you the  opportunity to taste the difference regenerative rice can make.  Jennifer Kohler is one of those people who just never quits.  A finance major turned baker and then small business owner.  Jennifer has been making some of the best gluten-free pizza crusts on  
**0:04:09-0:04:10:**  the market for several years.  Being a gluten-free consumer myself for some 12 years now, I can tell you I've  tried every possible GF pizza option out there.  And while some of them have gotten pretty good, there are still a number of them  that are far less delicious than their gluten-y counterparts.  
**0:04:29-0:04:35:**  Jennifer's pizza, however, is so good that it can pass as a regular thin  pizza crust.  In fact, some of the folks that buy her pizzas in her store in rural Ohio don't  even know that they're gluten-free.  More about all that later.  
**0:04:47-0:04:52:**  In this episode, I want you to really absorb just what it takes to bring  better ingredients into the products that you buy.  How much effort and risk and expense and how much of it is being born by those  who can least afford to do it because they believe in it so much.  You really have so much power to shape the course of the food industry by  
**0:05:14-0:05:19:**  supporting dedicated true believers like Jennifer and the others that we're  profiling in this podcast.  For sure, if you are in the Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, or Columbus, Ohio areas,  and you care about better food and the planet or both, you are going to love  this brand and this woman just like I do.  
**0:05:36-0:05:40:**  Here's my interview with Jennifer Kohler, owner of Around the World Gourmet and  Regen Ball.  Hi, Jen, how are you?  Hi, I am good.  I've been a little bit emotional this morning thinking about all the things  
**0:05:59-0:06:00:**  that we're doing.  It's so great.  Yeah.  Well, very exciting.  Good.  
**0:06:04-0:06:09:**  Before we get into that, tell everybody who you are and what your business is,  what you're doing and where you're at.  It's Jennifer Kohler.  I'm in Eastern Ohio.  I'm right near the Ohio River.  
**0:06:18-0:06:25:**  I'm about 45 minutes southwest of Pittsburgh and about two hours east of  Columbus.  This is my hometown area.  I live in St.  Clairsville.  
**0:06:31-0:06:36:**  I'm from Belmont County and our business is located in Bellaire, Ohio.  So anybody in the Pittsburgh area that wanted to take a regenerative trip could  just hop in the car.  45 minutes?  45 minutes.  
**0:06:43-0:06:44:**  There you go.  Not that far.  Yeah.  Yeah.  And so here I am with a business, a food company.  
**0:06:51-0:06:56:**  Kohler Foods International is the corporate name, doing business as Around  the World Gourmet, which is my food brand, and now also doing business as  Regenerative Mills.  So, and we'll talk about that here in a minute.  And what products do you make?  
**0:07:08-0:07:14:**  So we are a manufacturer of gluten-free vegan pizza crusts.  I have other recipes that I have.  That don't taste like it, I might add.  Yes, that does not taste like it.  Some of those can be a little taste challenged, if you will.  
**0:07:25-0:07:31:**  And I have had the good fortune to sample them many times and can  attest that they are, you know, you really can't tell the difference.  And in fact, a number of your patrons don't even know that they're  That's true.  That's true.  
**0:07:39-0:07:40:**  Yeah.  We are manufacturing these gluten-free pizza crusts and having distributors  pick them up.  And then we ship, we ship things out as well that are to like the University of  Iowa and Denison University here in Ohio.  
**0:07:54-0:08:01:**  We just got into a pizza chain called Pizza Joe's out of Pennsylvania, Western  PA that has 42 units and all those pizza crusts just got picked up today.  So yeah, the pizza crust that you're talking about, we do have a small  retail front and I wanted to prove to everybody that our pizza crusts are  the best and they do not taste like the typical gluten-free crust.  
**0:08:20-0:08:25:**  And so I forced the entire Ohio Valley here to eat our pizza.  And they don't, they can't tell the difference.  So we even on online apps like DoorDash and delivery.com, we don't  even say that it's gluten-free.  Even on our menu, it doesn't say that.  
**0:08:39-0:08:40:**  It's just thin crust pizza.  Yeah.  Well, maybe you should in case there are people nearby that could  say you have a gluten-free option.  The one we do, we have that on there too.  
**0:08:50-0:08:50:**  Okay.  We say that we have a gluten-free option, but it's actually all the same crust.  That's so good.  I love that story because you took over, you know, there had been a  convenience store there and it had been famous for its pepperoni rolls  
**0:09:03-0:09:04:**  and people really loved them.  And so, but you, you know, you added to this beloved tradition by creating  a gluten-free version of the pepperoni rolls for people, right?  That's correct.  Yeah.  
**0:09:13-0:09:13:**  Yeah.  Pepperoni rolls are, you know, you can't just say that it's a  chicken roll roll roll, it's a supporting roll as a Hellmuth  Ch  press. You bake it. Yeah. It's called a pepperoni roll.  
**0:09:34-0:09:36:**  The exciting part that you'll talk more about later is that  you've added a mill to your to your business too. And what are  you going to be milling?  We're going to be milling flour, and specifically, as much as  possible regenerative flour.  
**0:09:49-0:09:51:**  Made out of not wheat.  Not wheat, because it has to be gluten free in my building, but  I can't have wheat, barley or rye in here. It would just get  through all it would get everywhere. And we can't have  the cross contamination. But we're starting out with Adam  
**0:10:05-0:10:09:**  Adam Chapels regeneratively grown rice. I'm super excited.  He's been texting me the last two days asking how the milling  has been going. We're starting with 16,000 pounds because I  just I need the I don't have enough space for any more at the  moment. And he has the space. He's keeping it there on his  
**0:10:23-0:10:28:**  farm until I'm ready for the next shipment. We are actually  going to be milling brown rice flour, white rice flour, we can  do 100 mash, we can do 200 mash, even finer. And then we also  have his rice that we're going to bag up and just sell his  rice for cooking.  
**0:10:45-0:10:48:**  This is so exciting. You've been I've been following this journey  for years. You've been you know, you've gotten to know Adam,  you've you've met in person, you really have looked at his  growing practices and and so many hurdles to overcome to get  a direct relationship to it's to be as simple to return to the  
**0:11:05-0:11:08:**  most simple thing, which is a farmer working directly with a  brand, what I had hoped for all day. Yeah, you're making it  happen, Jen, you're living your dream.  You made it happen, actually. Because if it wasn't for me  knowing you through another business that we worked with,  
**0:11:21-0:11:24:**  and then came, you started Grounded Growth Network, I would  have never met any of the farmers. And now we're even, you  know, Grounded Growth is part of even a bigger system, Jill  Clapperton's network. And I'm glad that Grounded Growth still  exists and that you're still here doing this because I just  
**0:11:41-0:11:43:**  was thinking about it. And it made me tear up to like, I don't  think I'd be here without you.  Oh, so make me tear up.  Look, now you're making me cry.  Yes, yes.  
**0:11:51-0:11:55:**  What every interviewer aspires to make the guest cry.  Yeah, and my passion for saving the earth and being nice to it.  Yeah. Since I was a kid, you know, I didn't know how I was  gonna get about doing that as an adult. And this is my way of  contributing is through supporting the regenerative  
**0:12:10-0:12:14:**  farmers who are trying to save our planet from climate change  and in exchange, being able to support them by having my own  food brand and putting their product directly into our food  and then providing that to the consumer and then just keeps  going on and on and on. So now I have other other farmers  
**0:12:29-0:12:32:**  reaching out that want sorghum, their sorghum that they've grown  regeneratively, milled and you know, millet, teff, and other  brands. Yeah, we can buy the flour from you and put it into  their ingredients. Exactly. But yeah, all these great people in  our community that you're able to, you're on the same path,  
**0:12:50-0:12:53:**  but you know, it's hard to overcome these hurdles alone. So  that's part of the point of the community. Well, the other thing  in doing these interviews, I have heard a lot of great, great  insights about what is regenerative. But you know, a  number of people have talked about it beyond just the  
**0:13:06-0:13:11:**  practices on the farm, but you know, regenerating the community  around around them and that regenerating themselves and  their family as part of being part of this work. And it really  struck me with you at a whole different level. I mean,  certainly there's the regenerative work that you're  
**0:13:23-0:13:27:**  doing with the farmer, really taking on that small retail  store, there aren't a whole lot of you're in kind of a food  desert, right? I mean, there aren't a lot of places to get  fresh fruit around you. And, and certainly not ones that are  gluten free, probably, you know, yeah. And, you know, so you like  
**0:13:43-0:13:46:**  taking over that and milling your manufacturing your pizza  crust, and now milling where you are in rural, you know, Ohio,  you're keeping those jobs and the impact that I know you've  had in those people's lives. And it's been challenging. There are  a lot of things, you know, that are challenging in the rural  
**0:14:02-0:14:06:**  economy, and that your business keeps them going as well as the  planet, you know, it's a really regenerative beyond, you know,  the agriculture.  It's a lot of education, for sure. And I think that is what  we have to do in general, even across the world is to just  
**0:14:20-0:14:23:**  continue to educate everyone on regenerative agriculture. The  education part is just continuing to tell people what  regenerative is, why I'm doing it. And we actually have a  ribbon cutting going on tomorrow where a lot of the people here  locally are invited to come for our new mill, and we're doing  
**0:14:37-0:14:40:**  pizza tasting. So I think that'll even be more education  that local news stations are here and we've sent press  releases out.  What is your definition of regenerative agriculture?  The definition of regenerative agriculture to me is about the  
**0:14:51-0:14:54:**  climate change part of it. And I know that there are other  benefits, obviously. But regenerative agriculture is a  process that I think is a continuing process. It's not  just one thing, it's multiple things that can be done on the  farms. You know, the no till obviously, that has to, the no  
**0:15:12-0:15:15:**  till has to happen is what I mean, the tilling has to stop.  The first thing that has to happen is, I feel like if you're  going to be a regenerative farmer is you have to know, no  till or low till, for sure. Then you can, there's other things  that you can do, like the intercropping and the  
**0:15:27-0:15:32:**  covercropping and not using as much water. And then, you know,  I know that they have difficulty with the weed control. So then  you have to think about that. And then there's also the  animals being brought on. So there's a lot of different ways  to be regenerative. But definitely the first thing for  
**0:15:46-0:15:52:**  me is that this carbon needs to stay in the soil and to keep the  planet cool and help with the climate change issues that we  have, that definitely is mandatory.  And from what we've learned, you know, there, there aren't a  whole lot of rice growers that are doing what Adam is doing in  
**0:16:05-0:16:09:**  Arkansas. So that's kind of a nice, a rare thing, to give him  a specific market and a path to keep doing what he's doing and  for other farmers to maybe follow his practices. He's been  featured all sorts of different places. And if you just do a  search for Adam Japel, you'll find all sorts of interviews  
**0:16:22-0:16:26:**  he's done. And in the farm world, he's kind of famous. So  it's it's super, it's such a wonderful step forward that that  is a market for him. And for other and a signal to other  farmers that making these changes, they can actually  benefit from that financially, not just a pat on the back and  
**0:16:42-0:16:49:**  feature does a box, which is nice and all but yeah, it's a  real it's a real market connection.  It is and there are going to be for the farmers out there that  are listening to this, you are going to struggle, there are  going to be things that you're not going to know, just like in  
**0:16:59-0:17:03:**  our process, the farmers normally go and just drop off,  you know, their grains to a silo. And they never had to  think about how long is it going to take for me to get into the  cleaners because they already have customers in line. So that  was one of the things we had to figure out. And, you know, rice  
**0:17:17-0:17:20:**  being harvested in November thinking we're going to get it  immediately. And then, you know, learning that we had to wait and  line for the cleaner, take the brand or take the haul off, and  then also finding out that this race has to be dried to a  certain point, and then tested it before you can even take it  
**0:17:34-0:17:37:**  to the cleaner. We had some growing pains with that. And  there's going to be growing pains for everybody. But you  just, you just take some deep breaths and you keep going  because I certainly I do not want to go live on the moon. And  I don't go live. I don't I like we have a beautiful planet. And  
**0:17:53-0:17:55:**  we just need to make sure that we're not destroying it. It's  been given to us as a gift. Yes. And I feel like there's a lot of  people who don't think like that. They just trash it. They  just throw their cups out, litter all over the place, very  destructive behavior. So regeneration of this earth is  
**0:18:11-0:18:15:**  very important to me and future generations. The farmers that  are doing this and practicing this way and leading, you know,  leading us all down the right path is that's who I want to  have relationships with.  Because I know we've been on a small business journey,  
**0:18:28-0:18:33:**  solopreneur. You have more than you're not solo, but small,  small business path. You've been on that path for some time. And  it's so hard, and especially through COVID. And through, you  know, there are all sorts of curves that you've been thrown.  And it seems like, you know, I know a lot of people would have  
**0:18:47-0:18:52:**  let go of this regenerative path of sourcing because it is an  added, potentially an added expense. I think it's going to  be added value too. But there's been such pressure. And, you  know, I've talked with so many bigger brands that aren't  willing to do what you are doing, you know, that are  
**0:19:08-0:19:13:**  marketing on regenerative, but aren't anywhere near, you know,  the direct connection to a farm and knowing of the practices  that you have and that you're going to make possible for all  these brands now to buy regeneratively grown rice and  rice flour and other gluten free flowers.  
**0:19:26-0:19:29:**  I always feel like I'm behind and that we're behind. We are  behind. I don't want to wait. I mean, I'm not sure what the big  companies are waiting for or what their strategy is.  They're waiting for you to be successful and then they'll  follow me. Waiting for someone else to prove the concept that  
**0:19:44-0:19:48:**  consumers do actually want it. And it saddens me because the  people with the most money to take the risk have not done it.  And, you know,  Yeah. And the ones that don't have the money, we have to go  out.  
**0:19:56-0:19:59:**  Well, you're living on the belief in it.  Yeah. We have to go through the struggle to get there, but it'll  be worth it.  Yeah, I know. This is such a huge breakthrough to actually  have flour. Like you texted me a picture of, you know, the first  
**0:20:10-0:20:15:**  flour that we made. And how exciting. I mean, how exciting  that you now have the ability to turn this. That's been the big  barrier to take a crop and get it into an ingredient because  most of the mills don't just don't want to deal with it. It's  too small of a project or they don't want to separate it out or  
**0:20:30-0:20:33:**  it's too new or, you know, any excuse you can imagine we've  heard it because the first option wasn't for you to  necessarily build your own.  No, I wasn't anticipating that. And then one day I'm like, I  don't know, these things don't scare me. Like it scares some  
**0:20:46-0:20:47:**  people.  Yes. Like me. You're going to do the next thing. I'm like, okay,  what are you doing?  Yeah. Well, you know, and I got to learn how to use it  yesterday. You know, the guy, the engineering company that  
**0:21:03-0:21:06:**  had bought the milling equipment from, he drove in from Iowa two  days ago. We started it up Tuesday and then yesterday I got  my training and it's really not that hard. I mean, yeah, I'm  gonna have to lift some, some bags or somebody here is gonna  have to lift some bags. But this equipment, I mean, it's not as  
**0:21:25-0:21:29:**  small. It's not small, but it's also huge. The biggest one  either. The milling equipment that we have can run up to, if I  really maxed it out, 842 pounds per hour. And that's a smaller,  that's like one of the smaller this, this tight mill, a  pulverizer. It does just that. If you go with a hammer mill, or  
**0:21:48-0:21:51:**  milling rights, you basically have to run it through more than  one time to try to get the fineness to it. So this one, you  do not have to do that. I can run it through one time and  still get 200 mesh, which is really fine, really fun. Baby  powder on. I did pay a little extra in upgrading some pieces  
**0:22:06-0:22:09:**  of equipment so that when we do need to expand to the height,  the bigger size pulverizer, the other pieces are already in  place, and can handle the bigger motor size.  You know, we talked about your definition of regenerative. And  in some of the ways you're describing, you know, what  
**0:22:23-0:22:25:**  you're doing working with Adam, that's, that's how you're  practicing it, right? That's how your company is practicing it.  But are there any other pieces you want to add about that?  What are the things that we're doing as a brand? Yeah, all of  our containers that we have here are like to go containers, I've  
**0:22:37-0:22:40:**  gotten rid of all styrofoam that was in this building when I took  over and we now have plant based containers, compostable  containers that we use. We have energy efficient equipment. You  know, we try not to waste water. We don't waste water. We don't  like to waste anything we recycle. So when I called the  
**0:22:58-0:23:03:**  local recycling and company and they have a bunch of bins that  they brought down to us, we could recycle. We're wanting to  be a benefit corporation. So I think we're ready for that. I  just felt the flour, I stuck it in my hand yesterday. And it was  just very fulfilling. It's like a big grin on my face. And  
**0:23:19-0:23:22:**  holding Adam's rice. Should I walk out so you can see? Should I  take my last? And that is what you're using now to make your  pizzas? Yes, the pizza crust. Yeah. And other brands are now  lucky enough to be able to buy flour from you right? To make  their regenerative rice products. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And  
**0:23:40-0:23:43:**  then after that, we'll, I've been in some conversations with  other farmers that are, they've got sorghum and the white  sorghum. So we'll be talking to them further about milling that.  Coming back around, you've talked all about this, all this  great stuff. I'm going to have you sum up what regenerative  
**0:24:00-0:24:03:**  means to you in a couple sentences, which I know that's  hard, hard to define. So fill in the sentence. regenerative  agriculture is regenerative agriculture is a way of helping  with climate change and global warming. By no tilling on our  farms, keeping the the earth and all its ecosystem in place. We  
**0:24:23-0:24:29:**  can have more nutrient dense foods from this. It's important  for us to continue down this path and having regenerative  agriculture and the farmers doing these practices, so that  we can help with, like I said, the global warming, having more  nutrient dense foods. And that's what it that's what it means to  
**0:24:44-0:24:47:**  me. Do you think it's something that consumers are looking for?  Yeah, I think that there are some consumers that definitely  care about this. We've seen that they've cared a lot about  organic in the past. And this is just the next step of them  caring, you know, there's people that care about your bodies and  
**0:25:06-0:25:10:**  what you you are what you eat. The thing with the organic right  now is that most of them still have to till because of weeds  control and I do believe that consumers are going to love  this, they're going to love the connection with the farmers and  the farmer. They're going to love the fact that it's helping  
**0:25:25-0:25:30:**  what you know, they're actually able to by eating, let's say our  pizza. Okay, we actually have a tagline healthier for you and  our planet, and also save the planet one pizza at a time. I  think they're gonna feel like they're part of something  bigger. Again, it's education, education, education and  
**0:25:44-0:25:47:**  marketing. Like you have to let people know that you exist.  Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania is not that far from you. That's a nice  city. And Columbus is not that far. And it's huge. It's Yeah,  it's amazing. I mean, yeah. Normally, you wouldn't see a  place like what I have here, especially on the retail end  
**0:26:04-0:26:09:**  being where I'm at. We are listed on some of the apps for  finding gluten free locations like restaurants. And let's see  in the last two weeks, I've served somebody from the DC  area in Northern Virginia. They were a mother and daughter were  in Indiana, I believe, visiting a college and they were coming  
**0:26:26-0:26:30:**  back through. And they found my place because Interstate 70  runs right through our county. And so they stopped here for a  bite. And we actually had some tables up so they could sit down  finally, because we were just a takeout place. But now we have  dining. And they were so excited. And they actually said  
**0:26:44-0:26:46:**  to me, I wish we had a place like this where I lived. And I'm  like, you live near DC. I'm like, is there? And I'm thinking,  wow, okay, well, maybe, you know, that was a compliment. The  other there was, was it yesterday or day before a woman  came in with her two children. And her son had celiac disease,  
**0:27:04-0:27:07:**  and they were excited. And I said, have you not been here  before? She's like, No, I'm from Massachusetts. Okay, what are  you doing here? She said, Well, I have family that live in  Steubenville and Martin's Ferry, which are two towns north of  here, about 30 minutes and about 15 minutes away. And she had not  
**0:27:26-0:27:30:**  been here for like six years. But she came back to visit and  got the app out and saw that there was a gluten free place  here and came down and she's like, this is amazing. The food  is great. The pizza is great. So they were really happy.  You know, if you have people in Columbus, in Pittsburgh, that  
**0:27:45-0:27:48:**  want to be connected to a brand into a farm, they're really  blazing the path, they can do it. They can, they can order  flour from you, they can order products from you, they can, you  know, they can help you help this whole market grow. They  can be part of that.  
**0:28:02-0:28:05:**  And you know how we had, we had talked previously, Sarah, about,  we thought it was going to be a challenge because I'm in mostly  food service and not in retail stores. We didn't think that  food service would care as much. Well, that chain restaurant that  I just told you about the pizza parlor, Pizza Joe's out of  
**0:28:22-0:28:27:**  Newcastle, PA, they have the 42 units, when I went up there to  meet with them, they actually have a sustainability. So the  program, and that was one of the, I mean, obviously, the Pizza  Crest had to taste good, or they're not going to buy. But  they liked that I was checking off all the boxes for them.  
**0:28:44-0:28:47:**  Because, you know, their father had started the chain, but then  the two daughters who are adults and are running it now, he's  still involved, they've created the sustainability program and  love the fact that we were going to have regeneratively,  regenerative product.  
**0:29:01-0:29:04:**  If you're in Pennsylvania is go have a pizza, Pizza Joe's.  Yeah. Or even in Youngstown, I think Youngstown, Ohio, they  even have some of their shops.  I mean, how easy do we have to make it for you people? Right.  You know, easy has Jen made it for you.  
**0:29:19-0:29:24:**  And Adam and Seth Chappell grew the rice. They ship, you know, we  have a cleaner down there that he knew that he got it clean, it  gets to me, I mill it, making it into a pizza crust, and then the  pizza crust gets shipped out through Pennsylvania Macaroni,  one of my distributors out of Pittsburgh, and then gets to  
**0:29:36-0:29:37:**  Pizza Joe's.  That's awesome. And that's such a great story. I'm so glad it  has a happy ending.  I know it's very exciting. And I'm as tired as I am this week,  from last week and this week and getting to this point, I am  
**0:29:50-0:29:53:**  ecstatic that I feel like it's Christmas because it's Earth Day  tomorrow. I'm just so happy. This is happening right on  Earth Day.  You've been listening to Tasting Terroir, a podcast made  possible by a magical collaboration between the  
**0:30:18-0:30:21:**  following companies and supporters, all working together  to help farmers, chefs, food companies, and consumers to  build healthier soil for a healthier world. Risotera,  owned by Dr. Jill Cloperton, Risotera is an international  food security consulting company, providing expert  
**0:30:37-0:30:42:**  guidance for creating healthy soils that yield tasty, nutrient  dense foods. Check us out at risotera.com. That's R-H-I-Z-O-T-E-R-R-A  dot com. And the global food and farm online community, an ad  free global social network and soil health streaming service  that provides information and connections that help you apply  
**0:31:03-0:31:06:**  the science and practice of improving soil health. Join us  at globalfoodandfarm.com. And from listeners like you who  support us through our Patreon account at patreon.com slash  Tasting Terroir. Patrons receive access to our full length  interviews and selected additional materials. Patrons  
**0:31:24-0:31:28:**  will also have the opportunity to submit questions that we will  answer on the podcast. Tune in next week to hear more  interviews and insights with myself, Sarah Harper, and Dr.  Jill Cloperton, as well as the regenerative farmers, chefs and  emerging food companies in the global food and farm online  
**0:31:43-0:31:51:**  community and beyond. If you like our work, please give us a  five star rating and share the podcast with your friends.  Thanks so much for listening and for helping us get the word out  about this new resource to taste the health of your food. Until  next week, stay curious, keep improving, and don't stop  
**0:32:10-0:32:14:**  believing that better is possible when knowledge is  available.  