---
title: What Your Food Ate New Book Explains The Link Between Soil Microbiome Food Flavor Your Health
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### Tasting Terroir  (2022-12-07)  
### Author(s): Sara Hessenflow Harper + Jill Clapperton  

**0:00:00-0:00:22:**  We all love a tasty meal, but there's more going on than simple pleasure.  It turns out our own bodies possess some pretty impressive biological tools for detecting  what is in the things we eat and drink.  
**0:00:22-0:00:35:**  And just as for ruminants, flavors inform our body wisdom.  Welcome back to our podcast, Tasting Terroir, a journey that explores the link between healthy  soil and the flavor of your food.  
**0:00:35-0:00:49:**  I'm your host, Sarah Harper.  That was an excerpt from my new favorite book, What Your Food Ate, How to Heal Our Land and  Reclaim Our Health by David R. Montgomery and Anne Bickley.  
**0:00:49-0:01:02:**  And truthfully, I cannot say enough about this book.  It's just great, especially for the topics that we're interested in on this podcast,  The Flavor of Food, The Link to Soil Health.  
**0:01:02-0:01:17:**  We could do 10 episodes just on this book.  And I'm excited to bring to you an in-depth interview with the authors of the book and  my co-host, Dr. Jill Clapperton, in just a moment.  
**0:01:17-0:01:31:**  But before we dive into that, I want to give you just a few excerpts from chapter 14 of  the book, The Flavor of Health, because of course, we are on the journey to find and  talk about the link between soil health and the flavor of food.  
**0:01:31-0:01:43:**  But it can often be difficult because the science is still emerging on flavor and that  link.  And Dave and Anne have helpfully included some of that science and put some framing  
**0:01:43-0:01:56:**  around this topic that I think is particularly interesting.  So I'm going to read a few excerpts from, again, chapter 14, Flavor of Health.  And I'll give you some background on the authors and then we will dive into our interview with  
**0:01:56-0:02:05:**  them.  Flavor and taste have always been means to an end.  On the surface, they were how we identified and remembered sources of nourishing food  
**0:02:05-0:02:16:**  and avoided toxins.  But on a deeper level, flavor and taste guide us to health imbuing nutrients and compounds.  Just like that of our herds and flocks, our body wisdom developed a nutritional dossier  
**0:02:16-0:02:31:**  through repeated exposure to different flavors.  The agents that collect and help interpret all this intelligence are special cells tucked  deep inside the nose at the doorstep of the brain, along with taste receptors in the mouth.  
**0:02:31-0:02:46:**  Another excerpt, bland tasting fruits and vegetables, it appears, contain fewer health  protective compounds than those suffused with flavor.  At least that's according to a 2006 study published in Science that analyzed hundreds  
**0:02:46-0:02:58:**  of volatiles and tomatoes.  It turned out that the volatiles linked to the most satisfying flavors are rooted in  compounds that directly benefit human health, like cartonoids, phytochemicals essential  
**0:02:58-0:03:11:**  for sound vision and eye health.  The essential fatty acids LA and ALA contributed to the best tasting tomatoes.  In addition, three amino acids also underpinned mouthwatering flavors.  
**0:03:11-0:03:26:**  And these particular amino acids are among those that our bodies cannot make.  The only naturally occurring source of them is in the foods in one's diet.  Another excerpt, it is challenging, if not impossible, to recreate the full nutritional  
**0:03:26-0:03:39:**  profile of the whole foods from which ingredients for ultra-processed foods are sourced.  But that is not the goal.  Adding back the same phytochemicals and fats removed in processing would wreck the formulated  
**0:03:39-0:03:50:**  textures, tastes, and flavors of ultra-processed foods.  And they mentioned earlier that this category includes many of the fake meats and fake cheeses  that you see on the shelves.  
**0:03:50-0:04:04:**  Much easier is to begin with a blank, slight pile of protein or carbs and add vitamins  and minerals back into the final version of the food product, along with various flavorings,  binders, additives, and preservatives.  
**0:04:04-0:04:13:**  But whatever the final concoction, it is not a substitute for all that was lost along the  way.  These foods are no longer a sure guide to healthier ones.  
**0:04:13-0:04:25:**  Flooding ultra-processed foods with flavors may delight the tongue and brain for a moment,  but it leaves the body wisdom to spin aimlessly like a needle of a broken compass searching  for north.  
**0:04:25-0:04:39:**  That the health effects of diet are poorly understood through single components is borne  out in research showing that combinations of various foods and spices can prove more  important than the effects of any individual food or spice.  
**0:04:39-0:04:52:**  For example, data from the Iowa Women's Health Study show that fiber left intact in whole-grain  foods reduced the risk of mortality more than an equivalent amount of fiber added back into  refined-grain foods.  
**0:04:52-0:05:05:**  The benefit wasn't just from the fiber.  Eating whole foods sets up synergies between basic components like fats, fiber, and phytochemicals  when they come naturally packaged together as a plant.  
**0:05:05-0:05:17:**  And finally, drinking polyphenol-rich wine along with meat is another way to get some  phytochemicals in your diet.  This food and drink combination was also found to greatly reduce blood levels of key markers  
**0:05:17-0:05:28:**  for oxidative stress and inflammation related to heart disease.  These effects are likely due to polyphenols inhibiting the oxidation of dietary fat and  beta-carotene.  
**0:05:28-0:05:36:**  In simplifying our modern diet, we've stripped out things that formally interacted to our  benefit.  Honestly I could read the whole book to you.  
**0:05:36-0:05:44:**  It's that good.  I really can't recommend it enough.  But you'll get to hear a lot more about it here in just a minute.  
**0:05:44-0:05:52:**  Just a little more background on the book.  David R. Montgomery and Anne Bickley take us far beyond the well-worn adage of, Are  you really what you eat?  
**0:05:52-0:05:59:**  To deliver a new truth.  The roots of good health start on farms.  Of course they do.  
**0:05:59-0:06:15:**  What Your Food Ate marshals evidence from recent and forgotten science to illustrate  how the health of the soil ripples through that of crops, livestock, and ultimately us.  What they really do a great job of is explaining the soil microbiome and how it affects the  
**0:06:15-0:06:29:**  health of plants, the flavor, and how agricultural practices affect those things too.  In a way that is interesting and understandable.  You don't have to be a soil scientist to get it.  
**0:06:29-0:06:39:**  Just a little background on the authors, David R. Montgomery is a professor at the University  of Washington and a MacArthur Fellow.  His books have been translated into 10 languages.  
**0:06:39-0:06:50:**  Anne Bickley is a biologist and environmental planner whose writing has appeared in Nautilus  Natural History, Smithsonian Fine Gardening, and Best Health.  The couple are married and live in Seattle.  
**0:06:50-0:07:08:**  Their work includes a trilogy of books about soil health, microbiomes, and farming, Dirt  the Erosion of Civilizations, The Hidden Half of Nature, and Growing a Revolution.  As I mentioned I was lucky enough to be joined by my co-host Dr. Jill Cloperton in this discussion  
**0:07:08-0:07:15:**  with the authors.  So without further ado, here we go.  Hello!  
**0:07:15-0:07:19:**  Hey!  There you are!  Hello Jill!  
**0:07:19-0:07:28:**  Hello Sarah!  Hi!  By the way, I love the name Tasting Terroir.  
**0:07:28-0:07:33:**  Oh good!  Yeah, I think that's really...  It took us a long time to get that trademark.  
**0:07:33-0:07:47:**  We have to read it out.  I am so happy to welcome David Montgomery and Anne Bickley to our podcast.  And if you haven't got their book, What Your Food Ate, you really should.  
**0:07:47-0:08:00:**  It's just a great book.  It has so much research and so many really accessible ways to understand, even if you're  not a soil scientist, why the health of the soil matters to both the flavor and the health  
**0:08:00-0:08:08:**  of your food.  And I'm thrilled also that we have my co-host Jill Cloperton.  Dr. Jill Cloperton is joining in this discussion.  
**0:08:08-0:08:22:**  And so we're excited to hear her discussion with them and just all around continuing to  look at this topic.  So to start out, I just wanted to ask Dave and Anne, the book is about obviously what  
**0:08:22-0:08:32:**  your food ate.  And for meat eaters, I think that would make a lot of sense.  They'd say, oh, well, did the cow, the beef that you ate, did it eat grass or grain?  
**0:08:32-0:08:42:**  But what's really striking and unknown to a lot of people is that your plants are eating  food too.  Everything that you eat is eating something else.  
**0:08:42-0:08:53:**  And so how did you maybe decide to go on this journey and look at this topic?  And what were you hoping to find?  Big question.  
**0:08:53-0:09:02:**  Yeah.  You know, it's been kind of a long and interesting journey for us to get to the point where we  were writing about what our food ate, and in particular, sort of how we raise our crops  
**0:09:02-0:09:14:**  and livestock in terms of what that means in terms of what gets into our food.  And we really started sort of looking at the degradation of the soil and what you lose  when you degrade soil health and soil quality.  
**0:09:14-0:09:26:**  I'm a geologist and as a biologist, and you put those two things together and soil is  kind of right in the natural boundary between those.  So that these areas overlap with both of our interests.  
**0:09:26-0:09:36:**  But you know, we in all honesty started looking at the degradation at first, and then Anne's  also a gardener.  And we noticed in writing Dirt, The Erosion of Civilizations, the first book we wrote  
**0:09:36-0:09:50:**  on these topics, as I was writing that, Anne was restoring degraded land in our yard, literally  turning around the problems that I was writing about in that.  And so we wrote a book called The Hidden Half of Nature about the role of microbial life  
**0:09:50-0:10:03:**  in soil fertility and soil health and supporting the human microbiome's role in gut health  as well.  And then what that led us to thinking about, oh, well, if you could restore our yard using  
**0:10:03-0:10:18:**  composting and mulching and tending the microbial life in the soil, what about on farms?  And that led to writing Growing a Revolution.  That whole setup led us to basically realize that, wow, the way we treat our land is actually  
**0:10:18-0:10:32:**  impacting what's getting into our food in ways that the medical sciences regard as things  that could either cultivate human health or undermine human health.  And it's that last point that really led us to writing What's Your Food Ate.  
**0:10:32-0:10:40:**  So it's sort of the end of a long journey that Anne and I have been on.  And that's not the end.  It's the latest step on a long journey that we can get on.  
**0:10:40-0:10:46:**  It can be the end.  We're not at the end yet.  Yeah, right.  
**0:10:46-0:10:49:**  Right.  Yeah.  Yeah, that's right.  
**0:10:49-0:11:09:**  I mean, that comment, Jill, right, agriculture has been going on for 10,000 years.  And here we are all these years later, and we still haven't really quite got our arms  completely around how it is we ought to be farming if we want to get the two basic things  
**0:11:09-0:11:27:**  that we really want out of agriculture, which is a sufficient amount of food and food that  contains the kinds of things that are the leverage points and the critical key factors  in human health.  
**0:11:27-0:11:43:**  And as we write in great detail about in the book, that goes way beyond just the simple  notion of protein, fats, carbohydrates.  I mean, fats are in there, but they're considerably more complicated than I think most people  
**0:11:43-0:11:59:**  realize.  And I think also maybe part of the journey for us, Sarah, is that it's just sort of like  anything, when you begin to look into it, you come to realizations and you start putting  
**0:11:59-0:12:14:**  a story together.  But maybe it's really only when you get considerably into something that you kind of reach this  tipping point of realizing how much you don't know about things.  
**0:12:14-0:12:29:**  Because at first, it's pretty simple to learn the basics, to get yourself up on this  foundation of basics about any given topic.  But then the more you know, then the nuance starts to creep in and the gray and the vague  
**0:12:29-0:12:52:**  and the murkiness, but also at the same time clarity around, oh, okay, there's this noise  on the side, but overall, there's this central thing that is happening.  And that's kind of where I felt like with what your food ate, it really came into at  
**0:12:52-0:13:12:**  least my thinking on this, that farming practices are just...  I realized this before with the other books, but in a whole new way, farming practices  are just so fundamental to human health and we never talk about it other than in terms  
**0:13:12-0:13:19:**  of sufficient number of calories.  So yeah.  I'm gonna interrupt you right there.  
**0:13:19-0:13:28:**  That is a great talking point right there.  What is with the calories?  I mean, we need more than just calories.  
**0:13:28-0:13:43:**  I mean, we make energy from real nutrition.  So what's with us dealing with calories alone?  Yeah, we put far too much emphasis in the last 80 years of really agronomy or agriculture  
**0:13:43-0:13:55:**  as a whole, just focusing on the calorie question.  And of course we need adequate calories to provide the energy to keep our bodies going.  But health does not depend on calories.  
**0:13:55-0:14:11:**  Survival may depend on calories, but health depends on much more than calories.  And it's that connection, sort of how to grow not just enough food to feed the world, but  enough nutritious food to nourish the world that we really took our eyes off of, I think,  
**0:14:11-0:14:23:**  as a collective, as humanity's collective agricultural endeavor over the last 80 years  or so.  We got very good at growing very large harvests of very few things and didn't realize that  
**0:14:23-0:14:36:**  we were undercutting the amount of minerals that were in them, the amount of phytochemicals  that were in them, the kinds of compounds that our bodies use to help maintain health,  such that the point that now we would have to eat many more calories to get those same  
**0:14:36-0:14:45:**  level of health benefits from all those other compounds.  And that means we'd be eating too many calories, which was not good for those of us who have  access to plenty of calories.  
**0:14:45-0:15:00:**  Yeah.  Yeah, I guess I couldn't resist that point because we've been focusing, we've been talking  about what are these, what is the dietary intake and how do we calculate that?  
**0:15:00-0:15:15:**  And it's all based on calories.  And I'm like, wait, no, no, calories?  But we need a certain amount of them, but are we just talking about lipids?  
**0:15:15-0:15:28:**  Where does this come from?  And it's been really interesting, this whole idea between nutrition and science and farming.  I mean, it's like the whole thing is completely disconnected.  
**0:15:28-0:15:39:**  Yeah.  And there's even some really interesting and to me, odd definitions of nutrition in the  nutritional sciences world that sort of leave out things that are known to be important  
**0:15:39-0:15:51:**  for human health, but that you can live just fine without.  So you don't need them to survive, but that if you have more of them, and I'm thinking  of things like that, phytochemicals like beta carotene, or lycopene and tomatoes, things  
**0:15:51-0:16:02:**  that have antioxidant or anti inflammatory effects in our bodies, once we consume them  and plants make them for their own purposes.  But you know, but that are good for us in our food.  
**0:16:02-0:16:12:**  And we've known for a long time that how we farm affects those levels.  But we haven't really paid all that much attention in terms of the nutritional sciences at looking  at that as an element of nutrition.  
**0:16:12-0:16:25:**  And instead of focused on, you know, what does it take to maintain life rather than  maintain quality of life?  Yeah, and I think it's interesting that these motifs that run through agriculture, which  
**0:16:25-0:16:48:**  you put your finger on Jill, like what's with our sort of sheer focus on just calories,  which is about quantity, which is about yield, that that whole idea has flowed over and poured  into the nutrition world, where we're either thinking in terms of total caloric content,  
**0:16:48-0:17:06:**  or we're thinking in terms of do we have adequate levels of, you know, vitamin C, or calcium,  or this thing or that thing.  And the whole sort of problem with that line of thinking is that it's easy to measure those  
**0:17:06-0:17:18:**  individual things, but we still really don't have a great understanding of, you know, how  does that all work together?  And how does that work together in the infant body, the male body, the female body, the  
**0:17:18-0:17:35:**  whatever body through, you know, the life history of a human being and that's dynamic,  that is ever changing from, you know, especially early in life, right?  You ask anyone with kids and it's like, well, I don't know, they weren't doing that last  
**0:17:35-0:17:42:**  week, but they're doing that this week and, you know, it's some new behavior, some new  growth phase, right?  I don't know what I should do.  
**0:17:42-0:17:53:**  Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.  And so we got this idea that the human diet was about solely about sort of, you know,  fuel and energy.  
**0:17:53-0:18:05:**  And some nutritionists started talking about, well, yeah, that's what we need because you  need to grow from an infant into an adult and that is, that's energy, that's the fuel  part.  
**0:18:05-0:18:23:**  And somehow along the way, we lost sight and track of, especially in the Western world,  about how important it is to support things at the cellular level in the human body, right?  So, you know, you get on in your decades, into your 30s, 40s, 50s and so on.  
**0:18:23-0:18:31:**  And it's like, well, we got some hard working cells here and they're building up a bunch  of exhaust inside that cell.  There's got to be cleanup crews.  
**0:18:31-0:18:45:**  There's got to be ways of keeping that cell, you know, functioning.  So you got to be a lot, your cells need to be a lot more tidy, so to speak, about what  they do inside the body.  
**0:18:45-0:19:04:**  And so this is why phytochemicals and probably other compounds and molecules yet to be discovered,  or that we know about, but we're not quite sure what they do, these anti-inflammatory  effects and their effects to just keep ourselves functioning normally.  
**0:19:04-0:19:15:**  That's a huge part of health that is completely different from, but as important as sort of  these energy aspects.  And we just, we sort of got stuck.  
**0:19:15-0:19:29:**  It's like we got stuck in this recording, like, you know, the days when you had vinyl  and it's like, oh, the needle stuck and you just keep going round and round and round.  And so here we are, the vinyl, you know, the needle is stuck in the agricultural vinyl  
**0:19:29-0:19:43:**  of yield, yield, yield, and same with nutrition, you know, calories, calories, calories.  And it's like, wait a minute, all that biomass that is the human body, we got to take care  of that somehow.  
**0:19:43-0:19:50:**  And it's not through a bunch of carbohydrates.  I love that analogy with the exhaust building up.  That was, yeah, I love that.  
**0:19:50-0:20:00:**  Yeah.  One of the things that really struck me too, and you had a number of examples in the book  about, you know, even when you try to make up for like what's been lost with supplementation  
**0:20:00-0:20:15:**  or with fiber or whatever, it doesn't, it doesn't, it still doesn't have the same effect.  Like we've lost this idea of that we need, we come from whole and we need whole that,  you know, yes, you can take a fiber supplement if you're eating nothing but white bread or  
**0:20:15-0:20:24:**  whatever, you know, you've lost fiber here, so we'll take it back there.  And it's the same amount of fiber, so it should all be good.  And it's that very kind of mathematical chemistry kind of thinking.  
**0:20:24-0:20:39:**  Like we can control all the components and just select whichever way, you know, and,  but it's, it's, it's really fascinating that it doesn't work that way, that there is a  wholeness that has to be taken in, in order to get all the benefit, that it matters that  
**0:20:39-0:20:51:**  you eat the fiber with the thing that it was supposed to be in.  Yeah, yeah, yeah, definitely.  And just an example of that, I was reading something the other day, you know, there's  
**0:20:51-0:21:04:**  a lot of discussion in the grain world about some people are like, you know, don't ever  eat wheat again, or any grain because it has phytic acids or phytates.  So these are a phytochemical.  
**0:21:04-0:21:13:**  And it, it's considered, you know, some people think, oh, they're toxic, you shouldn't eat  those at all.  And they bind up minerals.  
**0:21:13-0:21:27:**  And so it's really make, they call them anti nutrients.  And it's like, wait a minute.  That's a pretty extreme way of looking at a crop that has fed humanity for 1000s of  
**0:21:27-0:21:40:**  years.  And okay, some some phytates might bind up some mineral to some extent, but it's not  binding up 100% of the iron in a in a wheat grain, or you know, 100% of the selenium or  
**0:21:40-0:21:53:**  the calcium or what have you.  And so it's just these ways that we human beings are so interesting.  It's like, either we, we just sort of get addicted to thinking in terms of black and  
**0:21:53-0:22:02:**  white things, or we get stuck in the vague and the gray.  And so then we say, well, we can't say anything.  And it's like, no, wait a minute here.  
**0:22:02-0:22:20:**  We can navigate our way through through that situation.  And so and some of these phytates, I think, are probably doing things in our bodies that  we're completely unaware of, and that, you know, there might be and they might be a mix  
**0:22:20-0:22:35:**  of detrimental and beneficial, but like, on the whole, so back to your point, Sarah, on  the whole, these things are an important food to have as a part of the human diet.  Yeah, and Jill, I'd love you to to chime in.  
**0:22:35-0:22:42:**  And I mean, I know you, you know this too, from your work and your  Yeah, well, I was gonna chime in on the whole.  Yeah.  
**0:22:42-0:23:05:**  So, you know, I, I sort of went, I've been through the book a couple of times.  And one thing that really struck me was historically speaking.  And that was going through like Alfred Howard and Eve Balfour, Andre Boisson, Anna Primovesi  
**0:23:05-0:23:21:**  was another one that came to mind for me from Brazil.  You know, people who were so far ahead of their time.  And so one of the questions I'd ask is you really dove into this, Anna and Dave, is that  
**0:23:21-0:23:34:**  they tried to turn the tanker around.  And so why didn't they succeed?  And how will we, given what you've dove into?  
**0:23:34-0:23:49:**  You know, the take I would have on that is that what people like Howard and Balfour and  others in their in their era back in the 30s and 40s, and McCarris and the head and, you  know, for them, right, you know, what they were all looking at and doing is they're running  
**0:23:49-0:24:04:**  experiments, they're making observations, they're putting together a story about how  the way we treated land or fed our crops influenced what got into the nutrition, whether they're  feeding it to rats or cows or people.  
**0:24:04-0:24:15:**  But they had a very different so they had observations and anecdotes and connections  to point out.  But what they really lacked was much in the way of a scientific underpinnings for a mechanism.  
**0:24:15-0:24:28:**  And so it was really hard for them to sell their their unlike minded conventional peers,  that they were that they were actually seeing very real things and having been seeing real  effects.  
**0:24:28-0:24:40:**  Because at the time, you know, people are enamored with the higher yields, you could  get from adding a lot of fertilizer to degraded land, and then kind of swept under the rug  that, oh, that meant that you then had to start using a lot of pesticides because you  
**0:24:40-0:24:54:**  know, something happened, and there were not more pests in those fields.  And it was that progress can be very effective blinders when one defines progress in a particular  way and just ignores any evidence that might challenge that wisdom.  
**0:24:54-0:25:06:**  So what I think that they really lacked in that day was the one of the things they lacked  was the ability to point to specific mechanisms, they could independently verify and other  scientists could go, Oh, yes, this is actually the way it works.  
**0:25:06-0:25:18:**  And part of that was because your understanding of the microbial world in soil was truly embryonic  in those days.  You know, there was hardly any understanding that there were even beneficial organisms  
**0:25:18-0:25:31:**  in the soil, let alone that it was teaming with them in healthy fertile soil and as a  key part of the basis for fertility and nutrient cycling.  So one of the things we tried to do in the book is to lay out what those what the last  
**0:25:31-0:25:46:**  80 years of science has really filled in, in terms of connecting the dots going between  the way that farmers treat the soil to the health of the soil, from the health of the  soil to the health of crops, the health of crops and plants to and what livestock eats  
**0:25:46-0:25:56:**  to livestock health and how that all rolls up into human health.  And that's a lot of dots to connect, right?  Going from soil health all the way over to human health.  
**0:25:56-0:26:06:**  But if you break it into bite sized pieces, you can kind of connect the path all the way  there.  Even if it's going to be a long time before someone does the definitive experiment at  
**0:26:06-0:26:20:**  a population level, sort of showing with 99% certainty about how all the connections work.  But there's studies that have done a lot of that for all the little pieces.  So that's a big part of what we tried to do is to basically go back to look at some of  
**0:26:20-0:26:32:**  those insights from historical figures and investigate what have we learned since then?  And you know, they come out looking pretty good in hindsight as people who are kind of  ahead of their time.  
**0:26:32-0:26:39:**  Because their insights were really pointing in the direction that I think science has  led in the subsequent century.  Yeah, I mean, I love that.  
**0:26:39-0:26:52:**  I love that title, rocks become you.  And that was just so you Dave.  I could see the geologist in that and how it just sort of, you know, started really  
**0:26:52-0:27:10:**  flowing from, well, here's how we mineralize rocks.  And that whole discussion of how we mineralize rocks is really powerful.  Because that is I mean, that really the bedrock, the start of the whole situation, how we started  
**0:27:10-0:27:19:**  to actually get trace elements into our food, right?  Yeah.  And then how do we go on that?  
**0:27:19-0:27:37:**  So one of the things I also wanted to ask you, given that you've talked about the whole,  you really looked at these things and individual studies all along, is now as a scientist,  as scientists, where are the gaps?  
**0:27:37-0:27:54:**  And how do we as scientists start to approach those gaps in a meaningful way?  I think one of the one of the biggest gaps that we sort of saw in the in the literature  that we reviewed for the book, and if anyone's interested in the science in the background  
**0:27:54-0:28:08:**  that we're talking about here, we also actually published the source list from the book as  a separate PDF document that you can download from our website dig to grow.com.  It's free Norton basically published it as a free ebook, it's a PDF.  
**0:28:08-0:28:17:**  People shouldn't have to go looking for all these sources.  Again, that we've swept them into a big pile, and you can sort through them on your own  if you'd like to.  
**0:28:17-0:28:22:**  And now I forgot your question.  Well, yeah.  So your question was about gaps, where are the gaps?  
**0:28:22-0:28:32:**  Oh, right.  Jill, and I think you can think about that.  But what comes to my mind in part is that we, we know some of the mechanisms and we  
**0:28:32-0:28:52:**  know some of the connections between the way that say, high levels of organic matter and  minimal chemical and physical disturbance of the soil translate into nutrient density  in in crops.  
**0:28:52-0:29:10:**  I think we need I think we need to explore that more because the at least this is how  my mind works.  The more evidence that you can get behind something and and then write and communicate  
**0:29:10-0:29:31:**  about to the people that that information is going to impact your, you're just sort  of building your case over and over again, or you're at least adding to it so that it  gets to the point that look, this is pretty, this is pretty rock solid, what we've got  
**0:29:31-0:29:46:**  going here.  And when you have that kind of an evidence base for anything in science, for that matter,  that that's what can, you know, I think, start to turn this ship around is just continually  
**0:29:46-0:30:00:**  adding to the evidence base, because then, you know, anywhere from farmers to policymakers  to consumers to food companies, they're kind of like, you want to get people to that point  of, I guess the writings on the wall.  
**0:30:00-0:30:10:**  I guess this is how it is.  Yeah.  You know, there's a real frustration, though, because regenerative agriculture as a title,  
**0:30:10-0:30:24:**  as a term has been trying to kind of move people in that direction, not maybe all of  you know, but that's really what you're talking about, you know, in the book, and the farmers  that you're interviewing and profiling, and marketing has taken over, and there's so much  
**0:30:24-0:30:33:**  confusion now about what it is.  And so I was thinking about because I, you know, I come from a policy world, and I know  all the ins and outs of how hard that is to change policy because of all the things that  
**0:30:33-0:30:43:**  are behind that.  And so why you would like to see that change?  I'm wondering if maybe part of the solution is for that people really need to have a garden,  
**0:30:43-0:30:54:**  even if it's a even it's just a salad pot in there, which I have three in my window  in my windowsill.  And you know, and start doing on a micro level, the practices that you you know, you talk  
**0:30:54-0:31:04:**  about in the book.  Yeah, I mean, you know, you because then when you taste that green, when you snip the little  lettuce or the arugula or whatever it is you're growing, and you taste the difference, you  
**0:31:04-0:31:16:**  taste how you know, how much more peppery and how you know, just the real difference  of what you've done versus what you buy in the store.  That you know, because I feel like there's got to be a way for people to experience it  
**0:31:16-0:31:26:**  and not just not just read about it.  Yeah, I mean, you're not gonna get any argument from about throwing any kind of plant.  I don't care if you want to eat it or look at it.  
**0:31:26-0:31:35:**  You just got to marvel at it.  Okay.  And I think you can marvel at whatever your houseplant all the way to your corn plant  
**0:31:35-0:31:46:**  to your to your whatever.  But that, that is a really good point, Sarah.  And I it goes to, you know, tasting to our when you guys call this podcast, because the  
**0:31:46-0:32:03:**  body, the body knows when it's taking in what it needs.  And one of the most fascinating areas that we researched for the book was this whole  link between nutrient density and flavor.  
**0:32:03-0:32:20:**  And that that flavor is coding embedded in that flavor are things like phytochemicals  in particular amino acids and a particular fat profile.  I mean, that's what all this tomato research out of I think it's, yeah, out of Florida,  
**0:32:20-0:32:35:**  hairy clay.  It's it that's what it's telling us is that flavor links to health.  And if you're perturbing, and you're sort of jamming monkey wrenches in at the level  
**0:32:35-0:32:50:**  of the soil with all these practices, all you're doing is, is you're getting in the  way of biology.  And you don't want to do that you want to let these plants function and function biologically  
**0:32:50-0:33:03:**  like they're supposed to be doing so that all of this, all of this then, you know, eventually  accrues to these nutrient dense foods in the human diet.  And you know what, you can do that.  
**0:33:03-0:33:21:**  If you put your plant hat on and become a plant, if you're feeling good, and you have  enough nutrition, and and you don't have a lot of pests, you know, actually nibbling  at you or poking you all the time, you can actually put a lot of nutrition into your  
**0:33:21-0:33:35:**  body.  And you can use the energy at that point, you know, you're not expanding it to build  up lignin to keep something off you were using to in the shikimic acid pathway to make all  
**0:33:35-0:33:47:**  these really toxic chemicals, you can actually use it to actually add in all these trace  elements add in all these other things.  And I don't think that's any different than us.  
**0:33:47-0:33:56:**  If we're really healthy, and our guts really healthy, we can take in a lot more nutrients.  That is a great analogy, Jill.  Yeah, I love it.  
**0:33:56-0:34:05:**  I'm gonna be thinking about my plant hat.  All these things coming out of it and going into it.  I love it.  
**0:34:05-0:34:13:**  I'm gonna have to create one like Harry Potter only it's gonna be the plant hat right you  put it on and you'd be able to think about how you sort plants.  I don't know.  
**0:34:13-0:34:16:**  Oh, yeah.  Totally.  Yeah.  
**0:34:16-0:34:28:**  Well, I love that you that you did spend so much time on that link between flavor and  health, because that is what we're trying to get at.  But so often when we talk to people, they'll be like, Well, I think so.  
**0:34:28-0:34:36:**  But I don't know what we don't know.  And I'm like, Ah, here's the other thing.  They found a lot of science behind, which intuitively makes sense.  
**0:34:36-0:34:45:**  It makes sense that when you taste a really good tomato, that it's because it has more  nutrients in it.  You know, I think and was the one who first sort of between us started digging up papers  
**0:34:45-0:35:00:**  that looked at, you know, how there's taste receptors throughout the organs of the human  body that tie into what we when we taste them in our mouths, we call flavors, but that they're  really sort of sensory receptors to what's in our food.  
**0:35:00-0:35:16:**  And when you think evolutionarily about, you know, well, think in the days of before food  processing, say, when we were mostly hunter hunting and gathering.  You know, it would make sense that the foods that our bodies needed would be foods that  
**0:35:16-0:35:28:**  tasted good, that there'd be a positive feedback that people that ate healthy food were healthier  and had more progeny, and then were better represented in future generations.  It just makes very simple evolutionary sense, all the way through to the point when we really  
**0:35:28-0:35:41:**  started to do like massive food processing and changing things, taking whole foods, breaking  them into their components, and then remixing them in ways that broke the link between flavor  and what's actually in food.  
**0:35:41-0:35:50:**  And that makes it I think, very challenging for us today to really kind of appreciate  that and understand it.  But we've all had the experience of eating those flavorless tomatoes that you can occasionally  
**0:35:50-0:36:01:**  buy at the grocery store, or having that absolutely delicious heirloom tomato that somebody you  knew grew in their yard that kind of melts in your mouth and go like, my God, this is  what tomato supposed to taste like.  
**0:36:01-0:36:14:**  And that applies to all kinds of foods in terms of fresh old foods.  So there hasn't been a huge evidentiary basis.  And one of the things I think we were a bit surprised by is that there's not a lot of  
**0:36:14-0:36:22:**  studies that make that connection.  The ones that do are pretty clear.  But there's a lot of, back to your question of sort of what are the gaps and what's needed.  
**0:36:22-0:36:34:**  I mean, there's more interest, I think, in the terroir beyond wine is how I like to think  about it.  That food has a terroir and that it relates to flavor.  
**0:36:34-0:36:49:**  And terroir is a big complicated concept that integrates everything from the atmosphere  to the soils to the weather to the microbes and the life in the soil.  But it may be that all of that actually really does impact what gets in our food.  
**0:36:49-0:36:56:**  And how we farm impacts all that at one scale or another.  Absolutely.  I mean, I think back to the xan.  
**0:36:56-0:37:06:**  That's how you and I met.  Yeah, person with that panel that was mediated by Dan Barber.  Oh, right.  
**0:37:06-0:37:17:**  And absolutely.  And we were talking about taste and can you measure taste and can you, you know, and if  something tastes good, is it really good for you?  
**0:37:17-0:37:36:**  Because intuitively, we believe that.  I mean, and to your point that that gap, that is a serious gap in the literature, because  linking that idea of taste, because taste and aroma and these things are all more like  
**0:37:36-0:37:56:**  a social science, because they're so subjective, like whether you have those sense that, you  know, inadequate sensory organs or whether they, you don't, how you taste flavor.  And then not all of us need the same things, as you pointed out here, right?  
**0:37:56-0:38:11:**  And at certain stages in our life or certain stages of the day or whatever our stages of  health are, we need different things.  And so we might, you know, just as a pregnant woman might want fermented foods because of  
**0:38:11-0:38:19:**  them, you know, maybe it's because of the microbiology.  We don't know right now.  I mean, that's the whole point is that we don't really understand that.  
**0:38:19-0:38:37:**  I know in the lab right now, I'm, I've been playing with volatiles and using headspace  analysis to actually look at, well, why do we smell?  But you know, the theme that is most interesting to me is that all of those things, I can buy  
**0:38:37-0:38:43:**  them separately.  When I started to look at that, I thought, oh, that's amazing.  Look at that.  
**0:38:43-0:38:46:**  Look at this.  Look at this.  And then I realized that they were all for sale.  
**0:38:46-0:38:57:**  And you can count them all in.  And I was flabbergasted.  I really was.  
**0:38:57-0:39:09:**  I was like, huh, there's nothing new here, Jill.  Well, so is what you're saying, Jill, so then if you can buy all of these volatiles, like  somewhere in the food industry, is that what you mean?  
**0:39:09-0:39:20:**  Then why grow them?  Well, here's why.  Here's why, girl, because there's no, as good as any food industry chemist might be, I don't  
**0:39:20-0:39:41:**  believe that they truly understand the proportions and the particular variant of a phytochemical  that goes into the flavor profile that the human body goes, oh, yeah, that.  I'm hankering for more of that.  
**0:39:41-0:39:53:**  Food industry, great.  They'll just shove sugar and salt into something and the human being will eat it.  And that's tapping totally different kinds of levers.  
**0:39:53-0:40:08:**  I thought that's what you meant, Jill, and it reminded me of something that is happening  right now around.  So the millennials and the Gen Z-ers are sort of down on alcohol these days.  
**0:40:08-0:40:22:**  And so there's dry October, dry January.  And here we are in the modern era, though, and you need to drink something, right?  So instead of just drinking water, the food industry, are they ever onto this?  
**0:40:22-0:40:31:**  Aha, mocktails, beer and wine with no alcohol.  OK, fine.  Or if you want to drink soda pop, you can drink that.  
**0:40:31-0:40:43:**  And then so I was thinking about this and I was over the summer, I was sitting having  dinner somewhere.  This happened to be in Maine and the only place they had a seat was at the bar.  
**0:40:43-0:40:48:**  And I'm like, OK, I'll sit at the bar.  So of course, what do I start doing?  Oh, here, can I sit?  
**0:40:48-0:40:55:**  Let me take a look at that label on your bitters thing.  And what's in that gin?  And it's all sitting there and it's like I'm kind of bored.  
**0:40:55-0:41:06:**  I'm like, oh, just reading the labels on all this stuff.  And what was really interesting to me on the orange little container called orange bitters,  I'm expecting to see orange.  
**0:41:06-0:41:22:**  Exactly.  There was not one genuine citrus derived ingredient in that stuff.  It was phenol oxal, this benzyl, that the whole thing was a big chemical cocktail, which  
**0:41:22-0:41:42:**  OK, maybe some of those volatiles truly came out of a citrus, but not in the proportion  and combination and so forth that you'd actually find it.  So in other words, this is all just kind of hijacking and jerking around our body wisdom  
**0:41:42-0:41:54:**  with all of these flavorings that are going into all of these non-alcoholic things, which  I would like the Gen Zers and millennials to know.  I mean, why can't we make wine instead of 15% alcohol content?  
**0:41:54-0:42:03:**  Great.  Let's get it down to 11 or 12%.  Why do you think the French for so long have been able to drink a bottle of wine at lunch?  
**0:42:03-0:42:10:**  Well, because it's not 15% alcohol that leaves you on your face.  But there's that abundance, isn't it?  More.  
**0:42:10-0:42:19:**  More, more, more.  If I can have this a little bit, why not have more?  I can create something that's more.  
**0:42:19-0:42:32:**  And you talk about that in your book about more, more, more.  And I certainly see it.  But I think the point that we talked about already about the whole is really important  
**0:42:32-0:42:41:**  because we don't understand, and you made this point too, we don't understand what all  these phytochemicals do.  Do they help us take up other nutrients?  
**0:42:41-0:42:48:**  What are the helper molecules?  When we eat whole foods, where are the helpers?  Well, we don't even know what the helpers are.  
**0:42:48-0:43:06:**  But I think back to mycorrhizal fungi, and there are helper bacteria that you can't actually  have colonization unless I have this microbial community around the root in order to help  stimulate that change.  
**0:43:06-0:43:12:**  And I think that our guts and a lot of other things work that way.  We need whole foods.  We need whole plant extracts.  
**0:43:12-0:43:26:**  We need this wholeness in order to get all the nutrients we need because otherwise, if  we're just cobbling them all together and what we think is good for us, is it?  Yeah.  
**0:43:26-0:43:38:**  Yeah.  We're sort of missing the potential ubiquity of synergistic effects where it's not so much  the individual elements, but the combinations that we take them up in that matter.  
**0:43:38-0:43:50:**  And that's where there's another gap on the agronomic end of things in that if you look  at most of the studies that have looked at the kind of things that we wrote about or  tried to connect in the book, most of them will try and look at singular practices.  
**0:43:50-0:44:03:**  They'll study like no-till farming or they'll study cover cropping.  From everything that I can triangulate from this whole series of books that we've worked  on is it's the system of farming that matters, not so much individual practices, but the  
**0:44:03-0:44:17:**  net effect of a combined system of practices.  And so that if you want to look at regenerative agriculture in particular, you wouldn't just  go compile studies on no-till, for example, because that's not the same story as if you're  
**0:44:17-0:44:37:**  doing some kind of minimal chemical and physical disturbance with maximum diversity and continual  cover either between crops, between rows or between crops in a sequence of crops.  And you really can't find very many published systems level studies that involve all those  
**0:44:37-0:44:47:**  practices compared against the full suite of conventional practices.  Everybody breaks it down into comparing one or one or one or one, one practice at a time.  Why?  
**0:44:47-0:44:50:**  Well, it's easier to find.  You can get one student to do it.  You can actually get a clear result.  
**0:44:50-0:45:04:**  It gives you a nice testable hypothesis, but it doesn't necessarily mean you're asking  the right question.  And I think that that's something that the agronomic world has fallen down very much  
**0:45:04-0:45:17:**  in the last few decades is trying to wrestle with the issues in terms of what questions  to ask and what studies to do to address systems level differences.  Because that's where we actually, the parsing of the literature that we've done now in a  
**0:45:17-0:45:27:**  few books looking at that, that's where we tend to see really big effects or when people  completely shift the nature of the system and adopt a suite of practices that are different  than conventional.  
**0:45:27-0:45:41:**  Then you get these synergistic, synergistic effects that are quite remarkable in relatively  short periods of time.  That's why the mindset, that's how the regenerative farmers we talked to, they all talk about  
**0:45:41-0:45:52:**  it as a mindset rather than practices and that practices change and they'll swap out  things as new problems emerge or as weather changes.  But it's the mindset that is the most important thing.  
**0:45:52-0:46:05:**  And so what's been really hard is to try to convey that to consumers.  Of course, you need to then know the farmer to understand what their mindset was.  And our system isn't built for that.  
**0:46:05-0:46:21:**  So do you think part of what is involved in people eating better is to actually find and  support those people that are actually growing it and selling it directly to you?  In terms of avenues within the marketplace today, that's probably a consumer's best avenue  
**0:46:21-0:46:34:**  towards trying to get to the best food because you can sort of then peer through the labels,  whatever they are that those farmers are adopting.  And if you can know what they're actually doing, it gives you greater insight into it.  
**0:46:34-0:46:39:**  Especially if they've read your book and then they can ask.  Oh, right.  There's that first step.  
**0:46:39-0:46:49:**  Yeah, exactly.  Well, I mean, there is an educational piece that's a big, I mean, we aren't taught this.  I mean, this should be part of what we learned in high school.  
**0:46:49-0:46:55:**  You know, health and what makes up health.  Yeah.  Yeah.  
**0:46:55-0:47:06:**  When I was in high school, you know, you had these lousy, of course, the girls had to go  to home economics and the boys got to go off to wood shop.  And I always wanted to go to wood shop, partly because you're kidding me, in home economics,  
**0:47:06-0:47:13:**  I'm going to open up this box of stuff, mix in some water and put this thing in the oven.  That is not creative.  That is really boring.  
**0:47:13-0:47:17:**  And it tastes like crap.  So get me out of here.  Right.  
**0:47:17-0:47:24:**  So this is what home economics.  We could call it, you know, maybe it's just lifestyle school, but you're absolutely right,  Sarah.  
**0:47:24-0:47:38:**  What that kind of a course and content ought to be about in high school is, you know, your  food, how your body works, how we're growing that food and how that all comes together  over a lifetime.  
**0:47:38-0:47:51:**  I mean, if you told a kid, a kindergartener could get that at a very, you know, kind of  basic simplistic level.  And if we started, I feel like, you know, younger with if we started earlier in our  
**0:47:51-0:48:06:**  education system with making links between how we farm to Dave's point, the whole farming  system, not any one practice, and how that ripples through to the plants and the animals.  And we could call them plants and animals.  
**0:48:06-0:48:17:**  I'm like, yeah, I'm kind of about full disclosure, we're eating living beings, whether they're  green or brown and furry, right?  That's the deal, plant and animal foods.  
**0:48:17-0:48:34:**  And we would, we would just have a lot more honesty in our food system.  And I think we'd have a lot more honesty about what it is we need to change and what it is  we need to keep about the way we approach agriculture and farming in the US, which is  
**0:48:34-0:48:39:**  about your mindset.  I'd love to see these kinds of things come out in the mindset of a farmer or have them  thinking about it.  
**0:48:39-0:48:50:**  Yeah.  And they would also make people less susceptible to some of these claims that another another  area that you talked about a lot in the book that I just loved was like the fake meat,  
**0:48:50-0:49:08:**  the ultra processing that goes, I mean, if people saw, you know, instead of instead of,  you know, fake beef or whatever, be impossible beef or, you know, whatever, if they saw it  as ultra processed food, that's what it is, because that's what it is.  
**0:49:08-0:49:21:**  But that it really changes the whole mindset of what you're doing, because they think many,  many people think they're eating healthier, because they're avoiding meat.  And well, to share with the share with the people what  
**0:49:21-0:49:35:**  And really what the first question that ought to be asked if you have, you know, if one  wants to eat healthier, I think prior to the question of, you know, do I eat meat?  Or do I eat plants the way it's usually framed?  
**0:49:35-0:49:41:**  Would be how is whatever I'm eating raised?  What did your food eat?  How was it grown?  
**0:49:41-0:49:58:**  Because there's, we can point to examples of livestock being very integral tools in  landscape rejuvenation and increased carbon sequestration on degraded grazing lands in  ways that also provide, you know, more omega three rich foods for for human consumption  
**0:49:58-0:50:14:**  foods that are better at quelling inflammation than the omega six rich meat and dairy that  comes off of feedlots where they're primarily fed seed derived feeds, which are going to  be very rich in omega sixes, which tend to promote inflammation when they carry through  
**0:50:14-0:50:25:**  into the human body.  So and similarly, with plant based foods, you know, if they're grown regeneratively,  a vegan diet, that's great to be completely healthy, you got to watch out a little bit  
**0:50:25-0:50:38:**  for you know, certain nutrients that you might want to have to pay special attention to getting  if you're very, you know, very strict about it.  But if you're eating plant based foods that were derived with farming practices that degrade  
**0:50:38-0:50:50:**  the land to the point that the mycorrhizal connections with crops aren't there, you'll  be getting fewer minerals, you'll be getting fewer phytochemicals.  Sure you'll be eating plants, but they may not be, you may not be eating as healthy as  
**0:50:50-0:50:59:**  you could on a different plant based diet.  And yeah, and so here's where we depart.  So do we not agree on everything?  
**0:50:59-0:51:13:**  Well, apparently not, this is what I find kind of irritating and intriguing all at the  same time.  And it's the cleverness of the term plant based meat.  
**0:51:13-0:51:24:**  Because last time I checked, animals that are herbivores, that's all they eat.  That's why they're in herbivores.  So we didn't plant based.  
**0:51:24-0:51:31:**  They are plant based.  Exactly.  So all of our ruminants are plant based meat.  
**0:51:31-0:51:39:**  That's what they eat.  And especially, you know, with the exception of feedlot practices, and we are not, we're  not in that.  
**0:51:39-0:51:50:**  We're not in that realm on this podcast.  And it's not worth talking about that.  But all of these, you know, pasture raised herbivores, that is what they're eating, they're  
**0:51:50-0:52:02:**  eating plants, and that is plant based meat.  Somehow the food industry got a hold of plant based meat and turned it into this.  They missed the label, Sarah.  
**0:52:02-0:52:09:**  They already have plant based meat.  That's dairy and beef.  And you know, go and see.  
**0:52:09-0:52:22:**  And they don't fully disclose the amount of sodium chloride that's in it.  Right.  And that other stuff is UPF, ultra processed foods.  
**0:52:22-0:52:32:**  It's really very, you know, it's kind of stunning in the way in which it's interpreted and presented  to the consumer.  Quite stunning.  
**0:52:32-0:52:46:**  No, it has been especially because there's almost like a virtuous glow that people seem  to feel about it when it's, it's the opposite.  It's more nuanced and complicated than an either or.  
**0:52:46-0:52:58:**  And that's where I go back to my point of it's important, whether you're going to be  interested in eating meat as part of your diet or dairy as part of your diet or not,  it's a very personal choice for people.  
**0:52:58-0:53:13:**  But if people are making it from the perspective of trying to have a smaller environmental  footprint for their diet, and have a stronger health footprint personally for them or their  loved ones that they're feeding, then whichever kind of diet they're on, they need to ask  
**0:53:13-0:53:25:**  the question of, well, how was it raised?  And that's the virtuous glow that often surrounds the perhaps incorrectly named plant based  meat proponents.  
**0:53:25-0:53:35:**  Really goes back to, you know, there's, there's lots of that the first book that we wrote  on this dirt, the erosion of civilizations.  I mean, almost every civilization I wrote about in that book as having destroyed their  
**0:53:35-0:53:43:**  land and impoverished their descendants for centuries after the fact did it with organic  agriculture.  And they did it by degrading the land.  
**0:53:43-0:53:50:**  And they did it mostly with plant based foods.  Yeah.  And so it's, you know, it's really how you treat the land that I think is the common  
**0:53:50-0:54:06:**  denominator for how we ought to be thinking about the way that our environmental footprint  of our diet, our global footprint of our diets, and the human health impact of our diets.  And the framing that I think we could take across the board, whether we're talking about  
**0:54:06-0:54:20:**  crops or livestock, is to think about to rethink farming to reevaluate farming practices in  terms of their net effect on soil health.  And soil health is, you know, it's a bit of a squishy concept.  
**0:54:20-0:54:29:**  But so is human health.  We don't have a crisp definition of human health that you can go out and get a number  and measure and go my health score is this yours is that and we have lots of specialties  
**0:54:29-0:54:40:**  in terms of different maladies.  And I think soil health is kind of similar.  It's a very useful, overarching concept that we tend to recognize most by its absence,  
**0:54:40-0:54:51:**  just the way that we recognize human health most by its absence.  We know when we're sick, when we're when we feel good, we just feel good.  We tend not to pay attention to feeling good, we just feel good.  
**0:54:51-0:55:03:**  And I think that we could if we started looking at the land similarly, we the first thing  we'd come away with is like, good Lord, most of the world's farmland is sick, and not healthy.  How do we turn that around?  
**0:55:03-0:55:17:**  And that's to me, the common denominator that underpins regenerative agriculture, and all  it sort of stands for and the promise of it is a way to think about farming that leaves  the land better off as a consequence of how we farm.  
**0:55:17-0:55:22:**  And that's certainly not conventional farming today.  Right?  I couldn't agree more.  
**0:55:22-0:55:36:**  But before you go, I want to read one part from your book.  When desperate people pass their suffering on the to the land, degraded soil hands, impoverishment,  degraded soil hands impoverishment right back.  
**0:55:36-0:55:47:**  There's a compelling need for a global shift in how we see soil to accept the health of  the land as central to our own.  I thought that was one of the most powerful statements I've ever heard.  
**0:55:47-0:55:59:**  I have to tell you that it almost brought me to tears when I read it.  Because and so when I think about that, once again, I come back to, you know, what is regenerative  ag?  
**0:55:59-0:56:11:**  And how do we turn this around?  Because I mean, I personally feel a desperate need to do that.  I Yeah, I think a lot of us are desperate like that, like, we're getting it right.  
**0:56:11-0:56:26:**  And we've been seeing what has been happening to land and to human health for a while.  And it's clear, like we need, we do need to change things.  And you'd asked a little earlier about like, yeah, so what can we do to turn this ship  
**0:56:26-0:56:35:**  around?  And why weren't you know, historically, you know, the Balfour's and Howard's and, and  others and other cultures able to do this.  
**0:56:35-0:56:49:**  And I think these days, what we really one way to consider going about this is it's a  concerted, coordinated, long term effort.  And I think it begins with raising awareness and knowledge, which is where you know, writers  
**0:56:49-0:57:03:**  like us come in is it's and, and providing information in a way that's, as you put it,  it's assimilateable picture plants, plants sucking up information.  Well, that's, it's our farmers, our eaters, our chefs, everybody.  
**0:57:03-0:57:11:**  So that's where we come in.  You raise awareness and knowledge.  And then you find out you actually talk to farmers and you say, Hey, what are your challenges  
**0:57:11-0:57:19:**  and barriers?  Because nobody think life is too hard.  Farming is too hard for anybody to take on something with insurmountable or even medium  
**0:57:19-0:57:29:**  sized barriers that might be technical knowledge that might be money that might be incentive  say, okay, now we've got to handle on your barriers and challenges.  Then what do you do?  
**0:57:29-0:57:39:**  You work to remove them, right?  If you want somebody to take 10,000 steps a day, then give them a decent pair of shoes,  give them some time, give them a walking route, right?  
**0:57:39-0:57:54:**  We need that kind of an idea applied to farmers if we want them to go regen.  And then once you you've the education and information there, we understand the challenges,  the challenges are on their way out.  
**0:57:54-0:58:07:**  We need to nest that in a cocoon of support.  And that's how you keep people doing things.  You get the pivot happening and then you support it.  
**0:58:07-0:58:23:**  And that support piece is private sector, it's government, it's how we spend our food  dollars, all of that.  It's not, nothing needs to be invented Jill to make this change, right?  
**0:58:23-0:58:35:**  We don't need to make some carbon sucking machine.  It's going to send this stuff off to Mars.  We already have all of the infrastructure, we have the human know how, we have a civil  
**0:58:35-0:58:45:**  society that can, you know, interact productively around these things.  That's how we do it.  And we have a lot of farmers who already do this.  
**0:58:45-0:58:56:**  And we can lean on them.  So many people think that there's nobody out there doing this.  And there are a lot of farmers that got this.  
**0:58:56-0:59:07:**  It's the processing industry.  But you talked about that on other episodes.  Yes, well, we, we, gosh, we could talk to you for another whole hour.  
**0:59:07-0:59:18:**  So as we as we wrap up, do please answer the question that Jill, Jill mentioned, we do  ask everybody.  So we just say, you know, what is regenerative agriculture, fill in the blank, regenerative  
**0:59:18-0:59:36:**  agriculture is?  Generative agriculture is when you farm in ways that bring life back to the soil, if  it's kind of short on life in the first place, or if you got pretty decent soil, your practices  
**0:59:36-0:59:51:**  are just continually improving and replenishing that so that biology is functioning normally,  which is to say exactly how it's supposed to be functioning between the fungi, the bacteria,  the metabolites and everything.  
**0:59:51-1:00:08:**  Yeah, and I would say what she said, regenerative agriculture is a style of intensive farming  that can leave the soil healthier and better off than without.  So farming that can improve soil health.  
**1:00:08-1:00:17:**  And it's great.  Yeah, I'll leave it at that what she said.  What you both said was, is that you got to combine them together.  
**1:00:17-1:00:27:**  What Ann and Dave said.  I just want to say though, to your point about the solution, the pathway, I think that's  an excellent one.  
**1:00:27-1:00:41:**  And that's, you know, that is what Jill does in her work with farmers all the time.  And I mean, she just helps farmers understand the different practices specific to their  land and you know, because all their situations are different.  
**1:00:41-1:00:56:**  And so, and there are other other advisors like Jill, you know, working with farmers,  and so that knowledge, getting that knowledge out and getting the awareness that there are  people like that, that can help farmers solve those problems is a big piece too.  
**1:00:56-1:01:08:**  It's actionable.  We talked about that today with Frances Yeatman and was like, it's about actionable results.  Like don't just hand somebody a bunch of numbers and go, here you go.  
**1:01:08-1:01:17:**  Right.  And they look at you and they go, so, and what am I supposed to do with this?  Exactly.  
**1:01:17-1:01:31:**  Does this mean anything?  Does this tell me where I am in the scheme of things?  And back to your point, Ann, is about grabbing somebody by the hand.  
**1:01:31-1:01:38:**  You have to succeed to turn things around.  You have to succeed at the very first step.  You have to.  
**1:01:38-1:01:51:**  And everyone can, everybody can take a first step.  And then, and then it's working through all the other steps and just me handing you a  bunch of numbers is not going to solve the problem.  
**1:01:51-1:02:02:**  There's a whole lot of other things and all those synergistic effects and all those other  things that come into play that are going to solve this.  But I want to thank you for your book.  
**1:02:02-1:02:18:**  Thank you so much for putting all this together and all your books.  I know the enormous amount of research that you both did on this.  And I can't thank you enough for putting it together in a very digestible form where my  
**1:02:18-1:02:25:**  microbiome doesn't have to work very hard to understand it.  Yeah, thank you.  Yeah.  
**1:02:25-1:02:40:**  Yeah, we appreciate, I mean, that coming from you, Jill, is just really special because  you do understand the amount of work that goes into researching this topic so that personally  that means a lot to me.  
**1:02:40-1:02:44:**  Thank you.  Yeah.  I want you to keep going.  
**1:02:44-1:03:04:**  So I will do what I can to, to, to, you know, keep, keep those books coming because, you  know, it's, it's such a breath of fresh air to have people who do a really thorough job,  who really like really weave the science into this incredible language.  
**1:03:04-1:03:10:**  That's that's so easy.  And that and the and the analogies and the metaphors and everything.  It's really nice.  
**1:03:10-1:03:17:**  So congratulations on this book.  I mean it because I know how much hard work went in.  And please keep it up.  
**1:03:17-1:03:20:**  Well, thank you.  Yeah.  That's, that's worth a lot.  
**1:03:20-1:03:23:**  Yeah.  Yeah.  Maybe we'll get, we'll give you a call every six months.  
**1:03:23-1:03:28:**  Jill, we need a little pat on the shoulder here.  I'd love to do it.  I'd love to do it.  
**1:03:28-1:03:41:**  And I would love to take you through the lab and show you what we're getting and talk about  it and, and we can wear our green hats and we can think like a plant.  I will wear our, we'll wear our plant hats.  
**1:03:41-1:03:44:**  Okay, good.  I promise.  Good.  
**1:03:44-1:03:47:**  All right.  Thanks again.  Okay.  
**1:03:47-1:03:50:**  Thank you, Sarah.  Thank you, Jill.  Yeah.  
**1:03:50-1:03:57:**  Thank you both.  Yeah.  Thank you.  
**1:03:57-1:04:14:**  You've been listening to Tasting Terroir, a podcast made possible by a magical collaboration  between the following companies and supporters, all working together to help farmers, chefs,  food companies, and consumers to build healthier soil for a healthier world.  
**1:04:14-1:04:28:**  Risotera owned by Dr. Jill Kloperton, Risotera is an international food security consulting  company providing expert guidance for creating healthy soils that yield tasty nutrient dense  foods.  
**1:04:28-1:04:42:**  Check us out at risotera.com.  That's R-H-I-Z-O-T-E-R-R-A.com.  And the global food and farm online community, an ad free global social network and soil  
**1:04:42-1:04:56:**  health streaming service that provides information and connections that help you apply the science  and practice of improving soil health.  Join us at globalfoodandfarm.com.  
**1:04:56-1:05:09:**  And from listeners like you who support us through our Patreon account at patreon.com  slash tasting terroir.  Patrons receive access to our full length interviews and selected additional materials.  
**1:05:09-1:05:20:**  Patrons will also have the opportunity to submit questions that we will answer on the  podcast.  Tune in next week to hear more interviews and insights with myself, Sarah Harper, and  
**1:05:20-1:05:38:**  Dr. Jill Kloperton, as well as the regenerative farmers, chefs, and emerging food companies  in the global food and farm online community and beyond.  If you like our work, please give us a five star rating and share the podcast with your  
**1:05:38-1:05:49:**  friends.  Thanks so much for listening and for helping us get the word out about this new resource  to taste the health of your food.  
**1:05:49-1:06:11:**  Until next week, stay curious, keep improving, and don't stop believing that better is possible  when knowledge is available.  