### The Natural Lifestylist Podcast  (2021-53-21)
**[0:00:00-0:00:11](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:00:00):**  Welcome to the Natural Lifestyle podcast with me, your host Tony Riddle.  Happy new year you beautiful beings of planet earth.  Now let's just take a moment to celebrate the fact that we all woke up today.  Yep let's inhale that for a moment.  I am alive.  
**[0:00:24-0:00:29](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:00:24):**  You know it's a huge privilege to be alive people so let's hand on heart agree to honour  those that didn't wake up today by living this one wild and precious life with everything  we've got.  These are indeed strange times so if you're feeling a little funky, out of routine, struggling  to adjust to the new social norm, remember that you're not alone and that it's okay  
**[0:00:47-0:00:48](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:00:47):**  not to be okay.  But also please remember no matter what the new norm, that new social norm, template,  whatever it is, it is always best to reconnect with your natural norms and take responsibility  for what you can take responsibility for.  And that is your health, wellbeing, lifestyle and your environmental impact.  
**[0:01:08-0:01:12](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:01:08):**  Now to help you navigate this strange new norm and to reconnect the ways of living that  are more in sync with your natural norms, I've been busy building an online community  called the NatLife Tribe.  NatLife Tribe is a subscription based service providing you with access to a growing community  of natural beings who wish to improve their health, wellbeing, lifestyle and refine their  
**[0:01:31-0:01:33](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:01:31):**  human experience.  We get together for weekly chats, weekly mobility and movement sessions and there's also free  access to my online tutorials and discounted rates on workshops, retreats and brands that  I collaborate with.  To find out more and subscribe, just hit the links in the show notes.  
**[0:01:51-0:02:00](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:01:51):**  Now I recorded this podcast, this conversation way back in 2020 but then I dropped into Tony  hyper focused mofo mode for the crazy one man, two feet, three peaks endurance event.  And then I'm returning from the nut 17 marathons, three barefoot mountains in nine day shenanigans.  I hit a massive come down and had to go into save my own ass mode, which also involved  the whole riddle tribe moving out of London and out into the country.  
**[0:02:25-0:02:30](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:02:25):**  So one could say I somewhat dropped the ball on this podcast.  So apologies to the wonderful Abby and all those that have waited.  But in keeping with my flow don't push philosophy, I dare say this will of course be just the  right time to drop the mic.  Now there has been lots of talk recently on the new norm, but as far as I'm concerned,  
**[0:02:48-0:02:53](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:02:48):**  the only new norm we should be moving towards is actually the natural norm, which ain't  that new really is it?  And I have to thank Abby because Abby is seriously, this conversation has certainly helped me  better understand and articulate my message around the natural food norm.  You see, it takes a huge amount of skill in our modern industrialized world of convenience,  
**[0:03:11-0:03:14](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:03:11):**  I say, to get our fundamental needs met.  That's pretty inconvenient in this modern world.  And I hope this conversation will help you refine your food filter and make that path  or that journey a little easier to understand.  But before we get going, here's a little intel on the wonderful Abby Rose.  
**[0:03:30-0:03:37](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:03:30):**  Abby Rose is the co-creator and co-host of Phanarama, a platform for the regenerative  farming movement for them to share their voices.  Abby is also the co-founder of Vida cycle apps, where they create digital tools to build  ecology, profitability, and beauty on farms around the world.  Their tech tools are built to support a paradigm shift towards regenerative farming, where  
**[0:04:02-0:04:06](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:04:02):**  farmers are empowered through learning from their observations.  Now I really hope you enjoy this chat.  I learned a hell of a lot from Abby, as I've said.  And I feel to be honest, I feel like it's just a teaser.  It's just the start.  
**[0:04:16-0:04:19](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:04:16):**  And I hope I get to do this again.  Enjoy the conversation.  So we're rolling out.  So welcome to the Natural Istarlist podcast.  Great to have you on here.  
**[0:04:28-0:04:30](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:04:28):**  This is I mean, this has been in the making.  Couple that didn't quite make it but you know, we're in lockdown right now.  What do we expect?  We're breaking free of it, should we say?  Stepping into something new, hopefully something new.  
**[0:04:43-0:04:46](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:04:43):**  Hopefully the old paradigm.  So Abby, I'm so happy you're on.  Yeah, total pleasure to be here.  Thanks for joining the pod.  So I know Abby Rose.  
**[0:04:56-0:04:58](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:04:56):**  And of course, I've done my research on Abby Rose.  But for those for those that don't know, I mean, how do you mean it's a bit of a unique  path reading, which is interesting to say unique path considering it was the norm, right?  But now it's a unique path.  So Abby, I guess for the listeners, just a little bit of backstory.  
**[0:05:14-0:05:20](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:05:14):**  How do we get to this unique path and this fear that you're operating in now?  Yeah, yeah.  So yeah, the farming sphere, which I agree today seems sort of unusual or unique, but  just back in the day or not that long ago would have been more the norm.  So and just to be clear, I have to say I didn't start my life being interested in farming  
**[0:05:38-0:05:42](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:05:38):**  by any means, certainly for the first 20 odd years of my life.  I kind of...  But that's great Abby, we definitely want that backstory or love that backstory.  Yeah, no, I was gonna say I embarrassingly kind of thought farming was a bit boring and  backwards and just something that really wasn't part of our futures.  
**[0:05:59-0:06:02](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:05:59):**  And I even, you know, I grew up in Manchester or in the outskirts of Manchester on the edge  of the Pennines.  And so I grew up surrounded by farmland.  And I just remember thinking like, why do people have these cows and sheep and it just  seemed so like monotonous and not interesting.  
**[0:06:14-0:06:18](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:06:14):**  And yeah, now I'm fascinated by those fields.  But how did I, you know, why that transformation?  And really, it all started when my parents actually moved.  They actually moved from Cheshire to Chile and started farming there.  And so just to be clear, they're originally from California.  
**[0:06:37-0:06:41](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:06:37):**  So they moved to a part of the world which had a very similar climate to California.  I'm so pleased you said that Abby because I was trying to get the accent and it was  like, well Manchester, I've never heard anyone from Manchester with this accent before.  Totally.  Yeah, it's very confusing.  
**[0:06:52-0:06:53](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:06:52):**  But yeah, it's a decoy.  I am actually totally British born and bred.  I've never lived anywhere else officially.  So yeah, so my parents moved to Chile.  And you know, they had the why did they move to Chile and start farming?  
**[0:07:07-0:07:12](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:07:07):**  It's they had actually, you know, I've been eating organic food my whole life, it's always  been a priority for them.  And I think they came to the realization before me that, you know, where does the organic  food come from?  It comes from food from farms and from the soil.  
**[0:07:24-0:07:29](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:07:24):**  And that to really get to the root of health and quality of life.  That farming, you know, going into farming is at the root of that.  And so that was really their journey and why they were excited about being back being on  the land.  And so yeah, I started to go visit the farm.  
**[0:07:44-0:07:46](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:07:44):**  Our farm is called Vida cycle.  So like life cycle, but the first half in Spanish.  Yeah, and it's all you know, we have olives and almonds and pistachios.  And we graze sheep in between the trees.  And we also have loads of fruits and nuts, sorry, fruits and vegetables that we kind  
**[0:08:07-0:08:10](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:08:07):**  of sell locally in the local farming market.  And then we also make a natural wine and a verju which is very juice like lemon juice,  but made from green grapes.  And we sell both of those in the UK.  I think I saw a bottle of that sneaking into Fran Bailey's Instagram.  
**[0:08:27-0:08:28](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:08:27):**  Yeah, yeah.  I think so.  Yeah, she's sort of become obsessed by it now.  It's the natural wine world is one of those things that I mean, I wasn't even into wine  before.  
**[0:08:37-0:08:41](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:08:37):**  But when you get into natural wine, you sort of it's a bit like, I don't know, you know,  the more you get into the flavors, it's pretty becomes addictive.  But anyway, that's a whole other story.  No, I think we will go I think we're unpacked that bit later because I'm Yeah, I have a  friend that has a vineyard and he went by dynamic basically.  
**[0:08:57-0:08:58](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:08:57):**  Cool.  In that in that process.  It'd be good to tap into a little bit of that later.  Yeah, definitely.  Yeah.  
**[0:09:04-0:09:09](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:09:04):**  And I think that's something I should say is that our farm in Chile, we say we're like,  beyond organic or regenerative.  And so we're regenerative farming.  And that's really farming by observing the natural processes around us and working with  them, rather than trying to control them.  
**[0:09:23-0:09:24](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:09:23):**  Yeah.  Yeah.  So I have to say farming is also you know, it's it's can seem all like, nice and fluffy,  but it's also extremely challenging.  And one of the realizations and one of the reasons I guess I really started to kind of  
**[0:09:40-0:09:46](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:09:40):**  commit my whole life to farming and to sharing the voices of the farming community and getting  people more involved in farming is that it's incredibly challenging.  Like in 2017, we there were super fires in Chile, similar to the ones that have been  happening in Australia and in California in the last few years.  And our whole farm burned.  
**[0:10:04-0:10:07](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:10:04):**  I was there at the time.  Yeah.  And so everything was gone.  Even our water systems, you know, they all just went up in flames and dissolved.  So we, to be Yeah, the buildings were saved was the only thing the local fire people saved  
**[0:10:23-0:10:24](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:10:23):**  the buildings.  But, you know, in those moments, you kind of have to reassess and you just realize what  a risky undertaking farming is.  And that farmers really are on the front line of the climate crisis.  But it's also all in, isn't it?  
**[0:10:42-0:10:46](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:10:42):**  It's like an all in approach, especially in this instance where you could lose literally  everything.  Yeah, yeah, totally, totally.  And, yeah, so I think being on the front line of the climate crisis, you do start to rethink  your practices and how you're doing everything.  
**[0:10:58-0:11:02](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:10:58):**  And now, you know, it was only since that fire that I was able to convince my dad to  get sheep on the farm.  And so we use the sheep to graze and to build soil health on the farm really in order to  have more water and moisture on the farm for longer through the season.  But yeah, so, so yeah, so it was realizing that farmers are the key decision makers of  
**[0:11:21-0:11:29](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:11:21):**  our future, you know, is what they, the way we decide to farm on our land actually impacts  everyone around us and potentially everyone on the globe in terms of, you know, the way  we graze those sheep can affect how much carbon is sequestered in the soil.  Yeah.  And that's like that conversation around holistic management and moving.  
**[0:11:45-0:11:46](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:11:45):**  Yeah, exactly.  So, yeah, we can dig into that in a bit.  And through all of that, I became quite obsessed with the soil and I have a background in physics.  So I started making apps initially for our farm to help us monitor our soil and also  to monitor our trees.  
**[0:12:04-0:12:07](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:12:04):**  And that's actually what I spend most of my time doing these days.  I only spend two months of the year on the farm in Chile and the rest of the year I'm  based in the UK.  And we, yeah, I work with many farmers across the UK and the US.  And we're, yeah, one of our apps is called Soil Mentor.  
**[0:12:24-0:12:31](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:12:24):**  And it's really all about empowering farmers, returning agency to the farm and allowing  them to go and observe their soils and then learn from those observations and then go  and experiment, see how they can build soil health and then come back and see what's changed  in the soil.  I love that.  
**[0:12:44-0:12:45](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:12:44):**  Do you know what it feels like to me Abi?  It's almost like a conversation between, you know, we had that, we had a wild period, right?  So we're like sations and then we move in, migrate into farming.  So there would have been a, almost a pre agricultural then agricultural nature where there was that  information about the soil.  
**[0:13:02-0:13:07](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:13:02):**  People understood the soil, let's say, because they were still part of it.  Whereas now the interesting things we can, as you were saying, we can now use tech to  step in as that wild human almost to assess what's happening with the soil.  Agreed.  And to plant the wisdom in that way, because they were like wisdom keepers, right?  
**[0:13:20-0:13:23](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:13:20):**  Around the land and the soil and how to find water and what was fertile.  Yeah.  Okay.  Brilliant.  Totally.  
**[0:13:27-0:13:28](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:13:27):**  Yeah, yeah.  Yeah.  No, it's all about that.  It's all about, yeah, reconnecting and the power of observation to build wisdom essentially  and allowing technology to support you in that.  
**[0:13:38-0:13:44](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:13:38):**  So yeah, I think, and we've also make apps for vineyards and for agroforestry or trees  and all of our apps focus on observation and building that wisdom for yourself and on that  piece of specifically your land.  Not just in the general abstract, what is good farming, but what is good farming and  this specific piece of land?  
**[0:14:01-0:14:03](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:14:01):**  Because it is different for every single case.  Yeah.  And I guess what else goes into that individual case of the soil is everything, isn't it?  It's like the farmer's DNA, their emotions, everything.  That's why it's such an individual effort in that sense.  
**[0:14:16-0:14:17](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:14:16):**  Absolutely.  Yeah.  And so I guess the final thing to say is that the other part of that evolution was realizing  also that farmers, when you're farming, you're so remote and removed from other farmers.  And so knowledge sharing is actually quite difficult.  
**[0:14:34-0:14:40](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:14:34):**  And so on that journey, as I kind of became more immersed in the UK farming community,  I really realized that people were already doing amazing work, but it just wasn't being  shared and heard that well.  And so I had some experience in podcasting tech for good, creating podcasts about technology  for good.  
**[0:14:56-0:15:05](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:14:56):**  And so I worked together with the podcast editor, Joe, and we created Farmerama Radio,  which is really a community led initiative to share the voices of the farmers doing things  differently and of the people who are behind this regenerative farming movement.  What experiments are they doing?  What ideas do they have?  
**[0:15:21-0:15:27](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:15:21):**  And it's just seeding the idea in other farmers' heads of like, oh, I could try that or, oh,  they've already tried that and that didn't work.  Okay, let's not do that.  Yes.  So it's all sharing all of that.  
**[0:15:33-0:15:38](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:15:33):**  And what I didn't expect, but what's happened is that actually we get a lot of people tuning  in who are not farmers at all, but they're interested in farming or they're interested  in food or like, you know, interested in rewilding themselves.  And so they want to understand what is behind all of this and what are people talking about  and thinking about who are the people who are actually interacting with the land.  
**[0:15:56-0:15:59](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:15:56):**  And so, yeah, Farmerama Radio is, it's really exciting.  And I'd say it sounds amazing.  Because it's, as you say, it's building that community, but that community then outstretched  is just farming.  Oh, yeah, totally.  
**[0:16:09-0:16:11](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:16:09):**  You know, because we really went down the rabbit hole.  I mean, everyone should have their concerns in this, right?  As we're going to over the conversation, you know?  Yeah, totally.  And I think our latest, we did a six part series called Cereal with a C, so C-E-R-E-A-L.  
**[0:16:26-0:16:34](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:16:26):**  And that was all about the food system, food and farming system, particularly in the UK,  but it was through the lens of bread.  So you know, bread is something that everyone can identify with.  And you know, a lot of people choose to be gluten free or have a somewhat difficult relationship  with bread, certainly in today.  
**[0:16:48-0:16:55](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:16:48):**  And so what the series is about is about, you know, what is behind this like, change  in health status of bread for humans and what, and we go back to the breeding of the grains  and also how people are farming it and how it's being milled and baked.  And at every stage, there are, it just becomes very clear why, you know, how our bread system  has actually become really skewed away from nourishing human beings.  
**[0:17:18-0:17:21](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:17:18):**  Yes, how it's compromised.  Yeah, totally compromised and is compromising the land and humans.  And so, you know, those are the kind of stories that actually everyone can listen to and learn  something from and get on board with.  So that's certainly been popular.  
**[0:17:35-0:17:36](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:17:35):**  Absolutely.  I guess, you know, it stretches way beyond that, doesn't it, with the soil and just,  I mean, gluten is a big one now, isn't it?  But I mean, we're talking about almost anything that's grown in the soil.  And it was, it's, it's, it's bizarre, isn't it?  
**[0:17:52-0:17:58](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:17:52):**  Because we know that, you know, this is regenerative conversation, as we've said, it goes all the  way, it goes all the way back to wild humans and wild humans understanding the earth and  then through agriculture.  But yet, it seems like a very new conversation, you know, and it reminds me of where we were  with microbiome.  
**[0:18:12-0:18:17](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:18:12):**  And let's say that's like a 10 year exposure now to that conversation being around the  table.  What, I mean, why is it?  Why is it only now, Abby?  Why is it now that we seem to be hearing about it?  
**[0:18:26-0:18:29](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:18:26):**  I mean, partly, I guess you've already answered that in some of the work you're doing, which  helps grow the community.  Yeah.  Why not earlier?  Is it because of the allergies?  
**[0:18:37-0:18:41](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:18:37):**  Is it because of, you know, it's just, I just find it interesting that, again, it's a rewilding  process, like rewilding that we only now hear about rewilding, you know, and really, it's  just when you understand it and you're in it, it's always surprising because it's such  common sense.  Totally.  
**[0:18:51-0:18:52](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:18:51):**  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  No, I agree.  It is regenerative farming in a way is common sense.  But the reason I think, in a way, I think the serial series does actually lay this out  very clearly.  
**[0:19:04-0:19:11](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:19:04):**  Like, I, I just think that we've come to the end of a certain type of logic of how the  world works.  So, you know, everyone, literally just five years ago, in the farming community, it was  up, you know, everyone was talking about the only way to build a farming business and to  be forward thinking was to scale up.  
**[0:19:29-0:19:35](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:19:29):**  You know, and if you weren't looking for economies of scale in your business, then you weren't  going to survive as a farm going forward.  And nowadays that that conversation has just disappeared.  I mean, not for everyone, but literally within this five to seven year timeframe, it's gone.  And so I think, you know, what happened, the thing with farming is it's so linked to everything.  
**[0:19:58-0:20:05](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:19:58):**  So you know, globally, the markets for like wheat prices, for example, crashed.  I think it was in 2013.  And they've never come back up again.  So many farmers today are, you know, you see all these fields of wheat around the UK.  But those fields of wheat, they're actually spending more to grow that wheat, then they  
**[0:20:21-0:20:23](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:20:21):**  can make selling it.  So they're, you know, growing wheat at a loss.  And it's just...  Imagine how demoralising that is.  Exactly, exactly.  
**[0:20:32-0:20:33](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:20:32):**  Right.  And that's, you know, and that's not uncommon across many different food types.  And then there's also the policy change that's coming.  So with Brexit and leaving the EU, that means that in a way, it's a great opportunity in  the farming world, because we are able to suddenly decide how subsidies are dealt out  
**[0:20:57-0:21:00](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:20:57):**  to the farming community.  And you know that the government's thinking about that right now.  And in some ways, it's looking good.  They're talking about public money for public goods and supporting more environmental, environmentally  sound farming.  
**[0:21:13-0:21:19](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:21:13):**  But like, I guess you can see from a farmer's perspective, suddenly, they're in a very unknown  position, and they really don't know how they're going to get their income going forward, because,  you know, 60% of income on UK farms is from subsidies.  It's crazy, isn't it?  And you know, again, it's like, why don't we know about that?  
**[0:21:37-0:21:40](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:21:37):**  Why isn't that mainstream press because we're all impacted by that?  Totally.  It's, it is like, it's a really bleak thing.  It's flabbergasted, isn't it?  Yeah.  
**[0:21:48-0:21:55](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:21:48):**  But I guess what I'm saying is, like, it's really reached a low point.  And I don't think it can go much lower.  And so all of that thinking, the paradigm, the mindset before that was about like, yields  and scale and productivity, not profitability, and then we were just all, you know, subsidies  were kind of covering it all up in a way you could say, you know, that's coming to an end.  
**[0:22:18-0:22:22](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:22:18):**  And so people are, and farmers are thinking differently.  They're asking different questions.  And what's amazing is just at that time, the regenerative farming movement is really gaining  ground in the United States as well.  So yeah, United States, Australia, New Zealand, it's gaining ground traction everywhere.  
**[0:22:38-0:22:43](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:22:38):**  And so that's really exciting, because it's come kind of at the right time in the UK.  And so, so many farmers are asking questions about how can I be more regenerative in my  approach?  Or how can I build soil health and biodiversity on my farm?  Yeah, and is there a template for that?  
**[0:22:58-0:22:59](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:22:58):**  I mean, how do we understand?  I mean, if I look at a human being and I want to find natural ways of living, you know,  I have to go to the wild tribes of today, or at least tribes that are still connected  with the natural way of living to understand what it is to be human.  And so what's the template?  
**[0:23:16-0:23:18](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:23:16):**  What's the template for soil?  I know you said it's almost individual puffs with each farm, but how do you get to that?  What is the original template?  And how do we?  Yeah, I think...  
**[0:23:31-0:23:33](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:23:31):**  Is there a, you know, how do we get there?  I think is the conversation, isn't it?  Totally, totally.  I think, well, in a way you could say that farming is inherently, it's an intervention,  right?  
**[0:23:52-0:24:00](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:23:52):**  So inherently, in a way, maybe there is no natural template for farming, because it's  always a balance between the human interference and the natural world.  And, you know, we're looking to produce at a larger scale or with more efficiency, you  could say, or maybe that's not the right word, but we're trying to feed more people off a  piece of land than the natural world might do of its own accord, basically.  
**[0:24:26-0:24:30](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:24:26):**  Or we, yeah, I mean, obviously you grow in the rainforest and probably there is a huge  density of nutrition.  So we, but not everywhere is rainforest.  But I would say that if I was to look at a template for what could really healthy soil  look like, we would look to the native forests in the UK.  
**[0:24:51-0:24:57](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:24:51):**  Because, you know, when you go into a forest and you can like, it just, it like smells  of this like amazing...  I don't know, probably people just think it's like earthy, like an earthy sweetness, or  certainly if you touch, if you pick up the soil, it does.  Maybe not everyone's done that.  
**[0:25:13-0:25:19](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:25:13):**  But, and that is like, there's lots of fungi in that soil, essentially.  And the soil, you know, it's really squishy underfoot.  You know, when the soil feels soft, and you could just put your hand in and dig soil out  and there's no resistance, you don't certainly don't need like a serious spade to get into  that soil.  
**[0:25:36-0:25:37](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:25:36):**  Yeah.  So it's really amazing.  And I think that the template somewhat is that.  But on the other hand, you know, if you wanted to grow, if you want to grow wheat, you can't  have forest soils.  
**[0:25:54-0:25:57](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:25:54):**  It's not going to work.  So yeah, I think it really is.  Okay, so the soil is literally crop specific then in that sense?  Yeah, to a certain extent, yes.  Because if you think about...  
**[0:26:07-0:26:11](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:26:07):**  This is really sophisticated, isn't it?  Okay, wow, I mean, imagine that.  It's about like bacteria and fungi in the soil, basically.  And you find in a wheat based, in a wheat soil where wheat has been grown year in year  out, there's a lot more bacteria, the bacterial ratio is higher.  
**[0:26:26-0:26:30](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:26:26):**  Whereas if you go into a forest, there's a lot more fungi in the soil.  So yeah, it's like every single plant is in communication and in relationship with this  microbial life that's below ground.  And so whatever plants you have in the soil is going to affect the microbial life below  ground in exactly the same way that whatever you eat is going to affect the microbiome  
**[0:26:53-0:26:59](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:26:53):**  in your gut, like what bacteria show up in your gut is affected by what you eat, essentially.  Or that's my understanding.  And that's a byproduct of what's grown.  So it's the soil, the food, the food, the microbiome.  That's a question of complete diversity, isn't it?  
**[0:27:10-0:27:11](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:27:10):**  Totally, yeah.  So I think that is...  So if I was to...  And the more diverse the species, it's suggested, the more, you know, the heightened the emotional  wellbeing of the humans.  
**[0:27:23-0:27:26](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:27:23):**  That must be the same for...  Well, it's the whole ecosystem then, isn't it?  Yeah, it is.  And you're so right.  So that's exactly what it is.  
**[0:27:33-0:27:38](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:27:33):**  If I was to say there's any template or anything that we're like working towards at all times,  it's increased diversity.  Like the more you can increase the diversity, the more resilient your whole farming system  will be.  And if we do look into the natural environments, like, you know, the diversity levels are insane  
**[0:27:56-0:27:57](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:27:56):**  generally.  Yeah.  Yeah.  Species diversity on every level.  Yes.  
**[0:28:01-0:28:02](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:28:01):**  Every level.  Yeah.  So if we were to...  So if we've discussed that, so then if we think about, well, mono cropping is like the  complete opposite of diversity then, isn't it?  
**[0:28:10-0:28:11](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:28:10):**  Exactly.  So even with...  So with wheat production, so if we say, how many years are you saying that we keep producing  wheat in one particular field and that the soil is specific for the wheat, is that part  of the problem why we're also seeing, you know, issues with gluten, intolerances that  
**[0:28:29-0:28:31](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:28:29):**  come through wheat?  Is it because possibly that the wheat that's being grown, which is still a mono crop in  that sense, is it?  Is it still?  Yeah.  
**[0:28:39-0:28:40](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:28:39):**  Oh, yeah.  We keep taking the same nutrients from the soil the whole time, so then the soil ends  up depleted.  But anything else?  Exactly.  
**[0:28:47-0:28:48](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:28:47):**  So how do we...  Abby, so how do they then recycle the wheat if it's always grown in the same soil?  So for people who do grow wheat, year in, year out, which that's impossible to do organically,  but you can do that chemically.  You just apply nitrogen, potassium, phosphate, year in, year out.  
**[0:29:14-0:29:18](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:29:14):**  And what's interesting is that when you see those plants and you look at their roots,  they have almost no relationship to the soil.  So the soil is just a substrate in that situation.  And that's where you start to like come up with this idea of dirt, right?  Because it is just, it's literally just a material that helps hold the plant up right  
**[0:29:35-0:29:36](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:29:35):**  basically.  There is no communication going on.  There's very, very thwarted communication going on between the soil and the plant.  And there's hardly any microbes in there.  And actually what happens is that you get this overpopulation of a certain microbe that  
**[0:29:52-0:29:54](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:29:52):**  then becomes a pathogen essentially.  And that's why you then have to use more fungicides or, you know, different things to try and  kill the pathogens.  Oh, and then, yeah, and then we go deep and then you consume that.  And then what's that doing then to that diversity of your gut?  
**[0:30:07-0:30:09](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:30:07):**  I mean, it's like...  Exactly.  Yeah.  And I think...  If you had a diet based on, well, the terrifying thing is the breads and the pastas and that  
**[0:30:18-0:30:19](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:30:18):**  was your nutrients.  And the expectation was you were going to gain what you would have gained 4,000 years  ago, 5,000 years ago.  Well, let's even just think of, let food be thy medicine, you know?  It's not let food be thy medicine.  
**[0:30:34-0:30:37](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:30:34):**  It's let soil be thy medicine in this conversation, isn't it?  Absolutely.  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  And then the other thing is about the soil.  And maybe I should talk a little bit...  
**[0:30:43-0:30:48](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:30:43):**  I don't know how much do you want to go into, like, just so people can get a picture of  this soil in their minds.  Yeah, yeah, please.  Yeah, I could tell you better.  So let's dig deeper in the soil.  
**[0:30:56-0:30:57](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:30:56):**  Let's do it.  Let's do it.  Love this.  So, yeah, the way I think about soil is that it's basically, it's a living organism.  It's a living web.  
**[0:31:07-0:31:13](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:31:07):**  And so in one handful of healthy soil, there are more microbes than there are humans on  the planet.  So it really is a heck of a lot of life going on in there.  And yeah, so you can imagine there's all these different microbes, bacteria, fungi, and they're  all in communication.  
**[0:31:27-0:31:34](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:31:27):**  And so what happens with a plant is that the plant is photosynthesizing and it's making  sugars.  And plants put about, or it's been shown that they can put about 30 to 40% of their sugars  down into their roots.  And it's really at the root that you can imagine the root is like the conversation or communication.  
**[0:31:52-0:31:57](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:31:52):**  It's like the communication, I don't know, film basically.  And that is, so it's that point that the plant will put out, or it has a little bit of sugar,  and it'll put out a little message and say, I need a bit of phosphate.  This really reminds me of Brett, just want to go off on a tangent just quickly.  It really reminds me of Brett breast milk, because I read something, someone posted something,  
**[0:32:19-0:32:31](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:32:19):**  a friend of mine posted something about, we're going to be creating lab breast milk, laboratory  breast milk.  And I read one of the comments, this woman, she was spot on.  She just said, the difference is that the baby, the communication is between the baby  and the mother as to what is needed in the milk.  
**[0:32:46-0:32:52](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:32:46):**  And the baby receives exactly what it needs through the milk at that moment in time.  And this is that same, it's exactly the same conversation that the plant is having that  communication to the soil through the sugar you're saying, to then say, this is what I  need for growth.  Yeah, yeah, I think it puts out little like, is other messages essentially, at that point,  
**[0:33:09-0:33:16](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:33:09):**  and sugar is kind of the reward for the bacteria and fungi that bring the what it needs to  it.  That is just mind blowing.  Honestly, I could stop you there.  It's just like I'm done with that.  
**[0:33:24-0:33:25](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:33:24):**  Oh, wow.  And it's amazing.  And so that little communication framework that's going on below the earth, like it that  is what allows plants to thrive.  And so when you start messing about with that, that's when you can get in trouble essentially.  
**[0:33:41-0:33:48](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:33:41):**  And actually, like the fungi, I mean, their network is so extensive, it extends for miles  around.  So one plant could be connected to another plant that's like over a mile away by the  fungal network.  So I call it the internet of fungi, essentially.  
**[0:33:57-0:34:02](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:33:57):**  You just imagine the internet that we as we understand it, that is happening below ground  in fungal, through fungal hyphae and connections.  And so that's transporting like water, but with a far diverse and totally population.  Yeah, yeah, it's mental.  It's yeah, so exciting.  
**[0:34:17-0:34:20](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:34:17):**  Way beyond what we could imagine in numbers.  Exactly, exactly.  And so I think, you know, once you start to understand that kind of communication framework,  and you start to see soil as essentially a mass of communications and a way to bring  a plant whatever it needs, then like soil becomes essentially the most important thing  
**[0:34:40-0:34:45](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:34:40):**  on a farm because that is the communication framework.  That is where nourishment comes from.  And yeah, so yeah, that's why I'm obsessed with soil health, basically.  And not only that, like what, you know, nature isn't too, it like always has multiple advantages.  So soil is actually like when it's formed biologically, and when all these microbes  
**[0:35:06-0:35:15](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:35:06):**  are doing all the work, they build soil structure that allows for oxygen to get through anywhere  in the soil.  And it also allows for water to be stored, huge amounts of water can be stored in a healthy  soil.  Yeah.  
**[0:35:23-0:35:27](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:35:23):**  So like, for example, a lot of the flooding in the UK, you know, more and more papers  are showing that it's attributed to a reduction in soil health and a reduced capacity for  the soil to hold water.  So it's the degradation, it's impacted.  Totally.  
**[0:35:38-0:35:39](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:35:38):**  Yeah.  Yeah, yeah.  So, yeah, so soil is kind of an amazing, amazing organism.  In the same way, I think, you know, people talk about the soil biome.  Yeah.  
**[0:35:51-0:35:56](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:35:51):**  It's almost identical in that, you know, we've really learned so much more about the microbiome  in our guts, and just how complex that is, and how many different things that affects  that we just had no idea, essentially.  Well, yeah, because we're, yeah, you know, that report on the guy, I think he lives with  the Hadza, doesn't he, he goes to stay with the Hadza, and he starts reading his microbiome,  
**[0:36:13-0:36:20](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:36:13):**  and he gets his microbiome up to the level of the tribe in a window of time.  And that's everything from the soil, everything in their environment has fed that microbiome.  It's not like it's taking probiotics, it's just being in the environment and eating what  they're eating.  But we always put the conversation around, well, you've got to eat more fiber, we eat  
**[0:36:35-0:36:39](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:36:35):**  more greens, and you eat more of this, and then that feeds the microbiome.  Well, actually, no, because if you're feeding on greens, the fiber, but really it's the  plant matter that's fed on the real diverse soil that's going to get you to a state where  you can fully rewild the gut.  Agreed.  
**[0:36:53-0:36:57](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:36:53):**  Because it's rewilding the land, rewilding the plant, rewilding the gut, rewilding the  humans, kind of that whole, again, it's a whole system, isn't it?  Totally, yeah.  And it's roots is this, right?  It's huge, Abi, isn't it?  
**[0:37:09-0:37:10](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:37:09):**  Yes.  It is.  And I think in the same way that there are principles of, or you think about how to rewild  yourself, farmers are thinking about how to, I mean, it's called regenerative, but what  are the practices they can do that build this on their farms?  
**[0:37:29-0:37:38](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:37:29):**  You know, they're introducing animals, they're making sure the soil is always covered.  You want to make sure there's always a living root in your soil.  And diversity is key, you know, in this messaging system, if all of the plants are putting out  the message for exactly the same nutrient at exactly the same time, then you're going  to get this monoculture of bacteria below ground as well.  
**[0:37:58-0:38:03](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:37:58):**  And that, as we've seen so many times, you know, that doesn't bode well.  It's not going to work if you're asking for the same, you know, every single plant in  the field is asking for exactly the same thing at exactly the same time.  Okay, so Abi, I'm a farmer, right?  So I'm a farmer and I've been monocropping.  
**[0:38:19-0:38:21](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:38:19):**  What's the process for me?  What does it entail?  I want to get back to, I regenerate the soil, I want to become, I want to rewild the land.  What's the, what's, what's, is there a step here?  What's the first step for the farmer?  
**[0:38:35-0:38:37](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:38:35):**  What do they need to consider?  Well, I mean, I know it's massive, it's probably a three hour question that one.  Totally, there's different types of farms and all that kind of stuff.  But I think, I do think that the first thing to do is actually maybe to just go and take  a look at your soils.  
**[0:38:53-0:39:01](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:38:53):**  So to dig some holes and using that understanding of how the soil works to go and look for evidence  of how alive your soil is.  And actually on our website, we have a totally free protocol, set of protocols of different  ways that you can look and learn to see how alive your soil is.  So they, yeah, I think that's a starting place.  
**[0:39:16-0:39:26](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:39:16):**  The other thing is, it's also about kind of a mindset shift, essentially.  So it's starting to, I think, you know, the best thing farmers can do is they go and they  engage with different regenerative farming groups around the UK and, you know, going  and like there's a farmer called Fred Price in Somerset, and he's transitioned his farm  over the last eight years.  
**[0:39:45-0:39:46](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:39:45):**  Okay.  And actually, the first thing he did, he was like a conventional arable farmer, so growing  all grains using inputs and he was achieving really high yields.  But his farm financially was looking atrocious.  So he started to reduce nitrogen inputs, essentially.  
**[0:40:08-0:40:13](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:40:08):**  And that was really the start of his journey, was starting to reduce the chemical inputs  that he was using.  And then the soil automatically started to improve.  And then he started putting in what they call cover crops, which is essentially like a biodiverse  mix of different crops that he was putting in between his wheat, for example.  
**[0:40:32-0:40:36](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:40:32):**  And so that was allowing the soil to recover a little bit.  Yeah, so and it took eight years.  He also, as part of that, introduced pigs onto the farm.  He's, you know, one of the best pig farmers I've ever seen.  All of the pigs live outside all of the time, and they graze on pasture, and they're moved  
**[0:40:53-0:40:57](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:40:53):**  regularly and they live in the woodlands in the winter.  And it's an amazing system.  And yeah, and his pork is, it's just like nothing else you've ever tasted.  You know you're eating nourishment.  And again, it's understanding that it's a whole system, it is a system.  
**[0:41:16-0:41:18](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:41:16):**  Yeah, absolutely.  Yeah, I mean, he wasn't that interested in farming animals, but he knew that he couldn't  shift his system to being regenerative if he didn't have those animals, the pigs in  there eating some of the cover crops.  So you know when the fields weren't being used for wheat production, for example, he  
**[0:41:43-0:41:50](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:41:43):**  needed to have a way of being able to, you know, essentially make money from the other  fields whilst also building up the nutrient level in that soil so that he could then grow  wheat crop again further down the line, if that makes sense.  Yeah, absolutely.  Yeah.  
**[0:42:05-0:42:10](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:42:05):**  It's, yeah, it's an unfolding journey.  And people talk about it as the regenerative journey.  Yeah, you can understand that.  I mean, what about the, what about, what about, say this, what's his name again?  Sorry, Price?  
**[0:42:22-0:42:12](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:42:22):**  Fred Price at Gough  Fred Price.  So does Fred Price, I mean, does he mention about his own, I mean, emotional health and  well being within it?  Because you know, the bigger picture again is, you know, it's always about the good  
**[0:42:35-0:42:38](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:42:35):**  for the human good for the environment, as far as I'm concerned.  And so are the farmers coming forward and saying, with that regenerative process, they're  making more of a connection to the earth?  Is their emotional well being improving through this process?  Yeah, absolutely.  
**[0:42:52-0:42:56](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:42:52):**  And I think that that's one thing that surprises them all the most.  Great, great to do that.  Yeah, so another farmer who also has transitioned recently, like Fred and the other farmer were  in conversation.  And they both said that suddenly, they're able to feel joy in their farming experience.  
**[0:43:20-0:43:25](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:43:20):**  And on a day to day basis, they actually are able to sometimes like, for example, take  a holiday and they don't, you know, they're able to feel good about what they're doing.  And I think, well, I think there's, I think actually, Gabe Brown, who's kind of like,  one of the, you know, he was sort of the figurehead or is sort of the figurehead of the regenerative  farming movement in the United States.  
**[0:43:46-0:43:52](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:43:46):**  And he wrote a book called Dirt to Soil, which does really talk about the regenerative transition  for farmers.  And he's, the way he describes it is that he wakes up every morning now.  And he used to, sorry, he used to wake up every morning and think about what am I going  to kill today?  
**[0:44:06-0:44:12](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:44:06):**  Now he wakes up every morning and thinks, what can I help flourish today?  And I think, you know, just imagine waking up every morning and thinking, what are you  going to kill today?  Like, that's not a very positive mindset.  So yeah, multiple farmers have told me, it's completely shifted their mental health.  
**[0:44:31-0:44:39](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:44:31):**  And I think that, you know, there are incredibly high suicide rates in the farming community.  And I do think that that's one thing I always try and emphasize to people who aren't in  the farming community is that this really isn't about making farmers wrong for what  they're doing.  Like, I think it's very much a systemic societal issue, as opposed to individual farmers making  
**[0:44:56-0:44:59](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:44:56):**  bad decisions.  You know, farmers are just, they're being, they're businesses, so they're just following  where the market is taking them.  And they're just doing their best.  And sometimes that ends up in kind of a system that they don't even like, but that's the  
**[0:45:17-0:45:19](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:45:17):**  business they're in, and there's not much that they can do about it.  And they're maintaining debts and all this kind of stuff.  So yeah, it's on all of us in a way.  Well, it's pretty fair to say that it's the, in order for farmers to fully implement it,  I guess the regenerative processes and practices.  
**[0:45:36-0:45:40](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:45:36):**  Well, they need the consumers support, right?  That's one level, isn't it?  Absolutely.  But also, then we got to look at fair trade, right?  And everything else that comes through that process.  
**[0:45:47-0:45:54](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:45:47):**  So that's the support of the consumer, but then outside that government level, really.  I mean, that's where it's at.  I mean, a lot of these farmers, we're looking at, I mean, it's inherited generation to generation  to generation, isn't it?  A lot of them, yeah.  
**[0:46:04-0:46:05](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:46:04):**  You know?  Yeah, exactly.  And so the fears and everything else that comes with that can be inherited.  So if your fear is the finances and the yields and everything else in that language, it's  almost like learning how to deconstruct that.  
**[0:46:20-0:46:21](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:46:20):**  Exactly.  Yeah.  And I think, you know, for a lot of farmers, you're carrying a lot of debt as well.  And I do think that's a real trap because farm machines are like 100,000, you know,  can be 100,000 pounds.  
**[0:46:36-0:46:40](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:46:36):**  And then you're paying off those debts over many, many years.  So if you've bought a machine that works for a chemical system, to just, you know, how  are you going to keep servicing those debts and you've still got that machine and you're  going to shift to this new system?  Like, it doesn't just make sense immediately.  
**[0:46:57-0:47:01](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:46:57):**  So there are a lot of barriers to change in farming.  And you know, we need to acknowledge those.  For us, you know, eaters, it's kind of easy to just walk into the supermarket and say,  oh, do I want organic or not?  You know, it's such a simple decision.  
**[0:47:16-0:47:19](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:47:16):**  It's really not that simple for farmers.  And yeah, that's something that I learned like kind of the hard way coming into the  farming system, sort of naively and thinking like, well, why isn't everyone organic?  And then it's slowly dawning on me as I visited more farms, and I just realized what a huge  struggle it is to achieve that in the current market climate and with the current policies  
**[0:47:44-0:47:45](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:47:44):**  in place.  And just, it's just not easy, basically.  So yeah, we really can't, I would never blame or judge a farmer for how they farm basically.  And I think that's quite important.  Because it's a journey, isn't it?  
**[0:47:59-0:48:06](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:47:59):**  And even if, you know, perhaps farmer of 50 years of age, maybe, you know, he might not  get it in this lifetime, but the next generation that inherit might do.  Yeah, totally.  It's a journey, isn't it?  Gotta have compassion for that, really.  
**[0:48:15-0:48:16](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:48:15):**  I mean, because we all go through it.  It's like if you buy anything, I could be a sustainable brand.  I'm designing something at the moment, we're just having a conversation about transparency  and sustainable materials, you know, going all the way through the conversation.  And then you realize that it's such an expensive process, and that has to reflect in the price  
**[0:48:37-0:48:39](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:48:37):**  of the product, right?  So if you, what's the biggest complaint around organic food and produce?  Oh, it's more expensive.  It's this, it's this, but we have to support it.  That's the thing.  
**[0:48:50-0:48:54](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:48:50):**  Without that support, what does the farmer do, you know?  Totally.  Yeah, yeah.  And I think, yeah, the cost of food is a massive conversation.  And where I've kind of got to on it is that, to me, it's really awful.  
**[0:49:09-0:49:17](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:49:09):**  And it's not okay that we think people who have less money deserve food that has lower  nutritional value.  Right that that this idea, you know, that everyone needs cheap food, that that's actually  really awful.  That's been normalized.  
**[0:49:27-0:49:32](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:49:27):**  Yeah, it's been normalized to think that it's okay, we can fob off people who don't have  enough money with just like, basically nutritionist food.  That's fine.  We'll just give them calories, and they'll carry on.  And I think that we need to question that.  
**[0:49:44-0:49:45](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:49:44):**  That's not okay.  Like, well, it's not okay from start to finish, is it?  Because it compromises the human at the end, you know, compromises the soil because we're  producing it again in compromised soil, because it's perceived as so cheap to do that, to  offer that process.  
**[0:50:00-0:50:04](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:50:00):**  And then crippling the farmer and his finances in between.  It's crazy.  Totally.  Yeah, it's just, it really doesn't work in so many ways.  So I think we really need to start thinking about, you know, accessibility to food, as  
**[0:50:19-0:50:22](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:50:19):**  opposed to cheap food.  And then, you know, starting a conversation from there, ensuring food is accessible and  high, you know, nutritious food is accessible to all is really important.  And it's just that's a slightly different conversation, essentially.  I think, again, in the cereal series, we kind of went into that because that was one of  
**[0:50:42-0:50:46](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:50:42):**  the things that actually inspired us to make it, was when we learned that flour today,  you know, like normal plain flour, has, like officially got almost zero nutritional value  to it.  And so much so that the government requires that you add nutrients to that flour before  you sell it.  
**[0:51:01-0:51:03](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:51:01):**  What are we doing?  I don't know.  Why?  Yeah, fortifying flour, like that is the norm.  We add nutrients back in, and then sell it, and that's required by law.  
**[0:51:11-0:51:18](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:51:11):**  So somehow we got from a food substance that we then took, made sure it had zero nutritional  value, and then we put some stuff back in and sold that to people.  I just think that is mental.  How did that happen?  It's just this huge level of disconnection, isn't it?  
**[0:51:31-0:51:34](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:51:31):**  Yeah, it really is.  It's total disconnection from any kind of ecosystem.  Absolutely.  It's very, it's alarming, isn't it?  You know, we experienced it, you've been around it, but I guess, you know, I'm out in nature,  
**[0:51:49-0:51:54](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:51:49):**  I'm in the, on the heath, let's just call it the heath, and the heath near us.  And you have this like 20 minutes out there, and the recommend, you know, recommended 20  minutes or lower heart rate, blood pressure, cortisol, just that alone, just 20 minutes  in that environment.  And that helps reconnect to self, doesn't it?  
**[0:52:10-0:52:19](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:52:10):**  Do you think there's like a connection between our farming practices and disconnection to  the land and ourselves?  Like the disconnection to self.  So not just, do you think we should be, more people should be involved with farming, in  other words?  
**[0:52:30-0:52:39](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:52:30):**  Do you think that Mr Riddle here can, should be invited into the farm to see the practices,  to make more of a connection to it, more of a connection to the earth, the food supply?  Do you get where I'm going there?  Yeah, absolutely.  Does that make sense?  
**[0:52:49-0:52:50](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:52:49):**  Got it.  I think, interestingly, particularly thinking about the social justice and racial justice  movement, there's a lady called Leah Penniman.  She wrote a book called Farming While Black.  And one of the things that she says that, and I've heard this again and again, particularly  
**[0:53:10-0:53:19](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:53:10):**  from black people, is that like starting to farm and garden themselves brought this whole  new sense of self that they just had never experienced in their lives, basically.  It's like, it gives you a confidence that isn't accessible elsewhere.  It is like, and so it's not just black people I've heard that from.  Of course, I've also heard, you know, there's many other people, but I just thought that  
**[0:53:42-0:53:47](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:53:42):**  was really interesting because of course, you know, the racial experience is even more  disconnecting.  And so it was interesting, you know, valuable to hear how much that impacted their lives  and their sense of self.  And so I do think that, yes, Mr. Riddle, going to a farm, I think it's not just about seeing  
**[0:54:04-0:54:07](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:54:04):**  it, but it's actually about doing it.  Being part of the process.  Being, yeah.  Being, but I think, I really think you can gain that just from your garden.  If you're able to grow things yourself, I think that you can engage with this whole  
**[0:54:20-0:54:26](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:54:20):**  soil process, like just in a garden or even, it's harder to do in a pot of soil because  obviously you're disconnected from the fungal network when you're in a pot.  But if you are able to access land that has soil in it, then you can quite quickly connect  with this whole life underground and you can start to work with it and sort of do a dance,  a gardening dance, and play with biodiversity and growing different vegetables amongst flowers  
**[0:54:53-0:55:01](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:54:53):**  and grasses and just experience what it is that this whole other world is about.  And I think that for me, certainly, you know, I'm not on the farm for 10 months of the year.  It is that experience that allows for that reconnecting with like, with myself essentially.  Yeah.  What does it mean to be a human being?  
**[0:55:17-0:55:25](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:55:17):**  What does it mean to create beauty in the world, to create nourishment and to reconnect  with what life is all about?  You know, to reconnect with being alive, essentially.  Does that make sense?  Absolutely.  
**[0:55:36-0:55:43](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:55:36):**  Well, we, yeah, again, because understanding one ecosystem, not being separate of it, it's  that conversation of, what do I say, it's like reconnecting, reconnecting from the ego  system and reconnecting to the ecosystem.  Totally.  Yeah.  
**[0:55:56-0:55:57](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:55:56):**  You know?  It is that.  Isn't it?  Yeah.  It's humbling as well.  
**[0:56:01-0:56:02](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:56:01):**  And just a simple act, I'm always amazed.  I took a group out on the heath on the weekend.  Well, actually pre-corona days, I took a large group out and it was raining.  It was like really hammering down.  It was just, it was mud puddles everywhere.  
**[0:56:19-0:56:24](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:56:19):**  And I had people just standing in a circle and we'd breathe together.  And then it turned into like working head to head.  And then they were just kind of, you know, I had the wrestling in the end around in the  mud.  It was like proper full on mud wrestling by the end of it.  
**[0:56:34-0:56:40](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:56:34):**  But it was almost like you had to give them the permission to do it to begin with.  But the moment they'd entered it, the moment they were in the mud, and they surrendered  to that point where, right, I'm in now, I'm all in.  It was no longer just about, you know, it was a bit of mud on my trackie.  They were just caked in it.  
**[0:56:53-0:56:56](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:56:53):**  Every part of them, you couldn't recognize their clothes.  It just went to a muddy mass.  But just the joy, just the level of joy, like the happiness that came through it.  And just the barely laughter, everything that comes through that process, you suddenly see,  wow, that's is it just comes through that reconnection.  
**[0:57:12-0:57:17](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:57:12):**  I want to, yeah, I guess it'd be interesting to see the studies around farming, wouldn't  it?  Whether, you know, statistically, whether as regenerative practices are coming in, how  that health and well being of the farming community improves.  And then what that means that goes into the figure.  
**[0:57:30-0:57:35](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:57:30):**  I honestly believe that, you know, it's like when I'm, if you have a forage door, you understand  digestion, it's like, right, you make a connection to the food.  And then it already is stimulating the digestive system.  You know, and then that whole system then is supported by just you feeling and sensing  and smelling all the senses coming alive.  
**[0:57:52-0:57:58](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:57:52):**  We listened to, there's a farming community called Casita Verde, which is in Ibiza.  We were living there.  And there's, I think they're permaculture now.  And their conversation, I'm sure was around even the farming, like urinating on the land  and all of that going into the soil that their DNA is actually in the soil.  
**[0:58:14-0:58:16](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:58:14):**  Everything is in there in that process.  Wow.  Yeah, absolutely.  I mean, on a philosophical level, I actually I had an experience with a lady called Mama  D. Mama D. She's an amazing, amazing woman.  
**[0:58:36-0:58:42](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:58:36):**  A black woman, a black mama really, she really has a strong, beautiful energy.  And she did this experience.  It was on a farm near Glastonbury, actually.  And she gave us each like a role in the woodland community.  So I was lichen.  
**[0:58:56-0:59:01](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:58:56):**  And she took us into this little forest and we each had to like take on the role of the  whatever we'd been given.  So I was lichen.  So I spent a lot of time at the bottom of a tree, just sitting there being in the forest.  And then the story, she kind of was telling us the story of the woodland.  
**[0:59:14-0:59:19](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:59:14):**  And then there was basically an apocalyptic event and we all died.  And we lived through that death and we were kind of reborn as soil.  And it was in that moment that I like really connected to realizing that, you know, ashes  to ashes, dust to dust, like, we come from the soil, and we will return to the soil.  And that I felt a huge like, sense of relief in that.  
**[0:59:45-0:59:51](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=0:59:45):**  And a sort of beauty in the idea that my body would decompose and become soil.  Like, sort of romantic, isn't it?  And it's like, it's sort of a holding, you know, if you're not religious, and you don't  have any beliefs around afterlife or anything like that.  It's like, that the soil is your, your, your holding place.  
**[1:00:07-1:00:08](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:00:07):**  I don't know.  I really like that.  I guess it goes back into that, that fungal network, doesn't it?  Mm hmm.  Imagine what's being communicated in that, you know, it's like, yeah, you want to go  
**[1:00:19-1:00:25](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:00:19):**  ashes, you want to go ashes to soil really, rather than dirt.  Yeah, yeah, totally.  Definitely.  Yes, absolutely.  Yeah.  
**[1:00:32-1:00:33](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:00:32):**  Yeah.  Wow.  Yeah, I think, yeah, there's definitely a lot of beauty to soil that we just don't realize,  or we haven't been told about, maybe is the better way to say it.  Well, as well, conversations like this, again, it's opening up, isn't it?  
**[1:00:49-1:00:52](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:00:49):**  Because I think, you know, we've got to the ground level, at least we're talking about  grounding and being barefoot.  And I always discuss like the sensory input, because we're the sensorial beings, right?  So as butt naked as you can possibly be to the elements means that your senses are constantly  alive.  
**[1:01:07-1:01:16](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:01:07):**  And to be sensory deprived means that neurologically and physiologically, we're starving, you know.  But then if we go, if we're talking about going deeper than that, really going into  it, then we're looking at not just the microbiome contact with the skin, we're looking at a  network that is very powerful.  This is like, it's almost getting to consciousness, isn't it?  
**[1:01:33-1:01:34](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:01:33):**  Absolutely.  Within the soil within that network.  Yeah.  And I think that is the realization of regenerative farming, in a sense that's hitting the nail  on the head is that for the last 60 to 80 years, maybe longer, you know, we've thought  
**[1:01:49-1:01:52](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:01:49):**  that we were the consciousness in farming.  Yeah.  And that we were the decision makers and that we were going to control everything.  Aye, aye, aye.  Ego, ego, ego.  
**[1:02:01-1:02:09](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:02:01):**  And the realization that, oh, whoa, the consciousness is so embedded in the soil and the plants  and the whole ecosystem.  And we're just a mere kind of, you know, part of that.  So we're part of that kind of ongoing ecosystem interaction and where can we place ourselves  and how can we help with it and guide it in a direction maybe that we want it to go in,  
**[1:02:30-1:02:35](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:02:30):**  but keep the humility and recognizing that the consciousness lays everywhere else as  well, essentially.  Yeah.  I always, I have this, I wrote about it saying that consciousness is like one of the most  patient, yet resilient, most patient, relentless, there we go, teachers, teachers, you know,  
**[1:02:59-1:03:04](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:02:59):**  wise teachers that, you know, we keep going at something, keep going and there'll be subtle,  subtle messages, no, no, no, nearly there, nearly there, nearly there.  You know, and then we have to go through this whole, sometimes terrible process to get to  something but we finally get there.  Yeah.  
**[1:03:17-1:03:20](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:03:17):**  This is one of those conversations where it feels like that.  And it's on the path of rewilding, isn't it?  Because if you think about the, it's a bit of a contradiction, isn't it?  Because if you think about we went from wild and then farming was kind of the closing,  that going into agriculture kind of meant that we were no longer a wild being.  
**[1:03:35-1:03:42](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:03:35):**  So do you view like that regenerative process as on the path to rewilding or is...  Yeah.  Trying to get the farm or in something that is more of a wild state, which as you say  would then be like the consciousness where it takes more care of itself and less human  intervention.  
**[1:03:56-1:03:58](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:03:56):**  Exactly, exactly.  And I think, yeah, it's about less human intervention.  It's not about no human intervention because I do think that, you know...  There's a custodian level to it and there is in the rainforest, isn't there?  Like the tribes are responsible for the rainforest.  
**[1:04:12-1:04:16](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:04:12):**  Well, and not just that, like part of rewilding yourself is recognizing that you are part  of the wild, right?  Yeah, you are nature.  You are it.  So this isn't about taking humans out of the picture because we are the destroyers and  
**[1:04:27-1:04:29](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:04:27):**  the destructive force inherently.  We are part of the ecosystem.  We're part of the wild.  And this is about, okay, let's get back to a system where the humans are more in balance  with everything else that's part of the wild rather than this kind of dictator ego that's  
**[1:04:48-1:04:54](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:04:48):**  just trying to control everything for only our own needs, which is essentially an extractive  system.  Yeah, so it's that harmonious interdependence.  Exactly.  Reestablishing that.  
**[1:04:59-1:05:00](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:04:59):**  Exactly.  That we have a significant role within it, but we're not separate of it.  Yeah.  Exactly.  Yeah, it's part of us.  
**[1:05:09-1:05:15](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:05:09):**  I think just to be clear, like there is a rewilding movement in the farming sector.  I don't know how much you've seen that, but you know, it's quite controversial in some  ways because some proponents of rewilding do consider it more about that the humans  are the destroyers and that we should just completely remove ourselves from those landscapes.  And I think what concerns me a little bit about that is that the idea then is that you  
**[1:05:42-1:05:53](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:05:42):**  would produce food in very kind of intensive areas of land using the old or this chemical  paradigm essentially.  Leading to more destruction and degradation.  Exactly.  And ignoring all the natural systems.  
**[1:06:03-1:06:10](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:06:03):**  And then leading to further human suffering, which then disconnects us from being well  being.  Exactly.  Yeah.  And like, you know, how are you going to have any nutritional quality in that food in the  
**[1:06:15-1:06:17](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:06:15):**  long term?  And it just, it doesn't make any sense to me.  And you know, some of what, for example, George Monbiot says, you know, he had that program  recently where he was advocating for food grown in the lab.  Yeah, the forestry ground food.  
**[1:06:31-1:06:32](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:06:31):**  Yeah.  And I just, I it's from like, if we think of the soil and the complexity of it and the  microbiome and the complexity of it, it just doesn't make sense to me that we should try  and feed ourselves from a lab.  Because I can almost guarantee we have missed a key point there.  
**[1:06:54-1:07:01](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:06:54):**  When it's almost like those, you know, when you see the text afterwards, it always reads,  what could possibly go wrong?  When you, when we start going right back into that breast milk conversation about laboratory  breast milk, because I know for some mothers that we go, oh, brilliant means I don't have  to give my child formula.  
**[1:07:14-1:07:19](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:07:14):**  But again, we're losing sight of, and in some cases, that has to be the case.  I get that.  But of course, we're losing sight of all this.  There's more to that.  There's the microbiome that's being fed through the breast milk.  
**[1:07:27-1:07:33](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:07:27):**  There's only the specific properties in breast milk that only feed the bifido bacterium of  the baby's gut.  It doesn't have any other need for the baby.  Doesn't fit any other need other than the microbiome.  And then we're talking about the fungal network, what that has for our system, not just on  
**[1:07:45-1:07:49](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:07:45):**  a microbiome level, but I guess it's feeding multiple systems.  And then what that's gaining from the food.  Again, yeah, again, what could possibly go wrong?  Yeah, totally.  I mean, I was a bit flabbergasted by him.  
**[1:08:00-1:08:04](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:08:00):**  I couldn't understand why he's suddenly taken that stance.  I haven't got there yet.  I don't really understand that enough, really.  I think he's just trying to take an extreme stance in some ways.  But I think the problem is that many of his ideas are brilliant.  
**[1:08:20-1:08:26](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:08:20):**  Yes, we should absolutely be bringing more wildness to farms.  And I think most farmers agree with that.  But what he's advocating for is what we call land sparing.  So allowing land to be completely wild and then just our human destruction is created  in isolated spaces.  
**[1:08:45-1:08:50](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:08:45):**  Whereas what I'm more pro is what they call land sharing.  And land sharing is about how can we bring this wildness to our farming systems and have  humans be part of that, like we just discussed.  And that's really what regenerative agriculture is about.  It's about bringing the diversity, encouraging the insects, working with all the insects  
**[1:09:08-1:09:15](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:09:08):**  and these different fungal systems to clean water on the farms, to store water on the  farms, to create nutritious food, and also to even sequester carbon is one of the positive  outcomes of taking the more regenerative route in farming.  Yeah, because otherwise, again, it's not ticking the box of diversity.  It's ticking a box of divide, isn't it?  
**[1:09:36-1:09:44](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:09:36):**  It's like we're trying to separate ourselves even further from nature if we say that, OK,  we don't create one system where we can coexist within it.  It's again that ego again, oh, well, we can do it this way.  We can grow laboratory meat and we can, again, it's kind of stamping our authority over nature  again instead of connecting with the fact that we simply are it, you know?  
**[1:10:06-1:10:07](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:10:06):**  Completely.  Yeah, I completely agree.  And I think it's also it's sort of weirdly, it's a worship of nature that can lead you  there.  Yeah, because if you see nature as other and the environment as other and you worship it  
**[1:10:25-1:10:32](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:10:25):**  to the point where you only see human beings as the destructive force on the earth, that's  when you start to think that that's a good idea.  So, yeah, I'm definitely always moving away from that perspective.  Yeah, it involves a lot of inner work again as well, doesn't it?  The inner work comes in, I always say that, you know, working with things like breath  
**[1:10:49-1:10:54](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:10:49):**  and dismantling or deconstructing old paradigms and language has to come in as well.  I feel we're in the process of reconnecting to being nature.  And on that note, I mean, the inner work is also in working in the soil, right?  Working in getting your hands dirty and getting in the environment.  And that might mean as you're saying simple, it could be simply gardening, it could be  
**[1:11:12-1:11:16](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:11:12):**  a few pots on your terrace, it could be anything still making that connection.  It's still nice example.  I had the guys at the weekend.  I just said find 10 things in goat nose, it go into the heat, and we defined an area that  really resonant where you feel that you're really drawn to I need to be there.  
**[1:11:30-1:11:34](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:11:30):**  And I just want you to pause for a moment and then find 10 things that you're drawn  to, I want you to build a little structure, you know.  And then you just sit and then use meditate, breathe, I just did breathwork, I said 40  cycles of breath, that's all you need to do.  And it was just amazing watching the kind of how quickly they down regulated and became  
**[1:11:51-1:11:52](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:11:51):**  part of that environment.  So enthralled in what they were doing, you know.  So again, that's just taking it back, getting it into the earth and not seeing ourselves  as separate.  Yeah, yeah, yeah, I think there's, I heard about this coach, farmer coach, or he used  
**[1:12:08-1:12:15](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:12:08):**  to be an agronomist, so advising farmers on what they should be doing on their land.  And then he became a coach.  He's based in Canada.  And he said that, you know, he really realized that the first thing he needed to do to help  farmers change was actually to just have them meditate for 15 minutes a day.  
**[1:12:30-1:12:36](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:12:30):**  So meditate in the broadest sense of the word, i.e. stop, look around at all the nature around  them and just breathe.  And just, yeah, just experience it.  Because as with all aspects of modern life, one of the things that happens on the farm  is you get drawn into the hamster wheel of doing.  
**[1:12:52-1:13:01](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:12:52):**  And you forget to just stop and to take in where you are and to reconnect with who you  are as a human being.  And that is so important for, you know, if you want to have a healthy farm, you need  to build yourself to be a healthy human being as well.  Because we are a human being, Abby, not a human doing.  
**[1:13:16-1:13:17](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:13:16):**  Exactly.  Okay, so I'm going to wrap things up soon.  What I mean, what other than buying food, of course, to support, what can we as the  individual be doing to support soil regeneration, the movement, let's say?  Well, I was just saying...  
**[1:13:36-1:13:38](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:13:36):**  To help get behind it, what can we be doing?  Yeah, so I was thinking if you are interested in kind of soil and experimenting with soil  and you do happen to have garden space, then a good person to look up online is actually  a guy called Charles Dowding.  And he's the proponent of no dig gardening.  
**[1:13:56-1:14:02](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:13:56):**  And no dig gardening is kind of at the core of building soil health in your garden.  Because as soon as you start to dig, or as soon as you start to turn soil, you break  all the fungal networks and then you'll have real trouble.  So that's like the tilling process.  Exactly, exactly.  
**[1:14:15-1:14:20](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:14:15):**  So yeah, if you watch some of his videos about how to garden effectively for your soil, that  can really help you get started.  In terms of like food and buying, I mean, you know, one way is to start to move away  from supermarkets, essentially.  So you know, maybe you could just choose one type of food that you're buying.  
**[1:14:37-1:14:41](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:14:37):**  I don't know, maybe most people you work with are already not buying supermarkets.  But for example, meat or pulses, you know, you could start buying all of your pulses  from Hodmedods.  I don't know if you've heard of Hodmedods.  No, I've been using Forest Whole Foods, which you've kind of been ordering from there.  
**[1:14:57-1:14:58](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:14:57):**  Oh, okay.  I'll be grateful of any recommendations.  I'll put them in the show notes as well.  We can have that in there.  So that's great.  
**[1:15:04-1:15:05](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:15:04):**  Okay, yeah.  So yeah, so Hodmedods, they specifically are working to build regenerative practices into  farming around the UK and to build a market for pulses so that farmers in the UK can grow  pulses, build soil health and have a good market for that.  So they're a good one to buy pulses from.  
**[1:15:25-1:15:33](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:15:25):**  And they also do flour so you can get this really brilliant wheat from them that is actually  a really diverse wheat.  Okay.  So that's called YQ or yeah, you should if you listen to the serial series, you'll understand  everything about YQ by the end of it.  
**[1:15:49-1:16:00](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:15:49):**  And then, I don't know, in terms of meat, there's people like the Ethical Butcher online.  There's something called Pasture for Life.  Maybe you already know about them.  I know there's green pastures that might be the same people and they're looking at grass  fed to grass slaughter.  
**[1:16:14-1:16:19](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:16:14):**  And I think you can go to the farm and visit.  Cool.  And then there's the wild community around meats, isn't there?  Yeah, totally.  Like the Wild Meat Company and people like that, that are going back into that.  
**[1:16:30-1:16:31](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:16:30):**  Yeah.  Well, what I would say about Pasture for Life is it's a farmer led organization and they're  basically some of the most pioneering farmers in the UK.  And they're really pushing the bounds of regenerative farming.  And so if you go on the Pasture for Life website, it shows you all the different farmers that  
**[1:16:50-1:16:51](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:16:50):**  are part of their group.  And then you could go, if there's a farmer near you, you could go visit them and have  a conversation.  And you can also start to, if you do want to buy any meat products, you can buy them  from them.  
**[1:17:02-1:17:06](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:17:02):**  And then you can know when you're eating the meat that it's actually like potentially even  carbon positive in the sense that a lot of those farms are showing that they can actually  sequester more carbon than they produce.  Yes, sorry, we didn't cover this.  Can we go into this?  
**[1:17:18-1:17:20](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:17:18):**  So that's holistic management, isn't it?  Where you move the ruminants around the land.  Yeah, yeah, exactly.  So basically, there's many different names for it.  One's holistic management.  
**[1:17:33-1:17:37](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:17:33):**  And what, and many Pasture for Life farmers are doing this.  And what they do is they have their animals together in herds.  And they do it, you know, it's replicating this, the way animals existed on the savannahs.  And really, it was kind of Ellen Savory, who of the Savory Institute, who had this insight,  which is that, you know, on the savannahs, animals, they group together in herds for  
**[1:18:03-1:18:07](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:18:03):**  safety, and then they move on all the time.  And so the way that the vegetation has evolved and the way grasses have evolved is to have  this kind of intensive eating period of many animals in one place, and then to be rested  for, you know, a month, two months, maybe three months before those animals return again.  And so that what they found is that when you graze in that way, so you actually start to  
**[1:18:32-1:18:35](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:18:32):**  really build your soil health and your soil carbon.  Because the plants, they, when they're eaten down to a certain level, and then left for  a long time, it increases, they photosynthesize more and they put more carbon into the soil.  Yeah, I heard the addition to that is that you, there is if the farmer takes on the role  of like, what would be the apex predator to herd them into that position.  
**[1:18:59-1:19:00](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:18:59):**  That's right.  And so that's what happens.  And then they poop and they pee and they stamp all that into the ground.  Exactly.  In that one area.  
**[1:19:07-1:19:08](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:19:07):**  So that's the fertilizer coming.  I mean, again, it's like, understand that as a simple system.  It is so simple.  Yeah, and many farmers doing they use electric fencing to, you know, keep the animals into  a very herd like area and then they move them regularly.  
**[1:19:26-1:19:29](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:19:26):**  So also, I mean, the other side of it is the animals, you know, if they're not put on the  same bit of grass, again, like particularly sheep for a while, they don't get parasites,  you don't need to worm them.  There's like, they don't need antibiotics often because they don't get the same disease  pressures.  
**[1:19:41-1:19:45](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:19:41):**  So like, there's a whole host of other benefits that farmers are finding.  So that's the health and wellbeing again of the animals.  Yeah, the animals.  Exactly.  So yeah, it is huge.  
**[1:19:53-1:19:55](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:19:53):**  Really important.  It really is.  Yeah.  It's exciting.  So yeah, in terms of what people can do, buying from animals grown in those systems is really  
**[1:20:07-1:20:10](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:20:07):**  important, I would say.  Yeah.  So is there, so say with this new, is it new legislations that's changing now because of  the EU?  Yeah.  
**[1:20:19-1:20:26](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:20:19):**  I mean, how do we, is there a way that we can support this with the farmers?  Because again, as I say, I mean, only because we're with Riverfoot that we actually heard  anything about this bill being passed or looking to be passed.  That's the only time I heard about it.  So and we're not going to pick up on it in mainstream media.  
**[1:20:44-1:20:45](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:20:44):**  Is there, where do people turn to?  Where do they go to and how can they get, do you aware of how we can get involved in  that?  Yeah.  So I mean, there is like an organization called Sustain and they're really good for lobbying  
**[1:20:58-1:21:02](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:20:58):**  for better food and better farming.  And so if you follow Sustain, they will always be sharing of like the policy that they, you  know, they're always sharing different petitions or change.org campaigns that we should sign.  And certainly right now, I guess the thing to be watching and the whole farming community  is worried about this, is that as new trade deals happen and obviously the current government  
**[1:21:30-1:21:35](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:21:30):**  seemed very keen on a trade deal with the United States.  What's really in question is the quality of the food imports that are going to be allowed  in and very much the farming community here in the UK are pushing for that only food that  is produced to the standards we already have in the UK should be allowed to be brought  into the UK, which was how it was when we were in the EU.  
**[1:21:59-1:22:08](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:21:59):**  However, they tried to get that put into law in the agricultural bill and it was voted  down.  So now, you know, we need to keep our eyes and ears open as the trade bills come or as  trade negotiations happen that we really rally to ensure that, you know, the government knows  that people are not up for lower quality food in this country.  
**[1:22:28-1:22:32](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:22:28):**  And so we need to have our voices heard about that.  And then the only other thing to mention that is currently in debate after leaving the EU  is also about GM foods and growing genetically modified crops in this country or genetically  altered crops.  And certainly that's, you know, there's a divide on that in the farming community.  
**[1:22:56-1:23:02](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:22:56):**  And at the moment, it seems like the NFU, the National Farmers Union is trying to or  is supporting legislation that would allow for that to be grown in the UK.  And I certainly am not pro that mainly because to me, that's more of this monoculture idea.  Like if you're genetically modifying seeds, that means that you're then replicating them.  And so you're just putting lots of the same genetic information into the field.  
**[1:23:28-1:23:31](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:23:28):**  And so it's just more of this monoculture system.  And that's what we're trying to move away from, not towards.  So yeah, so those are the two things that are very impressive practices.  Yeah, yeah, absolutely.  So that's sustained, sustained.  
**[1:23:44-1:23:45](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:23:44):**  They're lobbying for better food.  And we, as an individual can look at that and help support perhaps.  Yes, exactly.  And Sustainable Food Trust is another one that's good to follow for this kind of information.  Because I often get a little bit lost in it.  
**[1:24:01-1:24:04](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:24:01):**  It's like, you know, when you someone says, okay, this is happening, and this happening,  this happening.  And Riverford was a classic example of that.  And I read the whole thing that was like, well, now what?  What do we do?  
**[1:24:11-1:24:13](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:24:11):**  You know, how do we help?  And how do we support this?  How do we support the farmer?  So that's, yeah, that's kind of that feels like that's missing from the conversation,  you know.  
**[1:24:24-1:24:25](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:24:24):**  Totally agree.  And I think another thing is just, you know, many farms do have like, holiday places on  their farm, they'll have like converted a barn.  So if you are able to, you know, going and staying on a farm, it's a really nice way  to engage and to learn what's really happening out in the fields of the United Kingdom and  
**[1:24:47-1:24:50](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:24:47):**  how you can be involved in that.  Yeah.  So that's another nice way and other than just, you know, buying from Farmers Direct  where you can.  And I think, you know, obviously Riverford, they offer a great service of good quality  
**[1:25:04-1:25:05](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:25:04):**  organic vegetables being delivered.  And I mean, you know, they are a great farming organisation.  Yeah, are there, is there almost like a register of regenerative farmers?  Yeah, well, actually, I can't believe I haven't mentioned it yet.  There is, so there's a new database.  
**[1:25:26-1:25:33](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:25:26):**  So in response to COVID, there's this new database called Farms to Feed Us.  Farms to Feed Us, there you go.  And so they have many different farms on there around the UK, so all over.  And it's a way of basically being, getting in direct contact with different farmers who  are growing or producing different things.  
**[1:25:51-1:25:54](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:25:51):**  Some of them have websites, some of them just have phone numbers.  And you can just go on the database and find things that are local to you or different  people that deliver nationwide as well.  And that's an amazing way to really break out of the supermarket paradigm and to really  start to engage with buying direct from farmers and different producers.  
**[1:26:12-1:26:14](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:26:12):**  It's really, I think that's really exciting.  And I, you know, I helped get Farms to Feed Us off the ground originally, and now the  lady leading it, Kathy St. Germans, you know, she's really making it into a celebration  of the different farmers around the country.  And that's so needed and so exciting.  
**[1:26:31-1:26:33](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:26:31):**  It really is.  Yeah.  Absolutely.  So definitely check that out.  I'm going to read you something.  
**[1:26:37-1:26:41](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:26:37):**  I need to read you this just to close with and see what your thoughts on this is.  Brilliant.  This is like a, excuse me, just to keep my throat as I'm about to read something.  It's really quite profound this.  Anyway, it was found in an ancient Sanskrit.  
**[1:26:51-1:26:55](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:26:51):**  So it's, anyway, this is it.  Upon this handful of soil, our survival depends.  Husband it and it will grow our food, our fuel, our shelter and surround us with beauty.  Abuse it and the soil will collapse and die, taking humanity with it.  There we go.  
**[1:27:13-1:27:15](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:27:13):**  Four thousand years older, Abby.  Wow.  Isn't it?  Yeah.  Yeah, I do.  
**[1:27:20-1:27:29](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:27:20):**  I think it, you know, I started out not caring a bit about soil just maybe five years ago,  just seeing it as dirt.  And now I'm obsessed by it.  And I think that, you know, those words are absolutely spot on.  And part of our journey as human beings is essentially to reconnect with that and to  
**[1:27:46-1:27:53](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:27:46):**  realise and to be humble to the fact that there are these incredibly complicated systems  that we've just neglected all these years and that actually they are a source of nourishment  and beauty.  And abundance.  Yeah.  
**[1:28:02-1:28:05](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:28:02):**  The root of everything.  Yeah.  In the world.  Thanks for sharing those words.  No, no, it's great.  
**[1:28:11-1:28:13](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:28:11):**  Well, thanks for sharing your words.  You've been amazing.  So, Abby, where can people find you?  Yeah, so well, check out Farmerama Radio.  Yeah.  
**[1:28:24-1:28:29](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:28:24):**  We're at Farmerama underscore radio on Instagram.  And then check out VidaCycle.com.  That's like more about my family's farm and things we're doing and also the different  apps that we have.  And if you want to contact me directly, you can.  
**[1:28:44-1:28:45](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:28:44):**  I'm on social media.  You can.  I'm at Abby underscore super.  Super.  That's a long story.  
**[1:28:51-1:28:52](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:28:51):**  It's not.  It sounds like I think I'm super.  But that's not why it was created.  But anyway, long story.  Another podcast.  
**[1:29:00-1:29:01](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:29:00):**  Yeah, exactly.  Everyone's going to be why is it super now?  They're going to be research.  They're going to be out there looking for you.  It's not exciting, I think.  
**[1:29:09-1:29:11](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:29:09):**  Well, it's been super having you.  I'm really pleased we had this conversation.  And I'm sure it's going to ignite some passions in the soil for many others.  There's stuff in there that I'm just like, wow, okay.  The fungal networks.  
**[1:29:22-1:29:26](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:29:22):**  I mean, just mind blowing.  I am going to go and geek out over that somewhat.  I'm looking forward to that.  Definitely.  And then the next time you're in the forest, you'll just have a whole new level of experience.  
**[1:29:37-1:29:38](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:29:37):**  Yeah.  Your feet as well.  Well, yeah.  Again, I often say that, you know, put your ear to the ground and have a listen so that  that's going to be well and well and truly at play now.  
**[1:29:49-1:29:50](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:29:49):**  Yeah.  Love it.  Whole new narrative.  Brilliant.  Abby, super.  
**[1:29:54-1:29:56](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:29:54):**  Listen, I'm going to let you go.  You've been amazing.  Thank you so much.  Beautiful work.  Thank you.  
**[1:30:00-1:30:01](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:30:00):**  Boom.  Here's an Abby.  Great.  I highly recommend hitting Abby's Farnerama podcast up.  So please check out the links in the show for Abby.  
**[1:30:15-1:30:16](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Abby-Rose---Regenerative-Farming-and-Our-Natural-Norms-eotbl2#t=1:30:15):**  Thanks again, peeps.  And I hope to see you in the tribe.  