### The Natural Lifestylist Podcast  (2019-14-03)
**[0:00:00-0:00:10](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:00:00):**  Hi, I'm Tony Riddle and this is the Natural Lifestylist podcast.  So way back in December I had this crazy idea that I was going to run 900 miles from Land's  End to Jono Grote in 30 days.  But not just that, I was going to do it barefoot.  And yet that would raise socially extreme eyebrows, but it also would raise funds.  
**[0:00:29-0:00:35](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:00:29):**  So with that socially extreme eyebrow, it created a platform, gave me an opportunity  to raise awareness and funds for environmental charities and collaborate with leading experts  to raise awareness and money for six organisations fighting the top sustainability issues of  our time.  I knew of course that running barefoot would raise those eyebrows and with those eyebrows  
**[0:00:54-0:00:59](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:00:54):**  I'd be able to provide a platform, a perfect platform to highlight the importance of connecting  with our environment and those all important key sustainability issues of our time.  So I had the pleasure of visiting Surfers Against Sewage and getting behind the mic  with Hugo Tagholm.  Hugo is the CEO of Surfers Against Sewage, one of the charities I have chosen to fund  
**[0:01:18-0:01:20](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:01:18):**  Race 4.  We discussed sustainability and how this small but powerful organisation are making waves  and are becoming a leading voice to help shift legislation.  Hugo is an inspirational guy who speaks with passion and integrity and seeks to make this  world a cleaner place.  
**[0:01:39-0:01:43](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:01:39):**  So I hope you enjoy the conversation as much as I did.  Adios.  Ready to go.  Hugo.  Ready to go with Hugo.  
**[0:01:52-0:01:55](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:01:52):**  Thanks man, thanks for coming on board.  It's a part of this 30-30 challenge.  If running wasn't enough, it was I wanted to sit down and have conversations with people  about sustainability and the great work they're doing because I'm not the expert here.  I might be an expert barefoot running but I'm certainly not an expert with sustainability.  
**[0:02:10-0:02:11](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:02:10):**  I'm growing.  I class myself as a bit of a hypocrite in recovery now, going by where I stand really.  Things have really changed for us and there's so much highlighted for us at this stage.  How long have you been here now?  First of all, thank you for bringing us into it, making us part of the 30x30 and we're  
**[0:02:37-0:02:42](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:02:37):**  really stoked to have you come by and to be part of your epic journey.  It's an amazing endeavor you're undertaking.  You're a much braver man than I am and probably fitter no doubt too.  SS has been going almost 30 years now and I first fell in love with the organization  back in 1991, the year after it was founded as a young surfer and environmentalist.  
**[0:03:07-0:03:12](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:03:07):**  I've always been passionate about the environment and nature generally.  I saw this rebellious, slightly anti-establishment, punky organization that really appealed to  me.  Big issue back then was sewage, hence the name.  That's when I first got involved at a little surf competition up the coast from here in  
**[0:03:29-0:03:30](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:03:29):**  Polsette.  I met some of the founders and my journey began then.  Of course, I went off to university.  I went to do what I did in London in my career and stuff.  Then 10 years ago, over 10 years now, just over 10 years, 2008, I took the helm.  
**[0:03:48-0:03:51](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:03:48):**  The organization at that stage had gone through a heyday.  It had some brilliant people involved, some amazing campaigners, some brilliant leaders  and achieved a lot.  It lost its way.  It wasn't quite sure what it wanted to do.  
**[0:04:01-0:04:08](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:04:01):**  The initial campaign had been very successful and it needed to develop and expand and change.  That's what I came in to do.  I came in and this whole place, this office was a bit of a squat.  It was a bit-  This is the second space, right?  
**[0:04:16-0:04:17](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:04:16):**  You were somewhere else before?  It was in another office around the corner in the early days and a couple of spaces before  that but this has been the longest home of SAS.  This is the spiritual homeland of it.  St. Allen, St. Agnes, these beaches are the homeland, the place where it was born.  
**[0:04:35-0:04:38](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:04:35):**  I took over and it was a physical and metaphorical squat.  It was a crazy ramshackle place, Weal Kitty, where we are now.  There weren't many people about.  I had come from working in central London and came in here and it was in a really bad  state.  
**[0:04:51-0:04:55](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:04:51):**  There were very few of us then but I thought that there was a lot of hope to create change  and a new wave of success for the organization.  We've developed the team-  New wave.  Yeah.  
**[0:05:02-0:05:07](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:05:02):**  We've developed into one of now the country's leading environmental marine conservation  charities, campaigning charities.  It's a small operation.  Yeah.  It's not like it- It's so interesting.  
**[0:05:13-0:05:16](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:05:13):**  The team came out to meet me.  You realize that it's such a big impact you're making at the moment.  It's a small organization.  It's such a great message in itself, isn't it?  I think, yeah, there's a message on that.  
**[0:05:29-0:05:32](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:05:29):**  Sometimes I question the sustainability of that because of course it puts a lot of pressure  on people at times.  But small is good and I think people like small, particularly in the charity sector.  I think the age of the really giant charities when it becomes really a big marketing and  fundraising machine quite often, I think people aren't so warm to that.  
**[0:05:50-0:05:52](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:05:50):**  I think we're a really accessible charity.  We create a lot of opportunities for people, people can come and volunteer, they can campaign  with us, they can have their voice heard in parliament, they can campaign on plastics,  on climate, on water quality, on marine protected areas with us.  They can do all sorts of things that really is relevant to what they love most, which  
**[0:06:08-0:06:12](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:06:08):**  is their local beach or their local stretch of water, where they surf, where they swim,  where they run, where they walk their dog, whatever they do on that piece of coastline.  We're really about, I suppose the way I look at it, we're a positive pyramid scheme.  So we're a very small executive.  We're 20, whatever, 25 people here.  
**[0:06:28-0:06:31](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:06:28):**  We have 180 regional reps around the country.  We mobilize about 100,000 volunteers every year.  We take all of those people's voices to parliament with us through our ocean conservation all  party parliamentary group where we call for change, where we try and create new legislation,  where we push for new legislation alongside other brilliant charities, the Green Pieces,  
**[0:06:48-0:06:52](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:06:48):**  the Friends of the Earth, the Marine Conservation Societies, lots of great people working in  this space.  And that's really the model.  We activate and empower people to get involved in protecting what they love.  And we amplify their voice to call on the powers that be, whether that's business or  
**[0:07:05-0:07:08](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:07:05):**  whether that's politicians to create change.  We've been successful in lots of areas on plastics, on water quality.  We've been part of the climate debate.  So it's a good place, always growing in our understanding of what we need to do and where  we need to get to.  
**[0:07:21-0:07:23](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:07:21):**  Although it's a bit of a wheel.  There's never a plateau of achievement.  I remember when I started, I thought, well, when we get to X amount of money per year  turnover, that will be perfect.  We'll stop there, but it just doesn't work like that.  
**[0:07:33-0:07:35](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:07:33):**  Well, you're in it for the long game, aren't you?  Yeah.  And we're starting to see so much change coming through anyway.  So the message started off with sewage, right?  Yeah.  
**[0:07:43-0:07:44](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:07:43):**  From what I understand.  So that was back in, that was 1990.  1990, May, 1990, May the 10th, 1990.  I mean, that's because that's incredible.  I was explaining to the guys downstairs that I pretty much came, I'd say from, I'd say  
**[0:07:53-0:08:00](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:07:53):**  from the age of four up until I think 16 every year is where we did our holidays in Cornwall.  And I never, ever thought about that.  Yeah.  The sewage in the sea.  Yeah.  
**[0:08:05-0:08:06](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:08:05):**  You know, but that's, I mean, it's terrible.  I mean, when I read that one of the guys said it was between, it was poop between skin and  board, you know?  Yeah.  Well, on the worst days, it absolutely could be like that.  
**[0:08:16-0:08:21](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:08:16):**  You know, and I, you know, I, you know, I surfed in the area, you know, during those  times and, you know, sometimes I saw pollution, sometimes I didn't.  You know, we've still got water quality issues now.  We've just had damming report from the EA about the performance of water companies.  So we've had a lot of success.  
**[0:08:36-0:08:41](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:08:36):**  We've seen a great cleanup of our coastline, but we're almost, we've peaked past the top  of the bell curve now and slipping back down.  Oh really?  And so we're seeing poor performances.  So you can't afford to drop the ball there.  
**[0:08:46-0:08:47](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:08:46):**  It's not staying on it.  More sewage, you know, getting back into the sea.  And also that creates the perfect storm with more people in the sea now.  So back in 1990 when we started, surfing truly still was a niche sport.  It was far out.  
**[0:09:00-0:09:01](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:09:00):**  It was for a few hardy individuals.  Razz man.  You know, maybe, maybe in two weeks in the summer, you know, kids would come down and  get a polystyrene board and it was really like a subculture.  You know, now it's not a subculture.  
**[0:09:10-0:09:14](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:09:10):**  We've got, you know, the high street using surfing all the time to sell more products.  We've got more and more people surfing year round.  Amazing wetsuits means they can surf equally as well in January as in June.  So the whole thing has exploded.  And in a way that explosion in the actual market and the, you know, the sport of surfing  
**[0:09:29-0:09:33](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:09:29):**  means that more people are now putting themselves in the firing line of potential pollution,  whether that's, you know, toxic chemicals in the sea, sewage in the sea, plastic pollution  on our tide lines, which is everywhere.  Yeah, but that's what I love about this message because you don't, you don't think about that.  I mean, I've come on, I've had stagged parties and God knows what else that have been surfing  
**[0:09:46-0:09:50](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:09:46):**  orientated, but no one's ever been like, okay, what's the quality of the water that we're  basically immersed in right now?  Yeah, it's a super important thing.  You know, this is a, you know, I mean, you know, sadly speaking, and I think we can see  the dramatic, you know, of course the dramatic evidence now of climate change and the gases  
**[0:10:04-0:10:08](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:10:04):**  where or the impact of gases we're putting in the, into the atmosphere.  And let's not forget that, you know, that we are, um, you know, putting equal amounts  of crazy chemicals into our, into our ocean and waterways and pathogens and fertilizers  and things that, you know, which is really creating dead zones in the sea, which is putting  chemicals into our environment that, you know, people are coming into contact with in the  
**[0:10:32-0:10:36](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:10:32):**  ocean, antibiotics and bacteria that now become resistant to those.  So there's a lot of, you know, there's a lot of issues and the ocean really is, you know,  is the life support system of us all, you know, as much as the Amazon rainforest.  I know because we talk about the lungs of the planet, right?  Yeah.  
**[0:10:49-0:10:51](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:10:49):**  But you know, the, you know, the ocean creates every second breath that we breathe, you know,  half of the oxygen that we take in.  You know, of course it provides protein for much of the planet.  Um, you know, whether, you know, listeners, you know, eat, um, eat fish or not, you know,  that is, that is a fact.  
**[0:11:03-0:11:06](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:11:03):**  You know, it's a, it's a really important part of the planet.  And of course it's the majority of the planet indeed, which should be called planet ocean  really not planet earth.  Oh, it's over 70% water.  Yeah.  
**[0:11:12-0:11:13](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:11:12):**  So, yeah.  Um, so you know, it's a, it's a fascinating time when it's also, you know, this really,  um, emotive, um, environment, you know, people have this connection with the sea.  It brings out this sort of visceral deep seated sort of feeling.  Yeah.  
**[0:11:28-0:11:30](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:11:28):**  It's like very interesting there because we, I, you know, I work with rewarding and introducing  people back into nature and water's a big part of that.  You know, I'll take them into the ponds in Hampstead or get them into cold water immersion  and we do beach meets and stuff like that.  We get them out in the sea.  
**[0:11:41-0:11:45](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:11:41):**  But if you really think about it, you know, that there is a deep, deep connection to water,  isn't there?  Like you don't see people at the beach turning around and looking at the woodland.  I mean, they're all looking out of the sea.  Absolutely.  
**[0:11:52-0:11:53](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:11:52):**  Yeah.  It's a deep connection.  A really deep connection.  And, um, you know, I think that's, you know, where we, you know, we sort of want to be  the most authentic voice of the, the ocean in the sort of charity sector, you know, really  
**[0:12:02-0:12:05](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:12:02):**  represent people who live and breathe the ocean really want to, you know, get involved  in protecting it.  Um, and I think we've done a, a sort of a good job on that.  You know, we're, as you say, we're sort of small team here, but we empower a lot of people  and I think that model is attractive to the policy makers, to business leaders because  
**[0:12:17-0:12:23](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:12:17):**  authenticity is a really, really important part of our narrative and creating change.  I think in this world that is full of fakes, I think SAS can stand up as a really authentic  charity that truly is connected to the ocean.  And we look at the ocean out of those windows over there in the office and that, and that,  that is a really big point of difference to other charities that might lose that really  
**[0:12:39-0:12:43](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:12:39):**  tactile direct connection with this thing that they're trying to protect or the issues  they're working on.  Yeah.  People can sniff that out.  Can't they?  
**[0:12:47-0:12:49](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:12:47):**  You can recognize immediately whether it's authentic or not, whether people are living  it being it, you know?  Yeah.  Totally.  It's an obvious one, isn't it?  
**[0:12:55-0:13:02](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:12:55):**  Yeah, so we go from sewerage to now marine conservation, looking at plastics.  Well plastics is the zytlyce.  I mean it's huge right now, right?  It's the zytlyce.  And you know, we've got this, you know, we, we, you know, back in sort of 2016 we realized,  
**[0:13:12-0:13:16](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:13:12):**  you know, that, you know, whilst we've been working on plastics, um, you know, plastic  pollution for a long while, in some ways we haven't really named, you know, named it.  We hadn't really, you know, formed the cohesive campaign around it.  And so we launched our plastic free communities campaign.  We started much more active campaigning on pushing for legislation around plastic bags,  
**[0:13:32-0:13:37](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:13:32):**  around plastic bottles, around all of those things to create, you know, as it were, you  know, not taxes, charges and, um, and, uh, better ways to create a circular economy.  And also looking, looking at bands, so bands on straws and stirrers and those sorts of  things.  And, um,  
**[0:13:48-0:13:55](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:13:48):**  So you were behind the legislation that led to the charges on plastic bags?  Absolutely.  Yeah.  So we were one of the charities that formed the coalition.  Um, you know, we worked with four or five big charities on that.  
**[0:14:02-0:14:05](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:14:02):**  Um, and of course, you know, everyone at the time thought, you know, five pence, what,  you know, what's that going to do to the plastic bag circulation?  But indeed it reduced it by over 80%, um, billions fewer bags in the environment.  That's so good to hear, man.  Cause I was one of those voices.  
**[0:14:16-0:14:19](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:14:16):**  Um, you know, where's, where's that five P go?  What impact is going to have?  People are still going to do the same thing.  And I think as, as that small change over time though, and because we've become more  aware of plastic, I guess that's just going to grow and grow and grow more, isn't it?  
**[0:14:34-0:14:38](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:14:34):**  Because we never take plastic bag shopping and it's just not, you know, it started off,  we used to take the plastic bags we had to go shopping.  Now it's like, okay, we have cloth bags that we take, you know?  Well, it's sort of interesting, isn't it?  I mean, I think there's a lot of spillover effect too.  
**[0:14:48-0:14:50](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:14:48):**  So these things become inspirational to people.  Um, you know, things that we accepted, you know, back, back in the day as the right thing  to do, you know, and we now look at as the wrong things.  I mean, let's look at, let's, let's look at a controversial sort of Marine, Marine conservation  topic that, you know, lots of people sort of feel very passionate about, which is whaling,  
**[0:15:07-0:15:13](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:15:07):**  you know, you know, however long ago, you know, um, 150 years ago, whatever it was,  um, everyone used whale products and it was just an accepted thing.  It was like, this is the norm.  This is what we're going to do.  We'll light our street lamps with it.  
**[0:15:21-0:15:23](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:15:21):**  We'll we'll put it in products.  We'll eat it.  We'll do whatever.  Of course now society goes, no, it was completely wrong.  It shouldn't happen now.  
**[0:15:29-0:15:32](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:15:29):**  Of course there are certain countries that are still normalizing that.  However, it was completely part of society.  And at the moment, the normal thing is, is oil.  Everything we do is, is fueled by oil or made from oil.  That's normal.  
**[0:15:42-0:15:47](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:15:42):**  And then within 50 years, in a hundred years, will we look back the same way that we're  complaining now and go, Oh my God, petrol stations.  And Oh my God, you know, but you know, um, you know, things made of, of this material  that was buried in the ground, you know, millennia ago.  And there's nothing like becoming a parent to highlight all that.  
**[0:16:01-0:16:06](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:16:01):**  And when I'm looking forward to the conversation with me, especially my youngest, you know,  you got a new one coming into the world.  So that'd be a three year old and a one year old in so many years having that conversation.  Yeah.  There's that Peter Carnes term of environmental generational amnesia.  
**[0:16:17-0:16:18](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:16:17):**  Yeah.  You know, cause it's every, every year even that we're born into the change that's around,  you know?  Yeah.  And there's a new accepted baseline.  
**[0:16:26-0:16:27](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:16:26):**  Exactly.  That's what I mean.  That's what it comes to.  What's normalized, right?  Um, which is, you know, it's sort of terrifying.  
**[0:16:31-0:16:33](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:16:31):**  I mean, you know, there is a lot of doom and gloom out there.  We've got some pretty, pretty shocking, you know, evidence now, of course, on climate  change, you know, we really are, you know, looking, you know, the, you know, the evidence  that say sort of climates and a collapse, you know, if we're not very, very careful  now as a, as a, as a species on the planet, um, you know, we're looking at, you know,  
**[0:16:54-0:16:59](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:16:54):**  uh, you know, only a very small amount of actual nature surviving and thriving.  I mean, I mean, what is the statistic that, you know, out of, you know, out of all of  the, out of all of the, um, animals on the planet, you know, there's only like 10% they're  actually wild animals, 90% humans.  60% of wildlife has been wiped out in the last 50 years.  
**[0:17:13-0:17:14](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:17:13):**  That's half the human life.  If you, if you go by the blue zones of a hundred years.  Yeah.  So it's sort of terrifying stuff.  But that said, I think we need to look at the politics of hope as well to actually what  
**[0:17:27-0:17:28](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:17:27):**  can we get?  Because there is still, there is still a lot of, there is still a lot of ocean out there.  There is still a lot of nature out there that we can protect and we need to rewire them  protect these spaces fully.  Not just, not just put, you know, lines on a map that says they're zoned off as a, as  
**[0:17:42-0:17:48](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:17:42):**  a Marine protected area or a protected area on, you know, on, on land, but actually fully  protected so people can't take anything out of them.  People can't, you know, extract, you know, whether it's, you know, oil, minerals or,  or nature from those zones, because actually, you know, nature does have a great capacity  to regenerate and thrive again.  
**[0:18:02-0:18:06](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:18:02):**  And the Marine conservation zones that have been successful show that and the ocean can  bounce back.  We need to let it bounce back.  We need to give it space to breathe and thrive.  As long as it gives space.  
**[0:18:13-0:18:14](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:18:13):**  Right.  Yeah, totally.  So, um, you know, we need to look at, you know, I mean, ultimately it will come down  to what, you know, what, how much space do we really need to rewild and, and, and, and  sort of save, um, and how much can that then keep, um, you know, population functioning  
**[0:18:32-0:18:35](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:18:32):**  properly on the planet as the population's growing.  Yeah.  Cause even if we go back to this side out in 1990 to where we are now, so you have the  population growth in that period of time, but you're recognizing by normal people in  the sea of course.  
**[0:18:46-0:18:47](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:18:46):**  Yeah.  You know, but I think the positives of you, sir, I mean, it's huge positives there.  So if you look at from when this started in 1990 to where it is now, you know, what, how,  how's, how's that work percentage wise to clean up?  So what have we seen the difference in oceans from 1990 to where they are now?  
**[0:19:03-0:19:07](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:19:03):**  Well, it depends on the metrics we're really looking at.  If we look at it on a very sort of, sort of, as it were the most basic level, you know,  the campaigns that we, you know, ran on water quality, you know, helped create a really  big shift, an improvement in water quality in the UK.  So we went from what would have been just 27% of UK beaches passing the minimum European  
**[0:19:24-0:19:30](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:19:24):**  standards in 1990 to now, you know, above sort of 95% typically every year.  And that's really good.  Those standards also mask a few, you know, they're reported in a way there's some testing  that can be flawed, those sorts of things.  And they don't necessarily tell the full picture, but on a basic level, that's a really good  
**[0:19:44-0:19:45](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:19:44):**  success story.  That's amazing.  Right.  And that really came about through strong legislation.  It wasn't just business going, oh, we, you know, we shouldn't be putting sewage in the  
**[0:19:53-0:19:54](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:19:53):**  sea anymore.  What happened was is some people who were much cleverer than I am wrote some new legislation  in Brussels that then got put into UK law that said the water companies had to make  this investment by these dates.  And that's what happened.  
**[0:20:06-0:20:09](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:20:06):**  And that says we're part of that journey.  You know, we weren't the only part of that journey, but we're part of that journey.  And so it shows what good legislation can do because, you know, sadly speaking, unless  we're sort of often unless we're really forced to do things through legislation, we won't  do them.  
**[0:20:23-0:20:27](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:20:23):**  You know, the companies will find a way to avoid it if they possibly can, particularly  if it costs them money.  Yeah, mainly if it costs them money.  Because they're not looking at bigger picture, unfortunately, are they?  No.  
**[0:20:33-0:20:35](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:20:33):**  It's that small, that's that growth.  Well, really, they're looking at paying their shareholders at the end of the share.  It's the wrong end of growth, isn't it?  Yeah.  And it's sad because, you know, what we can't, you know, what we need to grow is nature around  
**[0:20:48-0:20:49](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:20:48):**  us and truly grow it.  Not use some, you know, sort of as it were, council strategy that says they're growing  nature without actually growing it, you know, by putting up a few, you know, a couple of  bee boxes when they build a new housing estate.  And what we really need to do is really grow nature and find out, you know, where we're  
**[0:21:08-0:21:11](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:21:08):**  going to really protect for the future.  And that's what's going to keep our kids, you know, thriving on the planet by actually  having the trees and the clean ocean and the clean streams and rivers and grasslands and  all of the flora and fauna that go with that actually functioning as a system.  Because all of those things function together.  
**[0:21:27-0:21:32](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:21:27):**  You know, I'm, you know, I'm not a scientist, but, you know, it's well versed.  And this is this is an ecosystem that that works together.  You know, all of these these things we need to protect are codependent.  We don't just need to protect the elephants or the rhinos or the bees.  You know, there's lots of things about the big scale protection of nature is what we  
**[0:21:47-0:21:48](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:21:47):**  need to do.  Yeah.  And it starts with me.  I always think it's about reconnecting humans to that.  Then we can fall in the fallback in love with it.  
**[0:21:57-0:21:58](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:21:57):**  Yeah.  Then we can understand the system and eventually we understand how we are that system.  That's the point, right?  Absolutely.  You know, absolutely.  
**[0:22:04-0:22:06](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:22:04):**  Your mental health issues and everything else we're facing.  It's a pure disconnect.  I see it from nature, the nature's deficit disorder.  I mean, you know, I only see it through the prism of friends and family.  But, you know, there's no doubt a mental health crisis.  
**[0:22:23-0:22:27](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:22:23):**  You know, other professionals I talk to, you know, talk about the crisis within their workforces  of how many people are ill and suffering.  And you know, I think we're in a perfect storm.  I think people are hooked to their screens.  I think they're constantly connected, you know, rather than liberating people from their  
**[0:22:39-0:22:40](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:22:39):**  workplace.  You know, the technology is simply anchored them into their workplace.  So you can never ever escape and you can never feel that you're truly sort of free.  And then we're in a very comparative, competitive society.  You know, in social media, you know, every, every platform is geared there to be competitive  
**[0:22:57-0:22:58](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:22:57):**  and to make you want to compete.  That's the way they get you to do more with them by going, right, okay, these people are  doing this.  So you've got to do a bit more.  Absolutely.  
**[0:23:05-0:23:08](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:23:05):**  I do feel that there's this, because I'm, I'm, I'm in battle with it, but I still see  there's the huge positives of it, right?  Oh, absolutely.  It's like we could connect, right?  I could, I found, I found, you know, my interviews all the way along, it's all being organized  
**[0:23:19-0:23:21](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:23:19):**  all through social media.  And then there's stuff that we can be putting out.  I guess it has to have that positive lens of what it is we're putting out again into  the world.  You know, for people to, again, then they can reconnect and rewind through that, which  
**[0:23:32-0:23:37](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:23:32):**  seems nuts using technology to reconnect and rewind, but it can, you know, it's gotta be,  it's gotta be possible, right?  It's the sort of, you know, it's sort of paradoxical, isn't it?  And I agree with you, but you know, I'd look at it, you know, maybe it's, you know, it's  a, it's a bad example.  
**[0:23:50-0:23:55](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:23:50):**  You know, there's foods that people shouldn't eat too much of that are delicious and brilliant  and can be good in, in, you know, the right sort of doses, you know?  And I think the same applies to social media.  I mean, people are just too hooked on it and it's, you know, it's, you know, it's a, it's  a really, you know, sort of addictive space and sort of compulsive space.  
**[0:24:16-0:24:22](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:24:16):**  And I think it makes people also sadly very unhappy quite often because they look at things  and you know, they don't realize that, that it's very, it's a very curated space generally.  It's not, it's not sort of warts and all within social media generally.  It's curated and we all, you know, curate now, can curate our own little sort of PR  sort of world, the message of what we want people to see, you know, and hear.  
**[0:24:38-0:24:42](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:24:38):**  And so that tends to make people, other people feel bad because I think people are constantly  doing something sort of amazing or they might be constantly, you know, constantly looking  great or feeling great or never got any problems.  And actually it's a fake because we've all got those things.  Um, and we've all got issues and problems and dilemmas and days we feel bad, um, and  
**[0:24:58-0:25:00](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:24:58):**  days we don't perform well and days we don't do anything interesting.  Days we're sat on our sofa.  I'm in all 10 miles today.  Yeah.  My purgatory in that space.  
**[0:25:07-0:25:08](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:25:07):**  Exactly.  We need to blog more about that.  Yeah.  Well, you know, you know, it's that and you're doing an incredible challenge and I think  it's great for people here and I think, you know, to, to, to, to, to push people into  
**[0:25:17-0:25:22](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:25:17):**  a space where they, I think people sort of go understand challenge and success in their  own context, not compared to other people.  You know, for me, you know, running 10K and then swimming a K is like, that's, that's  a big, that's a big, that's a big, that's a big for me.  You know, I couldn't, you know, I couldn't do, I couldn't do the back to back runs you're  
**[0:25:36-0:25:41](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:25:36):**  doing barefoot across the country, but that's my own sort of, that's my own, um, you know,  my own accomplishment and I base it on, on what makes me feel sort of good and I know  how to achieve that.  You know, sometimes I look at it with surfing because surfing is a very, very macho sport  and it can be pretty like wearing how much machismo and actually sexism there often is  
**[0:25:58-0:25:59](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:25:58):**  within surfing.  And, and actually I look at it, well, you know, there's guys like surfing, you know,  30 foot waves and I'm never going to surf a 30 foot wave.  I'm not going to surf a 13 foot wave.  You know, my comfort zone is probably up to about, you know, six foot, you know, on a,  
**[0:26:12-0:26:13](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:26:12):**  on a good day.  Um, and that's where I like to surf.  But does that make my experience any less valid than the person who's surfing the 30  foot wave?  No, because that's, that's what I want to do.  
**[0:26:22-0:26:23](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:26:22):**  That's what makes me feel good.  That's, that's the space I want to operate in.  Absolutely.  And I relate this to, um, doing ice baths.  Yeah.  
**[0:26:29-0:26:34](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:26:29):**  So getting in an ice bath, I always say there's a PB, but it's not a person best even.  It's just, it's being present.  Yes.  Your profound best in that moment.  Some days I'll get in there, it might be three minutes.  
**[0:26:41-0:26:44](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:26:41):**  Other days I'll get in there, it's 10 minutes.  Yeah.  But then there's other stuff that's happened before the three minutes and other stuff that's  happened before the 10 minutes.  They're always just profound best.  
**[0:26:51-0:26:53](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:26:51):**  They're always just present best.  No, I like that.  Because you know, there's so many variables around any day that you're performing in anything,  whether it's at work with your family, as a dad, as a brother, as a kid, whatever you're  doing.  
**[0:27:04-0:27:07](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:27:04):**  Um, and, and you can't always factor all of those things in.  No.  So it's hard.  Yeah.  But, um, but yeah, I think, you know, you know, fundamentally, you know, I suppose we,  
**[0:27:15-0:27:19](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:27:15):**  you know, we talked about nature, nature deficit disorder, and I think that, you know, we know  the benefits of sort of going in the water or going out into nature.  And that's one of the things we're really striving to sort of keep with, you know, this  organization.  It truly is about that, that powerful connection, you know, inspiring and motivating.  
**[0:27:31-0:27:35](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:27:31):**  That's what lots of our members, our reps sort of share, you know, they're not all surfers  and you know, surfing isn't a prerequisite in our, in our sort of organization.  It's funny.  Damn man, you're blowing it.  I thought you were all like, you're really committed to the surf.  
**[0:27:44-0:27:45](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:27:44):**  People, people talk about it.  I mean, I sort of look at it, I often use the analogy of, of, of the car phone warehouse,  you know, no one wants a car phone anymore.  And for a mobile phone, you probably don't want to shop in a, in a warehouse and not  for other things you do, but for a mobile phone you don't.  
**[0:27:58-0:28:03](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:27:58):**  And it's sort of, it's sort of strange with it with the same, you know, we know we're  not all about surfers.  We're not just about, we're not just about what people are against, what people are for.  You know, we want to know what people are for protecting the ocean, taking action on  climate change, you know, reducing their plastic impact, all of those things, you know, and  
**[0:28:17-0:28:21](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:28:17):**  it's about a really positive movement of bringing people together and that movement of volunteering,  whether it's beach cleans, plastic free communities, regional reps, campaigners on the ground,  all of that voice connects in, in to try and push for change.  It's not about each individual action is good, but we're never going to solve the world just  through voluntary measures of individual action.  
**[0:28:38-0:28:41](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:28:38):**  That's going to be a hardcore people, but that hardcore of people can actually push  on the powers that be to say, we need change.  We need bans on straws and stirrers like we've got.  We need the plastic bag charge.  We need more action on sewage.  
**[0:28:50-0:28:51](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:28:50):**  We need more action on climate.  And those people can carry on uniting until the legislators legislate to protect the planet  in the way it needs to be protected.  And that's really the goal.  The campaign aims right up there in parliament or in the European parliament or, you know,  
**[0:29:04-0:29:08](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:29:04):**  globally for all campaigners to push their governments to actually create the systems  that we can live in much more sustainably.  Because unless the system we're living in is sustainable, like we're all just trapped.  We're all just part of it.  So the economic system, we're all trapped in it in some way.  
**[0:29:19-0:29:24](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:29:19):**  The plastic system, we're trapped in the carbon system we're trapped in and it's up to actually  legislators to help us get out of that individually.  It's very hard.  We can shift things around.  You can do your best, but it needs to change up a level.  
**[0:29:32-0:29:34](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:29:32):**  Yeah, yeah, absolutely.  How can people get involved?  People can get involved every day by making choices around plastics, you know, what they  refuse, you know, their reusable cup, their, you know, bamboo toothbrush, whatever they  choose to do, refusing bags, whatever it might be, taking their refillable water bottle with  
**[0:29:50-0:29:51](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:29:50):**  them.  People can join as a member.  People can come to a beach clean, pick up some plastic with us, help recycle some plastic.  They can help us monitor and record stuff through citizen science so we can present  evidence to government and industry.  
**[0:30:03-0:30:07](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:30:03):**  They can download the Safer Sea service to get real time water quality information at  their favorite beach, over 350 around the country.  So all sorts of things that they can get involved with.  So yeah, we're there online, sas.org.uk for them to be involved with.  That's what we need now.  
**[0:30:18-0:30:19](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:30:18):**  I like that.  So are you responsible for the little plaques at the beaches?  Because we visited Constantine Bow and they've got a little litter pick and plaque there.  No, those boards, I think you're talking about the Two Minute Beach Clean, that's another  organization that's doing great things.  
**[0:30:31-0:30:32](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:30:31):**  That's a great model, isn't it?  It is a really good model.  It's kind of just a reminder when you come in, the first thing you see when you go into  Constantine, the little car park, little kiosk to buy a tea and then bam, you're hit with  that.  
**[0:30:44-0:30:48](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:30:44):**  It's a really lovely initiative, a really great organization.  And yeah, we've done lots with them in the past.  And every piece of plastic that we pick up from the beach, every piece that we remove  is a real victory.  I think the key, as I say, within all of these groups is not to assign the blame to the individual.  
**[0:31:03-0:31:13](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:31:03):**  So the whole littering per se, back in, I think it was the 50s, Keep America Beautiful  brought together an ad campaign with Burst and Marsteller to actually make plastic pollution  and packaging pollution a thing that was the responsibility of individuals by saying pollution  starts with the individual and it ends with the individual.  And actually that's something we really contest.  
**[0:31:29-0:31:32](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:31:29):**  So the littering construct is something we understand.  There are litters out there, but actually the responsibility for that is with industry  and government.  There's a hierarchy there that comes from that system.  To help us live the way we need to do.  
**[0:31:41-0:31:46](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:31:41):**  Because ultimately if we focus too much on littering per se within that agenda, what  happens is the corporates go, well, that's great.  Let's just keep pushing it to the end of pipe solution where people pick up.  Hand over the responsibility.  And that's it.  
**[0:31:54-0:31:58](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:31:54):**  When really what they need to do is create much more closed loop recycling systems.  They need to eliminate as much of their packaging as possible, reduce the amount, change their  packaging materials wherever possible and make sure that they give to the consumer a  much more sustainable option.  Because if not, we're just going to be endlessly picking up more and more stuff.  
**[0:32:12-0:32:16](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:32:12):**  And ultimately that either gets incinerated or buried in the ground and some of it will  get recycled, which isn't really efficient.  The best way to do it is deal with it through design and manufacture, not through picking  it up.  Yeah, it definitely needs to change at that level.  
**[0:32:25-0:32:28](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:32:25):**  But at the same time, we're really willing to carry on picking up.  We mobilize a hundred thousand brilliant volunteers.  They pick up plastic from the beach, they monitor what plastics we're finding.  They hold the big brands to account for the plastics they're putting into our system.  And that's why they're so important.  
**[0:32:39-0:32:43](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:32:39):**  It brings the community together to say, not that we're going to clean up forever, but  say we've had enough and we need change to happen now.  And how can the individual and the collective move towards changing legislation?  So what we do is we will bring together, so for example, we did the biggest brand audit  in the UK of brands we're finding at the beach.  
**[0:32:59-0:33:05](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:32:59):**  No surprise, this sort of top 10, Coca Colas, Pepsi Colas, McDonald's, those sorts of big  brands.  And we did a huge survey with our volunteers.  That data then fed into the government's consultation on extended producer responsibility to hold  the companies to account with the polluters pays principle.  
**[0:33:20-0:33:25](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:33:20):**  It fed into government consultations on deposit return systems.  So you can see that actually that piece of trash that you pick up from the beach, that  piece of plastic pollution actually can then influence the powers that be to create change.  And that's what we're there to do.  That's what we're there to do.  
**[0:33:37-0:33:38](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:33:37):**  I like that.  So yeah.  So it's good.  And you know, I just want to make sure that the beaches that we have around here, the  beautiful beaches, Parenport, St. Agnes, Chapelport, all of the beaches around Cornwall in the  
**[0:33:48-0:33:53](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:33:48):**  country and around the world can be protected for future generations.  So beaches, as Jack Cousteau said, the great unifier of people.  It's a place that, you know, you're sort of, you know, stripped of sort of everything really.  You know, you're sort of all equal on the beach and in the ocean.  And so it's an amazing place that sort of takes away this sort of hierarchical, this  
**[0:34:12-0:34:15](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:34:12):**  very competitive society and just brings people together.  So it's a really, really beneficial, positive space, you know, healthy, active space for  young people and for the future, hopefully.  Let's try and keep it that way.  Absolutely.  
**[0:34:26-0:34:27](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:34:26):**  I think that's a good place to finish, man.  Yeah.  I like that.  Good.  Well, thank you very much.  
**[0:34:31-0:34:32](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:34:31):**  It's been a pleasure to talk to you.  It's been beautiful.  Yeah.  It's been good.  So you got 10 more miles to run?  
**[0:34:36-0:34:37](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:34:36):**  Yeah.  Straight from here.  So James gave me a lift back to the where I just finished off.  Yep.  And then 10 miles and then back home.  
**[0:34:46-0:34:48](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:34:46):**  So what sort of pace do you do, remind me?  Depends, man.  I shot off a bit quick yesterday morning.  I think I probably ate 8.35 minute miles.  And then the second leg again was a bit slower.  
**[0:35:00-0:35:05](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:35:00):**  And then the third leg in was breezing again.  So at the moment, like today, I think I've just gone, I think it's like 10.35 minute  miles.  Not really just ticking over.  And then it just keeps me, I can keep relaxed.  
**[0:35:17-0:35:19](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:35:17):**  I've worked with a lot of nasal breathers.  The nasal breathing just really just tune in.  So it's a form almost going to like states of meditation I'd say.  Yeah.  And I'm bringing chanting in now and the chanting is quite interesting.  
**[0:35:29-0:35:30](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:35:29):**  Okay.  When it opens up.  And suddenly I'm like, right, I think I better stop that now just in case I can't.  I love it.  I love it.  
**[0:35:36-0:35:37](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:35:36):**  I love it.  Yeah.  So just 10 miles, 10 miles to go.  And from where to where to, is that 10 miles now?  Where am I running, James?  
**[0:35:43-0:35:44](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:35:43):**  Where have I got next?  James behind the lens.  From somewhere in the corner.  I'm going to put him on the spot now.  Hold on, I'll do it here.  
**[0:35:48-0:35:49](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:35:48):**  I'll do it here.  Look, power of tech.  Let's have a look.  I should know my route, right?  Wow.  
**[0:35:54-0:35:55](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:35:54):**  Dropboxing.  Here we go.  We just finished in Llanovet.  Yeah.  Yeah.  
**[0:36:02-0:36:05](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:36:02):**  So we're going to go Llanovet to Temple.  Okay.  Nice.  I think it's 9.7 miles.  Okay.  
**[0:36:10-0:36:11](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:36:10):**  Yeah, man.  So a little bit, a little chipping away at the 10 there.  And then food and a good night's rest.  I might actually do a swim.  Okay.  
**[0:36:18-0:36:19](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:36:18):**  We're not far.  We're in St. Maren's.  We're not far from Constantine Bay.  It's really close.  Beautiful.  
**[0:36:23-0:36:25](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:36:23):**  It's either that or head to Padstow, have a little walk around.  Yeah.  Nice.  Childhood memories of Padstow.  It's nice to reignite that.  
**[0:36:29-0:36:30](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:36:29):**  Beautiful place, yeah.  Yeah, man.  And I think the crowds have sort of thinned out now.  So yeah, it should be really nice now.  Yeah.  
**[0:36:35-0:36:36](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:36:35):**  It's a busy place in Midsomer.  It is.  Rick Stein's banging over there, isn't he?  Absolutely, yeah.  Man.  
**[0:36:41-0:36:42](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:36:41):**  He's doing well.  He's got the place sewn up.  I think they called it Padstow at one point, I think.  I think they still do, yeah.  Okay, man.  
**[0:36:46-0:36:48](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-1-Surfers-Against-Sewage-with-Hugo-Tagholm-e579p8#t=0:36:46):**  Brilliant.  Thank you, yeah.  Awesome.  