### The Natural Lifestylist Podcast  (2019-53-23)
**[0:00:00-0:00:06](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:00:00):**  Hi, I'm Tony Riddle and this is the Natural Lifestylist podcast.  So way back in December I had this crazy idea to run from Land's End to John O'Groats in  just 30 days.  But I wasn't just going to run it, I was going to run it barefoot to raise funds for environmental  charities and collaborate with world leading experts to raise awareness and money for six  
**[0:00:23-0:00:28](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:00:23):**  organisations fighting the top sustainability issues of our time.  I knew running barefoot would raise many a socially extreme eyebrow and with that eyebrow  raising behaviour I would be able to provide a perfect platform to highlight the importance  of connecting with our environment and those key sustainability issues of our time.  It gives me great pleasure to introduce you to Richie Norton, aka the Strength Temple.  
**[0:00:51-0:00:56](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:00:51):**  I first met Richie at a dinner that We Move magazine had put together and we instantly  hit it off.  To be fair, there's not a lot to not like about Richie, so hitting it off is a no brainer.  Richie is an ex rugby player turned yogi, surfer, adrenaline junkie.  He's spent the last 10 years working alongside sports professionals and some of the most  
**[0:01:13-0:01:16](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:01:13):**  respected pioneers of human performance.  And what has grown out of this is Richie's own unique blend of meditation, breath work  and yoga.  I'm so aligned with what Richie is putting out into the world so it gives me great pleasure  to be able to share this relaxed chat with you.  
**[0:01:29-0:01:34](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:01:29):**  Richie shares an insight into his own journey of self discovery and provides some simple  yet potent tools to unlock and develop physical and mental wellbeing.  I hope you enjoy the chat.  So I'm here with Richie Norton, Richie aka the Strength Temple and I'm so pleased this  is happening.  
**[0:01:55-0:02:01](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:01:55):**  It's been one of those days when it's probably more important than ever to have Richie here.  Richie's great at taking people through the process.  I've had just one of those couple, well it's not one day, it's a couple of days where things  just haven't quite panned out how I thought they were.  I personally know I can go into the cave, into the pain cave.  
**[0:02:18-0:02:22](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:02:18):**  I know I have tools that help me get out the pain cave, which I know Richie has some great  tools.  So this is taking off the path of what we normally perceive sustainability from me.  I wanted to talk to Richie about being a sustainable human in what can be, like what I've experienced,  stressful situations and things that kind of take us off the path and that we can have  
**[0:02:42-0:02:47](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:02:42):**  tools that help us process the path and get back on it so we can continue.  Which for me is the path is just being present.  So how do we get back to the present moment?  So that's kind of why I wanted you on the show man.  I'm calling it a show now, can you believe it?  
**[0:02:56-0:02:58](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:02:56):**  This is the Tony Riddle show.  The Tony Riddle show.  We're back on the show.  I think you should have a show.  Oh let's do a show man.  
**[0:03:03-0:03:05](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:03:03):**  We know enough people to have good chats.  We do huh?  We have loads of good chats and create a show.  So Richie's here.  Hello Richie.  
**[0:03:10-0:03:11](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:03:10):**  Hi mate.  Thanks for having me along.  It's cool.  I'm glad we could make it happen still.  Yeah, we had a run booked in didn't we?  
**[0:03:16-0:03:17](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:03:16):**  We did have a run.  We've been training for months.  Richie was all fired up for a run and then he put it out there, he's like I don't want  to run.  I don't want to run.  
**[0:03:24-0:03:25](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:03:24):**  And then Tony's ankle got blown out.  No it didn't.  My wish came true now.  Of course not.  So for those that don't know, my foot swirled up, my left foot swirled up.  
**[0:03:32-0:03:34](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:03:32):**  It made me throw over to my right foot.  I've worn the pads out underneath my foot.  It's too excruciating.  I've taken a couple of days out so we're resting.  So it's still a 30-30 challenge.  
**[0:03:41-0:03:44](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:03:41):**  I'm just going to have to do more mileage at the end.  Richie gladly came on so he's here for an interview.  Cool.  You might still sneak in a run maybe.  We may.  
**[0:03:51-0:03:52](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:03:51):**  If I end up up north where you'll end up.  Yeah I mean that would be great.  Maybe that will still happen.  Yeah the healing process.  I'm putting it out there.  
**[0:03:57-0:04:07](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:03:57):**  So Richie, ex rugby player, yogi, XPT, mindfulness, breath work.  What else is there to Richie?  How did you find all this Richie?  Many layers.  Well a big part of it has been coming across you actually.  
**[0:04:17-0:04:23](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:04:17):**  Thanks to the We Move guys putting us in alignment through the We Move podcast.  Oh because we met at the dinner didn't we?  We met at the We Move dinner.  Yeah.  Since then it's been a real connection with you.  
**[0:04:35-0:04:42](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:04:35):**  You've been a big part for me to actually step out of my comfort zone and to align with  I think where your journey has also taken you especially talking about the medicines  and the transformations and the lessons and the journey and what it's given you and what  it keeps giving you.  I know I've confined it in you with a lot of that that's helped me structure my next  
**[0:05:02-0:05:10](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:05:02):**  steps but without going deep into that the background for me is coming from rugby and  starting at a very young age thinking that was going to be my future, my career and the  wear and tear that put on my body physically, mentally, emotionally and the pressure and  when that got taken away because of injury and feeling powerless and not being able to  carry on what I thought was going to be my biggest journey, my biggest achievement and  
**[0:05:34-0:05:38](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:05:34):**  relating to where we are now it's a real blow.  And you're derailed that way because did rugby become like the personality view as well?  100% it was my outlet, it was everything for me, it was life.  I was struggling with a lot, rugby was my outlet, training, physical, challenges, social,  everything I was going down wrong paths and I realised I had more to give and more to  
**[0:06:00-0:06:05](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:06:00):**  offer but I really didn't know how to communicate it and didn't know how to channel all the  energy and all the frustration and anger and all this confusion and the short version is  I found my way into breath work, yoga, meditation years later after really losing my way.  And it seems that there's such polarity to rugby doesn't it?  I don't know why but rugby and mindfulness and breath work and yoga seems like such poles  
**[0:06:25-0:06:26](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:06:25):**  apart don't they?  If you'd have said to me when I was playing rugby one day you're going to be a yoga teacher  and you're going to teach kids and adults how to breathe and how to be more mindful  about how they exist and live a more sustainable existence, I would have laughed or just thought  you were bonkers.  
**[0:06:44-0:06:47](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:06:44):**  So how did that ignite though?  How was that moment between the breakdown of rugby, how did you discover the breath  work?  Do you know what I mean?  So it was a really intricate journey over a few years.  
**[0:07:00-0:07:05](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:07:00):**  I went to Sydney, I moved to Australia when I was 30 years old because it was my last  window to get that Australian working visa and I thought this is my way out of it, this  is my way out of the UK.  I needed a change, I felt like I was just destroying myself grinding in London and I  went to Australia and I thought well I'm in Australia I'm going to learn how to surf because  
**[0:07:23-0:07:28](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:07:23):**  that looks like fun, don't come to Australia and not try and give it a go.  And I committed to a routine of like I've never had a routine, I've not had a routine  in a while since I stopped playing rugby, my body felt pretty broken, I wasn't really  functioning very well, I stopped training the gym, put on a bit of weight, lost purpose,  lost direction and going back into nature, getting in the ocean, getting smashed a lot,  
**[0:07:45-0:07:50](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:07:45):**  almost drowning a few times but what I learnt from that was resilience and persistence and  got fit and healthy and then off the back of that I met a girl, as you do, a single  guy in Sydney, came across a beach babe and she was a yoga teacher and put a different  spin on yoga, she's like you know just go and have a little vibe in my class, it's very  playful, we just move and we breathe and I was like okay that's a different delivery,  
**[0:08:12-0:08:17](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:08:12):**  I'm going to go and give it a go and all of a sudden what I thought was loads of shapes  and meditations and chanting and you know lycra and lots of women in a yoga class where  I already felt intimidated, she gave it a different language and I connected with it  on a very different level, breathing became part of how I moved and the tempo of how I  went through class so it was at my pace and yeah the next chapter again while I was in  
**[0:08:40-0:08:47](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:08:40):**  Sydney I had to go to a Brazilian college that it was like, dare I say a loophole but  it was more a really interesting subject, capoeira, where you'd learn, you get a diploma  in capoeira and Brazilian martial arts. Which is really playful again right? Playful, it  really spoke to me and also you came away with a coaching course on how to teach kids  and the elderly and how to communicate with other people to give them really easy instruction  
**[0:09:14-0:09:19](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:09:14):**  to be able to get them to do some physical exercise but what was tied in with that was  this capoeira practical exam that you had to do over this year period while you were  on this course. So I started doing capoeira and I started going to yoga and these Brazilians  that I was studying with also went surfing at the weekend and had barbecues on the beach  and they had brought in community and it was all about community and I just thought wow  
**[0:09:37-0:09:41](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:09:37):**  I feel amazing. I'm not surprised at how many physical boxes you've took there right? Or  social physical boxes right? Yeah. That's incredible. And then all my injuries went  away, this was the big thing. All the aches and pains and the niggles that I'd been played  with that stopped my rugby career going any further, all of a sudden they weren't there  anymore, I could move better, I could move quicker. I started to play rugby again. And  
**[0:09:59-0:10:04](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:09:59):**  I wonder how many of those, the emotional attachment to them as well. Big, big. I found  a whole new like vibe of life. Surfing got better, I was moving more like fluidly, I  was moving in different directions and different planes of motion and like speaking more confidently,  more empowered because I felt like I got my power back because I'd reconnected with the  things that I was completely disconnected with. And yeah, life began again and I realised  
**[0:10:32-0:10:38](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:10:32):**  I'm going to try and find a way of communicating this to other people that are in my position,  rugby players, athletes. I think most human beings today man, I mean it can be people  just understanding that it's to find a purpose again isn't it? To find a purpose or some  out there might not even realise there is a purpose, you know? Yeah. So often it takes  a breaking down to realise there is a purpose. Yeah. Do you know what I mean? To reconnect  
**[0:11:00-0:11:06](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:11:00):**  with it, reignite something. Definitely. And then also you then have the tools as you've  gathered to help the others. Big time. I think some of my biggest inspirations and some of  the most amazing stories that I've heard have come from people that have overcome struggle,  that have hit a dark moment of life or overcome adversity and become more resilient and more  empowered and more aware and how that is a gift when you look at it that way to be able  
**[0:11:29-0:11:36](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:11:29):**  to inspire other people. And I went there and I feel like I've been able to align and  attract and see and connect those people now because I've seen pain in other people and  suffering in other people and wanting to empower those people to see that as a superpower because  you have that insight into knowing how to build strength and resilience to overcome  physical changes, challenges, emotionally, spiritually and that can come through changing  
**[0:11:57-0:12:01](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:11:57):**  your diet, changing your lifestyle, changing your environment, changing your friend circle.  Or even just removing the fear of adversity. Do you know what I mean? Changing the relationship  with it completely, isn't it? Yeah. This is going to come at some stage to all human beings.  And we live in such fear of it. Where sometimes leaning in is where you're going to really  face what's actually there in front of you, talking to you, communicating to you that  
**[0:12:25-0:12:31](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:12:25):**  you're either suppressing or hiding from. Whereas that's there for you to learn and  to be able to move into that next chapter. It's the honesty and the humbling experience  of adversity that teaches us the most, right? Lean in. And you know, that's where your growth  will come. So yeah, I made myself, made my way back to London as a personal trainer and  was very lucky to not have to go and work in big mainstream gyms. I just realised I  
**[0:12:52-0:12:56](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:12:52):**  had this mission, I had this knowledge, I had this insight and I thought, so aligned  the UK wasn't really where I was. You know, the gift of Australia was they were so far  ahead for me in my eyes with food, nutrition, exercise, outdoor lifestyle and how powerful  that was. And I came back to London and I felt like I was surrounded by zombies and  robots going through this repetitive cycle. You know, going to gyms, lifting weights for  
**[0:13:20-0:13:24](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:13:20):**  aesthetics and just smashing weights with no real idea why.  In a just all linear.  Including, you know, not just general public, but professional athletes and the conversations  I'd had with people. It was so like strange for me to have these very open chats about  intricacy of how do you mobilise your body and rewild yourself to be more in tune with  
**[0:13:41-0:13:46](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:13:41):**  how your body's working for you. So it all worked better for you because of how you breathe  and the way you move and align simple movement patterns. And they were like, what are you  on about? Yeah, I mean, you're a professional athlete. The more in tune you are with yourself,  more mindful you are about your movement and what you eat and how you behave and how you  speak will directly affect the way you feel and the way you perform.  
**[0:14:07-0:14:11](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:14:07):**  How successful you become as a human being. Yeah. Just an athlete. Yeah. So when I realised  it was it was, you know, so new to a lot of people, I realised this was where I was going  to be able to add value. And that was a few years ago now. I've been on a bit of a wild  journey through there and did my yoga teacher training in Bali with one of my most amazing  friends, Ian Finn. He was over recently. He was over recently in London. And he just had  
**[0:14:31-0:14:37](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:14:31):**  a birthday. Yeah. Yeah. Birthday. And it was a real special day to connect with him again.  And he's just an incredible human with the ability to look at the individual and go,  I'm going to use this language because I see that's where you're going to make a connection  with this. And for me, I've embodied that. That's quite a skill set. That's the coach's  personality, isn't it? It's like, well, you might not want to be a yoga teacher. You might  
**[0:14:56-0:15:01](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:14:56):**  not want to be a spiritual guru. You might not want to be a teacher or a coach. But we  all have this gift to be able to help each other and to inspire others based on our ability  to be connected with ourselves and to have this extra strength and resilience to maybe  help other people through challenges. And when I want to try and educate people on mobilization  and moving a bit better and be more connected with yourself and your family and the environment,  
**[0:15:26-0:15:32](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:15:26):**  you've got to go a bit more inward. And my journey has been very similar. But for me  to go and teach a yoga class and use Sanskrit names and traditional yogi words, I didn't  connect to yoga that way. My connection to it was I'm going to move my body and breathe  and have my own practice based on what my body wants to do in that moment on that day.  And that's what saved you as well. And that's what saved me because I was able to slow the  
**[0:15:50-0:15:57](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:15:50):**  pace of life down and I was able to see nature differently. I was able to like feel aches  and pains that were bothering me that I wasn't addressing. I was ignoring it, suffering a  little bit better with it rather than actually going, oh, my back is really feeling tight  here. That's given me anxiety. It's given me stress. I'm not moving properly. That's  frustrating me. I'm not sleeping very well, but I'm ignoring it. Whereas, well, you're  
**[0:16:15-0:16:18](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:16:15):**  not, you're never just ignoring it. That's the point. Because we start using pacifiers  to deal with the ignorance of the symptom. Yeah. Yeah. So I thought, well, this is what  I'm going to do. I'm going to search out people that I relate to. And I realize actually I  have a similar story. And I bet I can learn something from their journey. Yeah. But along  the way, I'm just going out and connecting with these people, just having conversations,  
**[0:16:44-0:16:50](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:16:44):**  enlightening people, sharing topics like we are now to bring awareness to whoever's watching  this to maybe go, actually, I need to maybe give that some attention and just giving them  that little nudge, maybe giving them a little bit of insight, education to get them up and  moving and thinking about the things that really matter because I think there's a lack  of perspective on what's really important. Well, it's powerful, isn't it? Because I was  
**[0:17:09-0:17:15](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:17:09):**  stopped on the run by a guy called Stuart Botting. This dude rocks up in his VW, bright  red VW transport in a campervan style thing. He's just standing in this country lane with  his arms out and I'm running towards this guy. And I'm like, who is this? He's like,  hi, I'm Stuart. Hi, Tony. And then as I get closer, he says, I realize you don't know  me, but I feel like I know you. And then we chat and we start talking about how he was  
**[0:17:37-0:17:46](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:17:37):**  in a dark space, right? And through following me, through following you, then he got into  Rich Roll, then he said, oh, then I found you on Rich Roll, which is amazing. I put  two and two together and here I am, I'm on the path. But I was in this dark space and  by doing morning rituals, by doing breath work, by doing mobility, by doing ice baths, by  turning to a plant-based diet. And now I'm into barefoot. My son and I walk around barefoot  
**[0:18:06-0:18:12](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:18:06):**  and my daughter calls us the barefoot warriors, right? And he just had this glint in his eye  and you could see he's transformed, right? And he's transformed through social media  because that's the tribe, right? That's where we're pushing content out into. So it's not  just meeting the individual or putting the class on, there's that tool as well now, isn't  there? To open up the space, which is like doing massive festivals. You have a huge following,  
**[0:18:33-0:18:38](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:18:33):**  right? Imagine that it's like doing a talk to 58,000 people if they're all listening.  Do you know what I mean? And he had, do you know what his glint was? I said, you've got  an amazing glint in your eye, man. What's going on? He said, well, I just get up and  I know what I'm doing now. I start with a routine, I have a routine. And I was like,  oh, you found purpose then? He's like, yeah, I think I found my purpose. And he said, for  
**[0:18:55-0:19:02](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:18:55):**  a man, a family man with kids to find purpose again has been one of the most powerful gifts  he could find. You know? How old was he? I'd say he's probably 50, you know? Young. So  much potential, so much opportunity. Potentiality there is like whatever he wants it to be.  That's what I love about it. When you tell me those conversations, I think, well, how  can I share that with my dad? Because I know he would love, you know, the opportunity to  
**[0:19:25-0:19:28](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:19:25):**  maybe do something different. He's outgoing, he's looking for the next thing, you know,  he's got time on his hands. How do you inspire people that are maybe looking for something,  but don't quite know where to start and just give them that little nudge and, you know,  to get going? Well, I think you keep doing what you're doing, Richie. Do you know what  I mean? That's what it seems like. Yeah. And especially for parents, right? It's like,  
**[0:19:46-0:19:50](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:19:46):**  they don't want to be told by their own kids how to behave, but they're observed their  behavior because they're their kids. So rather than being told, it's just be. And then once  you be, then people see. And then the C turns into we, something else. I like that. I love  that. That was good. You had that recording. Yeah, man. I'll turn that off. Write it down.  I'm glad you brought up the whole Rich Roll thing as well. He, I mean, he was one of the  
**[0:20:14-0:20:19](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:20:14):**  third podcast I ever came across when I got into the whole podcast space. Big, really  like his vibe. Yeah. Really hope I get to meet him one day and amazing guy. He's an  incredible guy. I was listening to him on the way down here actually. And one guy sent  me a video message yesterday, the power of social media. And I do, I've got a great relationship  with social media. Now at one point I lost my way with it and my relationship wasn't  
**[0:20:40-0:20:46](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:20:40):**  very positive. It was a bit like, and this guy reached out to me very in a very vulnerable  way, ex-military and he had something happened to him and he, and he at the right time at  the right moment, because I'd put content out at a time when he was listening to Rich  Roll, your podcast checked out, you followed, you found me. And one word that came out of  my post one day, the day after, because he just found me resonated with him. And that  
**[0:21:11-0:21:17](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:21:11):**  gave him the confidence to go, I've never shared this with anybody. And he shared, and  I sent him a voice note back straight away. He lives in the US and, and he just needed  to like have a soundboard to be able to express something that had been pushed down and suppressed  because he felt completely stuck. And for me having these conversations where I love  it so much and I get quite emotional and the whole thing is that's how powerful this can  
**[0:21:36-0:21:41](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:21:36):**  be. If you're there to do good. And if you're there to create a message, you're there to  inspire other people, whatever your tool is, don't be afraid to share it. You never know  who will be listening, who will be watching. Yeah, I guess it's learning or finding the  tribe around you that enables you to understand that this is all about being again. And if  you're just being, then in theory, everyone around you can grow from that. Because that's  
**[0:22:03-0:22:08](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:22:03):**  the authenticity again, isn't it? What we were talking about earlier, being authentic,  finding the authentic Richie within the story, right? Yeah. So I'm Tony now, right? And I've,  let's say I'm smashing out hours in the office. Get back, whack in a microwave meal, stay  up, watch a bit of news on my joe in Chandler chair. Have all the lights on around me eventually  creeping to bed probably about just past midnight. Wake up to the beep beep beep in the morning,  
**[0:22:40-0:22:45](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:22:40):**  hit snooze, beep beep, beep beep snooze, get up, go and smash some coffee because that's  the only thing that can ignite a bowel movement. And then probably skip breakfast because I've  run out of time. Get a shower, cover myself in chemicals aftershave, smash the door shut,  leg it as fast as I can to the tube because I'm in hypertension already and get involved  with the whole commute that's probably gone through the same process. Can't bear to look  
**[0:23:06-0:23:11](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:23:06):**  at someone on the tube because I'm feeling ashamed of myself in reality and arrive at  the office to sit down. What would you advise me? I'm already anxious reliving that whole  experience. Yeah man. I've been there. Yeah we've all been, that's how I know it you know.  I left London because I acted on my gut instinct that that was not a healthy place to remain  and it wasn't sustainable. So I wanted to practice what I preach and I wanted to like  
**[0:23:35-0:23:40](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:23:35):**  make the move and it was a big move that happened over two weeks because I know how easy it  is to get caught up in that routine and the habit and not know how to get off that ride.  Oh yeah I'm just gonna throw in here, we're not, anyway anyone's listening, we're not  judging you for that behaviour just highlighting that that's what's been normalised and we  just want to give you some tools to help you just see maybe a different way. Yeah I'd be  
**[0:24:02-0:24:07](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:24:02):**  a hypocrite if I said that I've got it all figured out and that I have a routine that  is nailed and it's always perfect. No no no no. Well when you do think you've got it figured  out then the process shows you and actually you're still in the process. Get back in your  box. So because I've been there I can authentically say I know where you are at if you are living  that life and it can feel a bit, you can feel lost, you can feel a bit helpless, you feel  
**[0:24:27-0:24:35](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:24:27):**  stuck, demotivated, like upset, frustrated, angry all these things or maybe just completely  unaware that you're in that space and maybe just need a little reminder to just check  yourself and take a little step back and just reassess if that is your life, are you happy  and what are the little changes you can make to maybe get on a new ride to start to make  changes that are more positive, that are maybe one step closer to where you really want to  
**[0:24:58-0:25:02](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:24:58):**  be because you know that's not sustainable and it's affecting your health physically,  mentally, emotionally, spiritually however you want to look at it. But also it's affecting  the health of others because that's what you're also the addition to the normalised behaviour  right? Definitely, your family whether it's your wife, your partner, your kids, your friends,  your work colleagues, if you're not living a life of fulfilment and purpose and you're  
**[0:25:23-0:25:27](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:25:23):**  waking up happy and you have time and you feel healthy and you're eating well and you're  getting time to do the things that you love it's like you're resenting something and you're  wishing something was different and that affects your mood, your personality, your energy.  Your energy then affects that person that you're around the most and the people that  your environment so you're in the office and the rest of the people around you like it  
**[0:25:45-0:25:53](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:25:45):**  just passes through everybody that you're around. So having rituals that I've embraced  living the life that I live now is really the key for me to keep on that journey and  to be able to then share the ups and downs that that brings when you step out of that  those habits that do keep you on track. So the takeaway here I guess to maybe inspire  people to start those changes is okay well just maybe audit your life a little bit and  
**[0:26:16-0:26:21](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:26:16):**  see where you can make little changes that are sustainable, that are realistic that will  have an impact straight away. So I do these morning routines you just described a morning  routine that is definitely not going to set you off in the right frequency. So one thing  before you wake up is sleep. You know Matthew Walker created a huge wave of interest after  all the science that he brought to the table which I endorsed massively because it transformed  
**[0:26:42-0:26:48](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:26:42):**  who I am by prioritizing getting a good night's sleep before you go to bed. How much technology  you've got your phone and your iPad in front of your face taking in all this stimulation  before you get in bed and then expect to have a good sleep it's not going to happen. Beyond  the device even the news at 10. Yeah you know crazy. Yeah the crazy stuff that's going on  in the world would that be discussed around a campfire. Feed your brain with all that  
**[0:27:07-0:27:12](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:27:07):**  fear and destruction and pain and suffering and worry and then let it completely immerse  your subconscious so then you go into your dream state with all this other clutter. So  sleep is definitely something to audit and there's so much great information out there  to how to improve that you know when you eat switching off you know a little bedtime ritual  eating the right things having like these amazing supplements we have now that help  
**[0:27:31-0:27:36](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:27:31):**  shut down and I'm experimenting with CBD right now which has been a game changer. I've been  using that. To delve into that a little bit more. Big shifts isn't it for down regulating  and just. Big so I'm fascinated about that space and then morning routines is getting  up and not looking at your phone again so ideally starting your day as you didn't end  your day waking up and without this hyper stimulation of your digital screen just filling  
**[0:27:56-0:28:01](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:27:56):**  your brain when you're super sensitive and ready to absorb things don't make it something  that isn't going to stimulate you wake up. Brush your teeth scrape your tongue hydrate  your body's so dehydrated when you wake up feed your muscles feed your tissues feed your  brain move breathe get out in nature watch the sunrise get up a little bit earlier move  your body read something positive listen to a podcast where your ears are going to hear  
**[0:28:23-0:28:31](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:28:23):**  something motivating stimulating. And just so yeah so the CBD oil aside folks that's  all free. That's all free. It's all free. It's all free yeah. Doesn't cost you anything.  Yeah CBD yes I went off track that it's something I'm into it's quite. No I am as well but I  mean we've put the CBD to one side the sleep's for free moving away from your device for  free mobilizing the bodies for free and time and time it doesn't take a lot of time people  
**[0:28:51-0:28:55](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:28:51):**  think I've got to go to the gym for an hour I've got to do a workout I've got a PT get  me up and get me motivated and shout at me to do stuff how about just doing it because  you know that's the most important thing for you to have a healthy existence if you don't  take care of your physical body your mental health what good is it working your yourself  into the ground if you're not able to enjoy that lifestyle you're trying to create when  
**[0:29:14-0:29:18](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:29:14):**  you're not living it now yeah and that shift of perspective is like actually I do have  five minutes I do have 10 minutes five minutes as you've opted to see my IGTV is like five  minutes becomes 10 minutes very quick because you're so into the practice of that mindful  attention to what your body needs in that moment and even if you're brand new to this  and you your fitness is shocking you haven't done anything in this ever before you're really  
**[0:29:38-0:29:43](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:29:38):**  struggling to get back into the flow of things start with five minutes roll out on your mat  lie on the floor breathe a little bit find all these mating tutorials of how to get the  basics right go for a walk in nature and if you've got kids and very aware of families  families can be a really good excuse and a distraction and something that needs attention  so if your kids are up super early and you're like oh I wish I'd had an extra bit of time  
**[0:30:05-0:30:09](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:30:05):**  in bed there's no reason why they can't start to practice some of these rituals as well  you know go to bed a little bit earlier with them you know get up with them we go to sleep  together yeah same time live the similar you know flow of life because you're one organism  as a family and then get them to play with you in the morning yeah they love to play  why don't you play connect with your kids in the morning get them into the routine early  
**[0:30:29-0:30:33](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:30:29):**  get them drinking water with you in the morning get them out for a walk in nature outside  around the block into the park yeah I just feel there's a lot of excuses made out there  when it could be made a lot more simple and a lot more empowering and those rituals those  habits lift your energy lift your mood get these endorphins lifted up so you can then  have some topped up to share with those people you're going to come into contact with that  
**[0:30:51-0:30:55](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:30:51):**  maybe didn't have that same start to the day yeah and then you're showing the appropriate  behavior for the observation and inspiring inspiring and also when you build that new  habit then it you have more power to remove the excuse yeah as to why not yeah and I think  I love the idea of I always say it when I do talks I was just with Fern Cotton at the  Happy Place Festival in in Tatton Park and it really boosted my confidence in what the  
**[0:31:19-0:31:25](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:31:19):**  human race is capable of when good vibes are there and we're there looking out for each  other people hugging people you know just communicate and talking without their phones  out trying to capture every moment being present and I always share it in the workshops I get  people to hug as you know and and have this awkward connection of introducing themselves  to each other like oh hi oh another human oh it's so nice to actually chat to you yeah  
**[0:31:47-0:31:52](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:31:47):**  my name is Steve you know my name's Tony and I always say well you all have this superpower  now because you all feel great after you just had this hug and you've just moved your body  a little bit and you've got this feeling it's high yeah now you have the ability to go and  share that with someone else and bring some light and some good energy into someone else's  day how nice does that feel yeah it feels pretty good actually we all have this ability  
**[0:32:13-0:32:16](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:32:13):**  we just forget and that can lift your vibe and someone else's so again we're talking  about the most simplest things these are just fundamental human needs again right so there's  human connection contact in there sleep movement play breath water right sun yeah it's all  in there that's just a basic fundamental needs just a few shifts that need to be made yeah  I think if you all those things like well that's so many things well why don't just  
**[0:32:41-0:32:46](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:32:41):**  start with one why not you know we have all these amazing tools don't we and it can seem  quite overwhelming intimidating to try and tackle all these things that you think aren't  quite right or aren't available to you right now okay well what are the things that the  closest to you and what the most realistic drinker you know a big glass of water in your  wake up make that be your ritual this week and the next week why don't you add a little  
**[0:33:08-0:33:12](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:33:08):**  bit of movement and walk around the block after you've had that glass of water yeah  yeah I'm with you you know and I think that sometimes we need to just go back to basics  and simplify things and strip it right at that getting back to the basics of stuff and  I think if we can leave a really positive message from these chats it's like okay well  let's empower you and give you that little bit of a nudge to go just choose one thing  
**[0:33:29-0:33:36](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:33:29):**  this week yeah and go and own it become yeah become the master of that and then once you're  like do you know what that makes me feel so much better that's that's gonna that's a keeper  now I'm gonna share that with my friends and see if I can inspire them to try because they've  seen how much better I feel how much more motivated I'm on much more active and proactive  more stimulated and happier I feel and then it can really inspire each other from doing  
**[0:33:57-0:34:05](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:33:57):**  the basics consistently becoming basic back to basics I think I'm all human I need that  I'm not perfect far from it far from it but I need to go back to basics sometimes because  I take on too much well I think the I think the more work you do the more you understand  or can align with there is no perfect that's the point no that's all control isn't it once  you let that go then you realize ah okay I just need to strive for the be the best example  
**[0:34:30-0:34:39](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:34:30):**  of self rather than what I perceive perfection to be yeah and that's sometimes can be the  negative side of what we're talking about social media right yeah you can look at that  and that's not sustainable no so someone gave me a great tool and it was to delete the accounts  that were creating anxiety yeah that's it you don't have to be on Instagram no just  look at the things that you feel are empowering you and that you can gain simple tools again  
**[0:35:00-0:35:05](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:35:00):**  to make small changes that might be sleep this week okay let me let me go and geek out  and sleep this week it's become a sleep let's become Matthew Walker this week become a sleep  expert yeah boom okay anyone that's not highlighting the appropriate patterns of sleep this week  let's get rid of those accounts and get them out yeah well I went to that I went for that  phase and I don't want to dwell on this too much because we can go deep into the social  
**[0:35:23-0:35:29](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:35:23):**  stuff well yeah we could talk for hours I know we could but this is something I can  relate to because I've had this feeling of like oh what if someone gets upset because  I've stopped following them because I've just decided to unfollow them because at that moment  in time I decided that I wasn't in a place where I wanted to see that I didn't want to  hear that I didn't want to watch that because at that point in my life it wasn't making  
**[0:35:49-0:35:55](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:35:49):**  me feel good about myself so I decided I'm going to put my attention onto something else  that does nurture a good feeling brings happiness to makes me smile yeah maybe I'll follow a  few animal accounts about zoo animals being cared for and rescue dogs and stuff like that  I love that it makes me feel good yeah nothing to do with my business but I love animals  and they make me feel good I love animals being rescued and I love animals being cared  
**[0:36:15-0:36:19](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:36:15):**  for I just followed loads of pet channels for a while and it brought me back into a  nice place of well there are good humans out there doing nice things and myself you know  I will also then do a little detox on certain things because I realize I'm not in that space  anymore that was just a distraction that channel that person I was following was where I used  to be I'm not there anymore I've evolved from that yeah thank you for what you did give  
**[0:36:42-0:36:47](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:36:42):**  me but now I'm not in that place I'm now going on this path and that makes me feel even better  because I've evolved I've grown and I think you know we all have that ability to choose  don't we we don't have to suffer we just choose to suffer sometimes you know and chronically  go into that point of I want to suffer and I can't stop watching them for whatever reason  whereas that's your choice yeah don't become a victim within that system but also I think  
**[0:37:08-0:37:13](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:37:08):**  the big one for me has always been it's it's none of my business what other people think  of me yeah so you know if I want to remove an account then I remove an account otherwise  I'm on it to please them and I'm prioritizing them over me we care a lot about what other  people think exactly and you're the most important person you are the most important person and  if you start to follow accounts and search into social media looking for distraction  
**[0:37:35-0:37:41](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:37:35):**  okay we'll just be a bit more conscious and aware of what those distractions are doing  to you and now are you living in someone else's bubble that is probably an illusion and how  is that making you feel and in that moment you have a choice to carry on or to divert  your attention to something that really speaks to you that will lift your vibe that will  bring value into your life and there's so many great people doing that now and it's  
**[0:38:01-0:38:07](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:38:01):**  awesome to see it's not just about you know getting you know flaunting yourself and promoting  your next thing there's a lot of great people speaking truth and inspiring and going down  to the root of you know where we can make change and I'm really proud to know that I'm  making that shift and really be more thoughtful of where I'm taking my attention and I see  a lot of that happen now so I'm excited about where the industry is going and how people  
**[0:38:30-0:38:35](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:38:30):**  are taking that responsibility to heart and seeing how serious it actually is to influence  someone is a real powerful tool and you've got to think about what you're influencing  them with oh exactly that's that's a real powerful gift yeah yeah and if you think of  it that way you know if we're looking to the external world outside then we need to probably  think oh what's going on inside that I keep needing to reach out for and so as an influencer  
**[0:38:59-0:39:04](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:38:59):**  it's important then to realize that people are looking to the external world and that  the messages we need to give are going to be about getting them to understand what's  going on inside and we have to check ourselves don't we we sometimes go off lose our way  a little bit because we got stimulated by something and we thought well maybe we should  put some attention or triggered by something triggered and then we respond we react yeah  
**[0:39:23-0:39:26](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:39:23):**  and then you look back and go I don't remember that I don't know why I put that out there  I don't know why I like express that emotion for that but it triggered you for whatever  reason yeah I think we were talking about this earlier and I think it's a very interesting  space that it feels like this is an ego by the way this just feels like the more work  you do when you do go or something does trigger you or adversity I was talking about adversity  
**[0:39:48-0:39:53](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:39:48):**  earlier right suddenly it's like wow okay my world's ending right now I've set up this  30-day challenge and right now I can't run anymore the world's going to end and sobbing  in my hands and roaring into the traffic because I can't run anymore right and then it was  like wow okay that that's triggering and then it's recognizing I'm triggered I'm now the  victim this is happening to me right is it or is it happening for me okay let's sit away  
**[0:40:13-0:40:21](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:40:13):**  from it and I think the more work you do the less time you spend in the trauma of it all  you know the more you can highlight what it is and what's coming up for you yeah and that's  a huge part of self-awareness yeah and being responsible for your actions and your behavior  and owning it don't blame anybody else your choice yeah you choose it's on you you know  just stop for a second observe what's going on embrace it acknowledge it you know just  
**[0:40:50-0:40:55](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:40:50):**  accept that's what's going on in that moment and understand why and strip it back a little  bit to get back to the the trigger and knowing again it's all down to you maybe it's a past  trauma maybe it's something that you'd you know you brought on yourself and I think the  more aware we can be and just accepting and being that vulnerable person that has actually  becomes quite empowered from that vulnerability hopefully that inspires more people to lean  
**[0:41:17-0:41:23](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:41:17):**  in and kind of like sit with what's coming up to maybe work back from that and understand  it and use that as a strength yeah for me I think I think breath's one of the most breath  is one of the most potent tools for that you know oh I'm I can feel I'm elevated I can  feel there's a bit of anxiety there I'm gonna do some breath any breathing tools what do  you recommend so many breathing tools what's the simplest form to help someone down regulate  
**[0:41:44-0:41:50](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:41:44):**  what would you do so to simplify down regulation based on my own personal experience is what  I see resonates with a lot of other people when I teach real foundation classes and workshops  is one being aware of what's happening with your breathing being aware of what's happening  in the process of a breath a lot of people say I can't meditate I can't breathe I get  so distracted got a really busy mind I'm really overstimulated I'm super stressed whatever  
**[0:42:12-0:42:18](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:42:12):**  the stimulus is whatever the emotion is is okay well one thing don't beat yourself up  if you feel you can't do it just observe the next breath and then observe the next breath  but if your mind is still busy don't worry except that's the way you feel in that moment  observe the next breath nasal breathing compared to mouth breathing there's a purpose for both  yeah but day to day if we're looking to down regulate and to bring calm and to get into  
**[0:42:45-0:42:50](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:42:45):**  more restful digestion state and you know calm and repair repair repairing restorative  whatever you want to call it down regulation is to start to slow down the breath to take  control of the breath and then be aware then of what happens physically emotionally mentally  when you start to lengthen those breaths go a little bit deeper and then inhale for the  nose and then exhale for the nose if you struggle with nasal breathing people still do yeah  
**[0:43:17-0:43:24](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:43:17):**  and I'm very aware of that work towards inhaling for the nose so it slows it down and then  lengthen the breath out when you release it slow it down even more and then observe the  next breath and then starting to count the breath I think is the key part because then  it's less brain chatter when you're having to internally count so inhale for four seconds  have a really conscious mindful pause before you breathe out and then count how long it  
**[0:43:45-0:43:51](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:43:45):**  takes you to breathe that exhalation and then repeat it yeah maybe it's a little bit longer  the next time maybe it's a little bit shorter but take your next breath so I always get  people to play with it because if I set the intention of right I want you to all breathe  in for four seconds and then exhale for eight seconds because that's what I find works for  my you know balance okay well that person might and feel anxious because they can't  
**[0:44:14-0:44:19](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:44:14):**  hit the four eight they can't hit the four eight so you do you one day it might be different  maybe you're super stimulated one day and you and that four becomes two and the eight  becomes three and like and I can't breathe into my nose today okay well what can you  do can you do a out for your mouth okay when then can your next breath be in for the nose  and out for the nose so that's a long way to explain that but I want them to have permission  
**[0:44:41-0:44:46](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:44:41):**  to know that each day might be a little bit different yeah but just observe and accept  that's the way you feel in that moment and then work on it which ties in with being present  be present because the awareness of your breath the awareness of the process is a mindful  act which allows you to be less stimulated by your environment or whatever's triggered  you whatever's wound you up it might just be one breath that gets you to go yeah the  
**[0:45:13-0:45:20](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:45:13):**  breath is what I need to get you back to the present to bring you back to assess to recalibrate  to check in to then go about whatever it is you've got to tackle next even if that's a  good night's sleep because you've got 10 rounds of solid consistent breath and you build on  it the next day you build on it the next day and if you forget one day it's okay we all  do it you know you can always come back to that it starts with breath it ends with breath  
**[0:45:41-0:45:45](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:45:41):**  yeah and I want to add to that because I have this whole thing about a PB I'm writing about  at the moment because I had this with the ice bar I thought I'm gonna I've got to get  in the ice and I've got to get my PB and it's for me it's now just a present best or a profound  best so every day every minute is going to be different every hour is going to be different  that's the point you know it's whatever that present best can be in that moment nice man  
**[0:46:06-0:46:11](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:46:06):**  that was our present best it was I like that I'm hyped I always love chatting about this  stuff it reinforces it I mean I love hanging out with you anyway yeah I think you're a  legend and I'm grateful that legends on the count I'm part of this that's a good name  for the podcast legends legends on the couch I'll embrace that there we go that's for you  that one I'm thinking about Richie and friends at the moment that's nice but I don't know  
**[0:46:34-0:46:39](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:46:34):**  we're steering in a direction of just understanding what I would like to be around yeah so but  I think you know if we're gonna leave this in a in a way that's gonna inspire the people  to maybe just be a bit more present a bit more aware it's actually just just check in  with yourself and see where you can make some little changes that will have a profound impact  I think on the rest of your life and don't feel like you've got to rush it because we're  
**[0:46:58-0:47:02](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:46:58):**  all in our own little journeys aren't we just learning absolutely and we're carrying so  much from generations before of their journey yeah you know so there's an awful lot to shed  there it's a good thing to be a part of isn't it so be so be be caring and gentle to yourself  just as much as anyone yeah I'm being empowered being exactly innately wild and you connected  and ain't empowered there you go so um incredibly grateful yeah man great grateful for your  
**[0:47:26-0:47:31](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:47:26):**  time man gratitude boom thank you very much Richie pleasure man been awesome  I hope you enjoyed the conversation with Richie as much as I did what a legend to find out  more about what Richie's up to then head over to his Instagram account at the strength temple  if you like the conversation then please show some love by spreading the message wide and  far if you're new to the podcast then please go back and listen to the previous episodes  
**[0:47:55-0:48:01](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:47:55):**  it also really helps promote the podcast if you can hit the rate button and subscribe  if you have in any way been inspired by my barefoot sustainability running challenge  then please make a donation to one or more of the sustainability and environmental organizations  that I am fundraising for you will find the just giving pages in the info box huge thanks  to mr. James Joyce for all your work in helping get these conversations out you are appreciated  
**[0:48:24-0:48:48](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/Episode-5-Richie-Norton-e5gq2p#t=0:48:24):**  remember peeps we can't all live in nature but that doesn't mean we can't live naturally  