<script src="https://cdn.podlove.org/web-player/embed.js"></script>
    <script>
        document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', function () {
          if (document.readyState === 'interactive' || document.readyState === 'complete') {
            podlovePlayer('#player', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/The Natural Lifestylist Podcast/James-thornton-client-earth-protecting-people-nature-the-planet.json', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/The Natural Lifestylist Podcast/config.json').then(registerExternalEvents('player'))
          }
        })
  </script>---
title: James Thornton Client Earth Protecting People Nature The Planet
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### The Natural Lifestylist Podcast  (2020-04-27)  
### Author(s): Tony Riddle  

**[0:00:00-0:00:32](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:00:00):**  Welcome to the Natural Lifestyle is podcast with me, your host, Tony Riddle.  Now it's been quite some time since I last released the new pod, even though this one's been in the bank and I've been itching to put it out, just didn't feel appropriate.  You know, in these coronavirus times, but then by magic, I've just been presented with some research that's actually suggesting that high levels of air pollution, specifically diesel, may be one of the main contributing factors to deaths from COVID-19.  
**[0:00:32-0:01:00](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:00:32):**  So for Mr Riddle, it's perfect timing.  So here it is, is the next pod. But before we get started with hearing from the superhero that is James Thornton, I want to check in with how you, my fellow humans, are feeling in this new social norm we call lockdown.  These are, of course, strange times. So if you're feeling a little out of routine and struggling to adjust to the new social norm, well firstly remember that you're just not alone.  
**[0:01:00-0:01:44](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:01:00):**  But also it's okay not to be okay. Not one of us has ever experienced this before. It's a new social norm and it also proves that, you know, social norms can just change within a breath.  But for me it also highlights that no matter what the social norm, it's always best to keep reconnecting with those natural norms and also take responsibility for what we can take responsibility for and that's our health, wellbeing, lifestyle and our environmental impact.  So to help you navigate this new strange norm and to reconnect the ways of living that are more in sync with your natural norms, I've been busy building an online community called NatLife Tribe.  
**[0:01:44-0:02:17](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:01:44):**  NatLife Tribe is a subscription based service providing you with access to a growing community of natural beings who also wish to improve their health, wellbeing, lifestyle and refine their human experience.  It's all about refinement, peeps. There are weekly Zoom chats, weekly mobility and movement sessions, as well as free access to my online tutorials and discounted rates and workshops, retreats and the brands that I collaborate with.  To find out more and subscribe, simply hit the link in the show notes.  
**[0:02:17-0:02:48](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:02:17):**  So now, here he is, drum roll, now for my next guest. So the new statesman has named him as one of 10 people who could change the world.  James Thornton is an environmental lawyer and writer. He is the founding CEO of ClientEarth, a global nonprofit environmental law organisation.  James launched ClientEarth in 2007, sparking fundamental change in the way environmental protections are made and enforced across Europe.  
**[0:02:48-0:03:19](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:02:48):**  Now operating globally, ClientEarth uses advocacy, litigation and research to address the greatest challenges of our time, including nature loss and climate change.  So without any further ado, here is Mr James Thornton. I hope you enjoy the conversation, peeps.  So I'm behind the mic again and I'm with James Thornton. James Thornton is the founder and CEO of ClientEarth and I've been super looking forward to this.  
**[0:03:19-0:03:34](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:03:19):**  It was meant to come together whilst I was on the run and logistically it just didn't happen.  Then we had another day and there was something wrong with the audio so we finally got together and James has kindly come on board and we're in London now.  James, welcome.  
**[0:03:34-0:03:38](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:03:34):**  Thank you Tony, great to be here.  How are you man?  Excellent.  
**[0:03:38-0:04:04](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:03:38):**  Excellent, there we go. So for those that don't know, ClientEarth. What is ClientEarth and how do we get there?  It's such a great name isn't it? I love it. I was given the book by Stanley as we've just been talking about and he said you must read this.  There's one part in the early part of this book where it talks about superheroes and superwoman, which I'm going to read out in a second.  
**[0:04:04-0:04:28](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:04:04):**  And it just blew my mind. It was kind of the woman that comes into the opposite office and she's observing it and she's saying about being a frequent flyer and the fact my phone is my battery from my phone, people have died making this.  And it's the alarm isn't it that you feel that and there's an anxiety around this at the moment.  So before I waffle on anyway, let's hear about James. James, how do we get here?  
**[0:04:28-0:04:31](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:04:28):**  How do we get to ClientEarth?  ClientEarth, yes please.  Shall I tell you about the name first?  
**[0:04:31-0:04:48](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:04:31):**  Yes please.  So we're lawyers and so ClientEarth is an organisation of around 165 people now. Around 120 of them are lawyers.  And the idea was to get together a group of top international lawyers to try and help save the earth because law is so very, very powerful.  
**[0:04:48-0:05:20](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:04:48):**  So we have, as I said, 165 people and we've got offices now in London and Brussels, Berlin, Warsaw, Beijing, people on the ground in four African countries and we're about to start very actively working in Asia and soon I hope to in Brazil.  And law is one of the most powerful tools you can possibly use if you want to move society forward.  And it links up very beautifully with all of the waves of people demonstrating. So millions of kids are taken to the street, this raises the awareness and then what do you do?  
**[0:05:20-0:05:37](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:05:20):**  Well what you have to do is, having raised the awareness, you have to then change the rules.  And law is the rules. So you change the rules of the game and then you enforce the rules of the game.  Put very simply, that's what we do. And it's a very powerful thing to do. Now, we needed a name and...  
**[0:05:37-0:05:59](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:05:37):**  So we're going back 13 years now. 13 years, yeah. 13 years ago, there you go.  Yeah, 13 years ago, we needed a name. And I was on the internet and I went through, I recall around 108 names.  And you know, I'd Google them and they were all taken. And they were taken, nice names were taken by things like sewage treatment companies in Florida who wanted a nice ecological name.  
**[0:05:59-0:06:22](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:05:59):**  So I was really wondering how I was going to get a name. My husband Martin Goodman and I were visiting my parents who were alive in Santa Barbara, California at that time.  And we were walking on the beach. And I said, how am I going to name this thing? And he said, well look, you're a lawyer, right?  And I said, yep. And he said, who's your client? And I said, my client's The Earth. And he said, simple as that. Call it client Earth.  
**[0:06:22-0:06:36](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:06:22):**  So easy.  Yeah. And I went back to the motel and I Googled it and it came up with zero hits. It was a completely clean name. And I said, that's it. And it became client Earth.  And it really registers.  
**[0:06:36-0:06:54](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:06:36):**  That's powerful in itself that it's a zero hit, right?  It was waiting for this moment, right? And so, and then it's, if The Earth is the client, how do you interview your client?  Because if you're my client and I'm your lawyer, I have to interview you to find what your needs are so I can help you meet your needs.  
**[0:06:54-0:07:03](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:06:54):**  So you can represent me.  Yeah. Well, whatever your needs are, then I can represent you and help you with your needs if I understand them. But I need to understand them.  So how do you understand the needs of The Earth?  
**[0:07:03-0:07:29](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:07:03):**  And what I always tell all of my team is that it starts with science. Because The Earth and nature speak to us in the grammar of science.  Science tells us what The Earth and all the living things on Earth need, whether they are people or animals or oceans.  And you then take the science, the best you can find, and turn it into policy, then go into legislatures and help write the law.  
**[0:07:29-0:07:40](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:07:29):**  And then you enforce the law.  And it's simple when you say it that way. It becomes, of course, quite detailed and complicated.  But the marvelous thing is it's been very, very successful.  
**[0:07:40-0:08:07](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:07:40):**  Yeah. My first podcast I shot was with Hugo Tagholm from Surfers Against Sewerage.  And his whole, his big thing was, you know, to people to get behind organizations like theirs because theirs is about changing legislation, going in and, you know, again, there's the cause and there's a symptom, isn't there?  And it's that change in legislation that enables us to get into the cause.  
**[0:08:07-0:08:22](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:08:07):**  You know, just saying that I have clients come in the door and it could be a melees of different diseases, it could be anything.  And I can view it at symptom level and say, yeah, I can give you this for symptom relief.  But I have to go, well, at some stage, what's causing this? Where are we at right now?  
**[0:08:22-0:08:38](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:08:22):**  You know, and I guess that's where legislation, where we change legislation, we can get, we can enter that cause level.  Yes. So you can actually change the rules of the game, writing legislation.  And then you have to hold governments and companies to account, right, because they often don't comply with the law.  
**[0:08:38-0:09:04](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:08:38):**  And until you do use the law to hold them to their duties, they will try and get off.  So a great example in the UK was air quality and also all across the EU.  And in 2010, I looked around and I wanted to demonstrate that citizens could actually use and enforce the law against governments to make their lives better and help save the planet.  
**[0:09:04-0:09:23](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:09:04):**  Quite a simple idea. And I picked the clean air law because dirty air is a genuine health problem, a huge health problem in the UK and throughout all the rest of the EU.  And we sued the government because the government was doing nothing about it.  And in 2010, there were numbers that they had to meet.  
**[0:09:23-0:09:44](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:09:23):**  The air had to be cleaned to a certain level for NO2, which is a toxic poison gas, comes from combustion, like from cars.  And they hadn't met it. We were well over the limit, often double or more the limit.  And we wrote to them as one does and said, well, surely you know that there's a limit.  
**[0:09:44-0:10:05](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:09:44):**  Surely you have every intention of protecting citizens by complying with the limit. Do tell us what the plan is so that we don't have to sue you.  And they wrote back amazingly, the UK government in 2010 and said, we have no intention at all of complying with the law until at least 2025.  We have no intention.  
**[0:10:05-0:10:11](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:10:05):**  No intention.  Wow.  So we're going to ignore it for at least 15 years before we even start thinking about complying.  
**[0:10:11-0:10:25](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:10:11):**  Now, in the UK, according to their numbers, at least 40,000 people a year die early of air pollution.  Yes.  So that's almost knowing that that's not going to be good for the human and it's not going to be good for the environment.  
**[0:10:25-0:10:32](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:10:25):**  But we have no intention of doing anything.  Even though our own law says we have to do it.  So what do you do?  
**[0:10:32-0:10:53](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:10:32):**  Well, if you're a citizen who doesn't want to see things happen that way and doesn't want to see all these people get asthma, heart attacks, lung cancer.  And now air pollution is even implicated in Alzheimer's and the fine particles we now know cross the placenta into the fetus.  Yeah.  
**[0:10:52-0:10:55](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:10:52):**  It's amazing.  Of course.  You don't want to see that happen.  
**[0:10:55-0:11:00](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:10:55):**  What do you do?  Well, you go to court.  So we went to court and we won in the Supreme Court of the UK.  
**[0:11:00-0:11:11](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:11:00):**  And the Supreme Court gave an injunction, their first ever environmental injunction, and ordered the government to comply with the law.  Now, uh...  I mean, that's just, I mean, it's brilliant, but isn't it a shame?  
**[0:11:11-0:11:16](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:11:11):**  Isn't it a shame?  You know?  However, the cool thing is that when it's necessary, you can actually do it.  
**[0:11:16-0:11:31](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:11:16):**  And since governments were out of practice with the idea of complying with the environmental laws, we had to do that not only here, and we're still enforcing that injunction because they're going too slow.  Something's happening.  London is doing a good job.  
**[0:11:31-0:11:40](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:11:31):**  The mayor would do more if the national government gave him the help he actually needs.  But it's going slow in the rest of the country and we're on it.  We've had to take them back to court twice.  
**[0:11:40-0:11:45](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:11:40):**  We'll keep on them.  It'll happen.  But it was the same all the way across Europe.  
**[0:11:45-0:11:53](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:11:45):**  They weren't, none of the governments were interested in complying with their own air quality law.  And air is just an example.  But it is an important example.  
**[0:11:53-0:12:01](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:11:53):**  So we brought cases all across the EU.  Starting in Germany in the heart of the German motor industry.  Dusseldorf, Stuttgart, Munich.  
**[0:12:01-0:12:07](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:12:01):**  We brought the cases and we won.  And we got bans on diesel cars going in the centre of those towns.  Brilliant.  
**[0:12:07-0:12:21](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:12:07):**  This made the German car manufacturers unhappy.  But the good news is that it will make citizens much healthier.  And it has also pushed the German car manufacturers into making electric vehicles much, much quicker than they would have done.  
**[0:12:21-0:12:28](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:12:21):**  So let me go right into the cause, don't we?  Yep.  It often surprises me, even that we're having this conversation now and we know really what's on the table, don't we?  
**[0:12:28-0:12:37](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:12:28):**  And we know what we're facing.  And you know, for my walk over here, I said I'm very rarely going to town.  Just for me it's the, it's everything feels toxic to me.  
**[0:12:37-0:12:45](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:12:37):**  It's like the air and the energy of it.  And yet I look at the traffic and I think we're still not there.  We still have the cars on the road.  
**[0:12:45-0:12:59](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:12:45):**  And it's, how do we, how do we get it to that level?  It's like, you know, when is it going to be the stage when it's not okay to go and buy a fossil fuel car?  Absolutely.  
**[0:12:59-0:13:05](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:12:59):**  Well that comes, again, that comes from two things.  It comes from people demanding it, like we're going back to the climate strikes.  Yeah.  
**[0:13:05-0:13:16](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:13:05):**  You know, people need to demand it.  And then governments need to react.  And governments in different countries are saying that they will stop all the sale of diesel and petrol vehicles.  
**[0:13:16-0:13:25](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:13:16):**  So that's what's required.  You know, some countries are saying by 2030, some by 2040.  But if it becomes impossible to buy these vehicles, everyone will just readjust.  
**[0:13:25-0:13:33](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:13:25):**  And they'll say, oh great, well I have an electric car now.  And I'll forget about having had a huge diesel vehicle.  You know, it'll just become a thing in the past.  
**[0:13:33-0:13:38](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:13:33):**  We don't have horses on the streets of London anymore.  No one misses them.  No one's going to miss their diesel cars when nobody has a diesel car.  
**[0:13:38-0:13:53](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:13:38):**  Exactly.  Yeah, because we have that argument, you know, there's the argument that the consumer drives the market.  But actually it's the change in legislation and adopting those principles that then change what's available to the consumer, right?  
**[0:13:53-0:14:08](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:13:53):**  Yes, well, because the way it has worked for transport is the car companies wanted to sell petrol and diesel.  And they lead the consumer by the nose.  And they have led governments by the nose all over the world.  
**[0:14:08-0:14:17](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:14:08):**  You know, do the car companies run Germany is a question that's often asked.  Is the automotive industry, yeah.  Yeah, is the automotive industry really in charge?  
**[0:14:17-0:14:27](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:14:17):**  The same thing has often been asked about the United States.  And it could be asked in any country.  But you know, the old line in America was what's good for General Motors is good for America.  
**[0:14:27-0:14:43](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:14:27):**  And that's a deep, twisted form of thought.  But you can see that the driving force came from the companies who wanted to sell their stuff to people.  And they generate advertising. People want what's put in front of them and what they're told to want.  
**[0:14:43-0:15:00](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:14:43):**  So that all has to get turned on its head.  And by dinging the car companies and making them unable to sell diesel if somebody wants to drive into the center of Dusseldorf, they start doing something else.  They'll make great profits from selling electric vehicles.  
**[0:15:00-0:15:10](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:15:00):**  But there's a lot of inertia. They just didn't want to make the change.  They were doing very well by selling diesel.  And as we saw from the Volkswagen scandal, they really didn't care what it was doing to people.  
**[0:15:10-0:15:26](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:15:10):**  Yeah, so let's go into the Volkswagen scandal. What was going on there?  Well, Volkswagen, it became clear that the Volkswagens were emitting even new ones.  Many times what the level of pollution they were allowed.  
**[0:15:26-0:15:49](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:15:26):**  And then it was actually the American EPA, Environmental Protection Agency, that did tests on Volkswagens and found this out.  And found out that they had what was called a defeat device.  They had a clever computerized device in the car that would change the way the engine worked so that when they were running tests on them, it looked like they were compliant with the law.  
**[0:15:49-0:16:02](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:15:49):**  But then for the rest of the time, they would actually emit tremendously more pollution.  It's outrageous, isn't it? Imagine who sits there and makes that decision.  Because that's got to go in front of a whole board, right, to make a decision like that.  
**[0:16:02-0:16:17](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:16:02):**  Well, yes. I mean, the former president of Volkswagen is in trouble and should certainly go to jail.  I mean, people died as a result of these decisions because you're talking about a tremendously extra layer of pollution that went into the air.  That pollution causes harm. So people died.  
**[0:16:17-0:16:35](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:16:17):**  Yeah, I mean, as you're saying, imagine that emits and that goes into the placenta, into the new wall maybe.  And then who knows what the repercussions of that are at that early stage.  Because that's like pollution going into an early threshold of what would already be entered into a toxic threshold that will grow and grow.  
**[0:16:35-0:16:57](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:16:35):**  Well, there's a new study that came out just the other day about children's lungs.  So, kids' lungs. And this is quite consistent with what's been found in recent years.  But when kids are growing in a dirty air environment, so a lot of this NO2, particularly, then their lungs never grow to full size.  
**[0:16:57-0:17:11](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:16:57):**  And they can be up to, say, 13, 15 percent stunted for the rest of their life.  Now, by the time they then become adults, that starts hurting.  You know, when you're young and you have extra capacity in your body for everything, not so important.  
**[0:17:11-0:17:31](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:17:11):**  But by the time you hit middle age, you know, that 15 percent less lung capacity starts to have serious physiological problems.  So what all of this pollution does is it may not knock you over overnight.  But as with cancer from pesticides, you know, the body picks this stuff up.  
**[0:17:31-0:17:46](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:17:31):**  It harms the body over the long term.  One of the recent things, though, is a short term thing.  So if you're walking down the street and you're in an area heavily polluted with NO2, there's toxic poison gas, diesel engines, put out a lot of it.  
**[0:17:46-0:18:04](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:17:46):**  The scientists recently realized that it actually crosses from the blood straight into the brain and physiologically…  So that blood-brain barrier.  …blood-brain barrier crosses because it's a gas, dissolves in the blood, goes into the brain, and causes depression.  
**[0:18:04-0:18:20](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:18:04):**  Yeah, yeah.  It's a relatively new finding.  So there'll be a lot of people walking around in cities all over the world depressed, and it'll be from this pollution from cars, particularly diesel cars.  
**[0:18:20-0:18:29](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:18:20):**  And they'll be making decisions about their life from this point of view of depression.  They'll be thinking, you know, what's life worth?  Why am I depressed?  
**[0:18:29-0:18:34](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:18:29):**  You know, life is terrible.  And it's just because they have a bad chemical in their brain.  Chemical imbalance.  
**[0:18:34-0:18:45](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:18:34):**  They're on a bad trip, you know.  And it's due to diesel cars.  And also you've then got that, you know, the oxygen levels that have been affected, even oxygen dioxide relationship from only being…  
**[0:18:45-0:19:01](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:18:45):**  I mean, the younger generations, if we're saying that from an early age the capacity to breathe is affected, you know, what's that effect then on the brain?  So that means what they are breathing in is then minimized what it should be, the full capacity.  And what they are breathing is then toxic, then the blood-brain barrier.  
**[0:19:01-0:19:08](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:19:01):**  I mean, it's wow, man.  You can keep unravelling this, can't you?  That's the scary stuff, right?  
**[0:19:08-0:19:32](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:19:08):**  Well, yes. And it is. But the good news is that you can clean it all up, you know.  So if you have electric vehicles and they're powered by renewable energy, so by wind, solar, you know, renewable energy, then you've got a good system going.  Or if you have them powered by hydrogen, you know, and you make the hydrogen from renewable energy, then you have a perfectly clean system.  
**[0:19:32-0:19:55](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:19:32):**  And that's great. I mean, if suddenly in London, Paris, anywhere else you substitute it overnight, you know, these clean cars, then the air pollution mostly goes away because it doesn't linger.  Yes. I mean, what's the prognosis there for air pollution? How do you see it playing out, say, in the next, what, five years?  Well, the next five years…  
**[0:19:55-0:20:05](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:19:55):**  I mean, it's just air right now. We can move on to water yet and we can move on to soil and all kinds of realms, can't we?  Just the air for now, yeah.  Indeed. This is a good example of how society has been making decisions.  
**[0:20:05-0:20:32](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:20:05):**  Yeah.  And we should probably get on to climate at some point. But over the next five years, you know, due largely to these actions that we've brought all across Europe with citizen groups in all these different countries, we're active.  We have cases going on in 10 countries now and we're always working with local citizen groups, you know, who are representing themselves and everybody else who lives in their city or town.  
**[0:20:32-0:20:49](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:20:32):**  And we're winning all those cases. And courts are ordering compliance. Courts are ordering governments to clean up the air.  And that will mean ban on really dirty vehicles and so on.  So the air will get better over the next five years all across Europe, I believe, to a significant extent.  
**[0:20:49-0:21:09](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:20:49):**  And that's really good because it shows, it gives you heart, you know, then citizens know that they can do something and that in this case law is a very good tool.  Yeah, and we're being heard.  Yes. Well, and the other thing is when you're not being heard by the government, you can go to court and the court can require the government to do what the law says.  
**[0:21:09-0:21:27](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:21:09):**  So you're being heard by somebody else even if the government's paying no attention.  So how does the individual go around that, though? How does the individual do that? I mean, how does an individual go around that path? We come to you.  Yeah, well, so what we do is, you know, since we're a charity, we're a charity, we don't have private clients.  
**[0:21:27-0:21:59](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:21:27):**  So we'll say, you know, the air is very bad in Milan in Italy. The air is very bad in Rome. The air is very bad in Brussels. The air is very bad in Stuttgart, London and so on.  And then you see where it's all bad and then we go and find a group of citizens in that place who want to get involved and want to put their name on it.  And, you know, it could be the Mothers of Milan, you know, or it could be Friends of the Earth in Bulgaria, you know, but it'll be a group of citizens.  
**[0:21:59-0:22:15](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:21:59):**  Does it have to reach a certain number? Do we need...  No, well, I mean, then you get into very technical rules in different countries.  So in some countries you need to, in order to be an environmental group and go to court in this way, you need to have been active for three years and have a hundred members.  
**[0:22:15-0:22:37](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:22:15):**  You know, there are some very technical restrictions. But basically in every country in Europe you can go and do this.  And then we're looking at countries outside Europe, you know, because you get terrible air pollution in India and, you know, in China and more or less everywhere in the world, you know, there are air pollution problems.  And many of them could be addressed by citizens taking action like this.  
**[0:22:37-0:22:54](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:22:37):**  Yeah, brilliant.  And what you do is, when you win these cases, and air pollution is a really good example, then the citizens are also teaching the government that they're watching.  You know, and the government can't just get away not taking care of them, not taking care of people.  
**[0:22:54-0:23:13](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:22:54):**  Particularly when the law says the government has a duty to take care of the people and they ignore it.  And when the people stand up and use this powerful tool, they're also educating the government that they can't get away with this anymore, that you have to be responsible.  Because we were talking earlier about the, this ten years that we have between now and 2030.  
**[0:23:13-0:23:20](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:23:13):**  Yeah.  And it's really, you know, you might think of it as the decade of responsibility.  Accountability, responsibility.  
**[0:23:20-0:23:23](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:23:20):**  Accountability and responsibility.  Absolutely.  That's right.  
**[0:23:23-0:23:39](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:23:23):**  And part of it is that citizens, by using law, can tell governments that they need to be responsible when there are already laws.  And they need to be accountable for the consequences of their action.  And this ten years is a very critical time for that.  
**[0:23:39-0:23:53](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:23:39):**  Yeah, yeah.  It's so good that we started with air because it's kind of, for me I look at breath work and I look at breathing and I coach people in it.  And I always think, right, it's the first act of life and the last, you know.  
**[0:23:53-0:24:04](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:23:53):**  And if we think of earth as the client, you know.  And then what are the effects of that on the environment?  So we can go to climate, for instance.  
**[0:24:04-0:24:21](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:24:04):**  So if we up it now into climate, what else do we see there?  Because we can discuss about the individual of how its effects are if we look at, right, the pollution levels are far too high.  This is the effect it has on the human level.  
**[0:24:21-0:24:33](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:24:21):**  Can we actually go to court and then say, this is the effect on the earth, not just the individuals on earth?  Yeah.  Well, that depends on individual laws.  
**[0:24:33-0:24:46](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:24:33):**  So that's always what you want to do.  What you want to do is to say, here's a serious problem, you know, we want to address it.  And then you have to go off and be very, very creative about how the system of rules can address it.  
**[0:24:46-0:24:59](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:24:46):**  Because a lot of the stuff that is causing, say, climate change is not illegal.  Now, we were talking a minute ago about air pollution.  And for the government to allow the levels of air pollution that exist is illegal.  
**[0:24:59-0:25:11](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:24:59):**  So you can go to court and say, make them stop.  But some other things that are causing climate change in a major way are not illegal.  So you have to be very creative.  
**[0:25:11-0:25:25](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:25:11):**  So, for example, one of the very—public enemy number one are coal-fired power stations.  You know, we need to get electricity from somewhere.  And there are tens of millions of people in the world that don't even have it yet.  
**[0:25:25-0:25:30](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:25:25):**  So they need it.  They have a decent life.  So we need electric power.  
**[0:25:30-0:25:39](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:25:30):**  But in the past, one of the main sources has always been burning coal.  In the old days, we didn't know there was anything wrong with that.  It was there.  
**[0:25:39-0:25:51](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:25:39):**  It's really effective.  The problem is that it releases so much greenhouse gas that it becomes public enemy number one.  And causes huge problems of air pollution as well.  
**[0:25:51-0:26:03](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:25:51):**  That's also true.  But building and running, as long as you run it properly, coal-fired power stations isn't illegal.  So what do you do?  
**[0:26:03-0:26:19](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:26:03):**  Well, if you actually want to move governments much quicker than they have been going in terms of reducing climate change,  then you have to—citizens, again, have to take it upon themselves to stop the building of coal-fired power stations.  So how do we do that?  
**[0:26:19-0:26:32](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:26:19):**  Well, an example is Poland.  They were in Europe about to build, when I started ClientEarth, more than half of all the new coal-fired power stations that were planned.  30 of them.  
**[0:26:32-0:26:40](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:26:32):**  And it would have been an enormous contribution to climate change.  And 14 were already just about to be built.  Ground had been broken in some of these.  
**[0:26:40-0:26:54](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:26:40):**  So we set up an office in Warsaw.  And it's told well the story, I think, in the ClientEarth book.  About how these brilliant Polish lawyers said, we're not going to stand for this.  
**[0:26:54-0:27:14](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:26:54):**  And then brought cases against every one of these 14 power plants based on nature laws.  So, for example, that there wasn't an appropriate assessment of impact done.  Or that the impact assessment showed that they were going to raise the temperature of the water so much it was going to kill the fish.  
**[0:27:14-0:27:25](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:27:14):**  Or they didn't have the right permit.  So you have to be creative about what law you can use.  But the result of that was that ultimately none of these power stations got built.  
**[0:27:25-0:27:34](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:27:25):**  Brilliant.  And that's wonderful.  Because just like I was saying, you can use the air quality laws to drive a car market towards electric cars.  
**[0:27:34-0:27:44](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:27:34):**  You can use this type of litigation to drive the electricity generation market away from coal.  You just make coal too expensive.  Make it hard to build.  
**[0:27:44-0:27:53](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:27:44):**  And then the market will move towards renewable energy.  Which it, to some degree at least, has done in Poland.  Yeah.  
**[0:27:53-0:28:06](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:27:53):**  But it's not an easy transition.  You know, and governments need then to be lobbied by, for example, students.  Yeah, I mean, how long did that process take? How long was that process?  
**[0:28:06-0:28:14](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:28:06):**  Oh, it took us about 10 years to kill all those.  Wow.  And then the next stage is to shut down all the existing ones.  
**[0:28:14-0:28:36](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:28:14):**  So in Germany, for example, everyone thinks of Germany as a very green country.  And when you talk to the German environmental leaders, they say, well, you know, that's because we're good at PR.  The dirty secret of Germany, they said when I got there, was that we generate a huge amount of our electricity from coal still.  
**[0:28:36-0:28:54](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:28:36):**  And the German environmental leaders said, look, we don't have lawyers like Klein Earth, no organization of lawyers like Klein Earth.  So could you come to Germany and set up an office to tackle all the existing coal plants?  Because they need to be shut down, and they need to be shut down much quicker than the government will ever do.  
**[0:28:54-0:29:02](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:28:54):**  So we're working on that.  You know? And it's quite exciting.  So it becomes possible to shut down those plants with diligent efforts.  
**[0:29:02-0:29:14](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:29:02):**  That's probably 10 years.  But if we were to succeed in 10 years, that's eight years before the government is thinking of doing it.  And they're talking about 2038.  
**[0:29:14-0:29:23](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:29:14):**  So if we could shut them by 2030, you're at least eight years ahead.  But we know when they say 2038, it will never happen in 2038.  Maybe it would happen in 2050.  
**[0:29:23-0:29:39](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:29:23):**  So if we could do that over the next 10 years, you're making enormous progress.  And of course with the climate strikes, the school strikes, it must accelerate that process.  You know, because they must look and go, actually, people are listening now.  
**[0:29:39-0:29:49](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:29:39):**  It all helps.  But I think you always need to have the hammer of using law.  Oh, absolutely. Yeah, yeah.  
**[0:29:49-0:29:59](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:29:49):**  Because just like the car companies, the big utilities have enormous power over governments.  They're enormous companies.  They've been going forever.  
**[0:29:59-0:30:12](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:29:59):**  And they're deeply intertwined with government.  And governments are just used to doing what utilities want, more or less.  So if you're a utility, like the big German one called RWE, it's one of the big electricity generators,  
**[0:30:12-0:30:21](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:30:12):**  you want to do things the way you've always done them.  You have to be creative and nimble to want to switch.  And they don't.  
**[0:30:21-0:30:42](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:30:21):**  And so how much do they not want to switch that they started cutting down a virgin forest in Germany called the Hombach forest  in order to create a new coal mine for when their existing coal mine runs out 10 years from now.  So what they're thinking is when this coal mine runs out 10 years from now, this next coal mine needs to be ready  
**[0:30:42-0:30:48](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:30:42):**  so we can do it for another few decades.  And let's wipe out a carbon-sequestering forest, of course, to do it.  Exactly.  
**[0:30:48-0:30:59](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:30:48):**  Brilliant.  And there was a lawsuit brought by a group of German NGOs.  And they got a court to order the company to stop cutting the forest.  
**[0:30:59-0:31:08](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:30:59):**  But you can see the way the company is thinking.  The company is thinking, oh, great, we can burn coal for decades and decades.  We just need to get that one ready 10 years from now.  
**[0:31:08-0:31:18](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:31:08):**  And madness. That's absolute madness.  Thinking that way brings you to the end of civilization.  And that's why you have to bring these kind of hard suits.  
**[0:31:18-0:31:27](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:31:18):**  So you have to see who are the W.E.  I mean, there's a level of frustration, isn't there?  Because I've moved past frustration in life and I've got compassion.  
**[0:31:27-0:31:38](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:31:27):**  But it's hard to have compassion there, isn't it, for someone that's actually making that decision  that they can't see the bigger picture.  Because this is all bigger picture stuff, isn't it?  
**[0:31:38-0:31:45](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:31:38):**  It's like, what's coming our way?  Yeah, it's all big picture stuff and it's all extremely clear.  Really clear. I mean, it couldn't get any clearer, right?  
**[0:31:45-0:31:58](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:31:45):**  No, the scientists are very, very clear on this and have been for some time and it's clear every day.  So is it easy to have compassion for people who make such decisions?  I work at it every day myself, but that's the place.  
**[0:31:58-0:32:13](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:31:58):**  So what I learned from the Dalai Lama many years ago when I had a great meeting with him,  he said this, you're a Buddhist.  Work on getting beyond the mind of anger.  
**[0:32:13-0:32:23](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:32:13):**  Because from the angry mind, you'll never get positive solutions.  Well, you're almost operating at the same level.  So we need to work to get beyond the angry mind.  
**[0:32:23-0:32:39](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:32:23):**  A lot of the people that I've met on the opposite side of the table when you sue people for doing the wrong thing  are actually extremely decent people who are very nice to their children  and often they don't quite get what they're doing or else they feel trapped in a system  
**[0:32:39-0:32:58](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:32:39):**  that makes them do things a certain way.  So on a certain level, it's easy to have compassion for them because they're simply thinking the wrong way.  And if you want to think about it this way, I see that environmental problems are actually mental problems.  
**[0:32:58-0:33:09](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:32:58):**  It's as simple as that.  Where did environmental problems come from?  They came from us thinking the wrong thoughts and having the wrong approaches, the wrong attitudes.  
**[0:33:09-0:33:21](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:33:09):**  And what's inherited within that thought process too.  Yes. And those thought processes lead people to do things a certain way.  Those ideologies lead them to be blind to certain things.  
**[0:33:21-0:33:32](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:33:21):**  But it's all mental problems.  So since they are mental problems, they're problems in the realm that we know how to clear up.  Not easy, but we know how to clear them up because they're in our own minds.  
**[0:33:32-0:33:42](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:33:32):**  Yeah, not thinking clearly.  Emotionally disconnected from the bigger picture in a way.  Well, no, because it's still emotionally connected to it, but just not the right emotion towards it.  
**[0:33:42-0:33:49](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:33:42):**  Right, there we go. That's good.  So that's the earth. That's the air, sorry.  So we've gone to air.  
**[0:33:49-0:34:01](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:33:49):**  What about, let's go into sea, the water.  What do you have on that?  Who have we taken to court here?  
**[0:34:01-0:34:16](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:34:01):**  Well, not so much taken to court, although I hope to start.  But it's a different approach there.  One of the things I was mentioning that you have to do if you're going to use law effectively is help to write new laws.  
**[0:34:16-0:34:30](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:34:16):**  Help laws evolve in the right way.  So back when I started ClientEarth 13 years ago, talking to scientists, I asked what was the big biodiversity problem,  the big nature problem in Europe at that time.  
**[0:34:30-0:34:47](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:34:30):**  And they said, well, it's quite clear. It's fisheries.  So we've got great fisheries in Europe, very rich fish resources that we've been using for a long time.  But they said we've been overfishing so much that it really has to stop now.  
**[0:34:47-0:35:01](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:34:47):**  And the way this law works is, like many laws, it comes up for renewal every 10 years,  so you have a big chance to rewrite things in that year that's open.  And that was just happening near the start of ClientEarth.  
**[0:35:01-0:35:15](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:35:01):**  So what the scientists said is if we get it right this time…  Sorry, so at the start of that was happening at the creation of ClientEarth.  So we're three years into the next cycle of that, right?  
**[0:35:15-0:35:25](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:35:15):**  Yes, it's a little sloppier than that because instead of a year, it took something like three years to actually get it all written.  Cool.  But yes, we're just about to start the next cycle.  
**[0:35:25-0:35:51](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:35:25):**  And what the scientists were saying is if everybody gets the law right this time and reduces the take of fish,  you know, it's unsustainable now, and if we get a system of rules that protects the fish stocks enough,  then the fish stocks will renew themselves and you can have healthy fish stocks forever in Europe.  
**[0:35:51-0:36:00](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:35:51):**  So I said, okay, here's the way we're going to approach it.  We're not protecting fish from people.  We're seeing fish and people as one ecosystem.  
**[0:36:00-0:36:12](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:36:00):**  And what we want to do is to protect the fish people ecosystem.  And that means at the moment taking less fish.  But that also means that the fisher people will have jobs a hundred years from now,  
**[0:36:12-0:36:20](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:36:12):**  which will not be the case if the fish populations crash because then they disappear.  And that was the way we approached it.  So it's great.  
**[0:36:20-0:36:26](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:36:20):**  So you have to be that smart with the law, basically what the model is you're presenting.  Yeah, yeah, I like that.  Yeah.  
**[0:36:26-0:36:38](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:36:26):**  Well, this goes back to talking to your client, you know, and what does the earth want?  Well, the earth wants healthy populations, you know, and workable ecosystems, you know, resilient living systems.  Don't do it for you, do it for your children kind of conversation.  
**[0:36:38-0:36:52](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:36:38):**  Yeah, precisely so.  So if you approach things that way, then you can get an idea of what the law should be.  So the rule should be one that takes into account the needs of the ecosystem and the people alive right now and future generations.  
**[0:36:52-0:37:02](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:36:52):**  And the interesting thing, since you pointed future generations is when you start thinking about future generations,  what you always get is a result that protects the ecosystem.  Yes, of course.  
**[0:37:02-0:37:07](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:37:02):**  Well, eventually we start to realize we are the ecosystem.  Yes.  Yeah.  
**[0:37:07-0:37:19](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:37:07):**  Because a lot of what we're talking about is that disconnection from that, this huge ego system that just goes around in a destructive sense.  Yeah.  Okay.  
**[0:37:19-0:37:32](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:37:19):**  And they're not fishermen anymore, really, are they?  It's kind of like when you look at those huge hauling nets, you have to question, is that fishing, you know?  Well, it's what they call industrial fishing, you know, so and that's the problem.  
**[0:37:32-0:37:50](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:37:32):**  So the problem is that we can take so much more out all at once that it's easy for us to extinguish whole populations of fish.  And we could render the ocean sterile of fish pretty easily with this industrial fishing.  And we've been in the process of doing that.  
**[0:37:50-0:38:11](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:37:50):**  The law is better now, and now we're trying to make sure it's enforced.  But it's like an agriculture, you know?  It's the industrialization of agriculture that has meant that agriculture has become really in Europe, certainly, it's the number one thing harming nature, harming biodiversity is agriculture.  
**[0:38:11-0:38:37](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:38:11):**  Because of the industrial nature of the agriculture, you know, and the massive use of pesticides and herbicides and fertilizers.  When things go from being looked at from the point of view of the health of the system into a purely industrial operation, whether it's fishing or agriculture, then you break that bond of humans understanding the system and humans responding to the system.  Yeah, the coexistence of it.  
**[0:38:37-0:38:54](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:38:37):**  Yeah.  How to coexist.  Yeah, because even down to animal agriculture, you know, if you look at, you know, what is it, 90% of soybean is going to livestock, right?  
**[0:38:54-0:39:19](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:38:54):**  And then what are we doing to grow that in the first place, which is then is this, you know, that's where the pesticides come in.  So not only are we then destroying the soil and its ability for carbon, sequestering carbon.  Then also that soy is then depleted of nutrients that would need anyway to feed the animal again, that's not even the animals then removed from what that ecosystem would be completely separate.  
**[0:39:19-0:39:39](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:39:19):**  It's not only we're doing it to ourselves, we're then doing it to the animal and plant kingdom at the same time.  That's the level of disconnection, isn't it?  Complete. And of course the other piece of that is we're cutting down the Amazon rainforest to plant the soybeans to feed the cattle that graze on the land that you made by taking down the Amazon rainforest.  
**[0:39:39-0:39:42](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:39:39):**  Yeah.  Completely crazy.  Yeah.  
**[0:39:42-0:39:47](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:39:42):**  Yeah.  Now, one interesting thing about that is.  Again, here goes the frustration part, you know what I mean?  
**[0:39:47-0:39:50](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:39:47):**  Yeah.  Oh, no, the frustration is enormous.  Yeah.  
**[0:39:50-0:40:04](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:39:50):**  So you have to hang with it and then figure out what you can do.  Yeah.  Because the way to get beyond anger and frustration and despair, it's very easy to feel despair when you wake up and actually look at what's going on.  
**[0:40:04-0:40:12](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:40:04):**  And it's actually a natural part of the process.  Yeah.  So I was saying earlier, it's almost in a way it feels like.  
**[0:40:12-0:40:24](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:40:12):**  So I might run recently.  So I ran, you know, the days that I couldn't run, I would say when people say, what was the what was the what was the hardest part?  Well, the days I couldn't actually run. There was a day when I was forced, had an injury.  
**[0:40:24-0:40:33](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:40:24):**  The worst one was probably day 27, you know, right near the end of three days to go.  And I sprained my ankle.  So I have three days.  
**[0:40:33-0:40:40](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:40:33):**  That's adversity.  So in that moment, wow, the run became everything.  It became everything to me.  
**[0:40:40-0:40:46](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:40:40):**  It's almost like we're at that stage.  It's the adversity now, isn't it?  That humans start to react.  
**[0:40:46-0:40:55](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:40:46):**  You know, this is what we need to be.  We need to do this now.  It's not just a silent conversation, you know, stuff that's going on in the background that you might hear on the fringes.  
**[0:40:55-0:41:05](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:40:55):**  Much more people around the table now.  I think everybody's waking up.  You know, the we did a poll recently in the UK about the upcoming election.  
**[0:41:05-0:41:31](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:41:05):**  And the question was to find out what percentage of the voters felt that climate change was going to.  And the words were greatly affect the way they voted and for who they voted.  And what was really interesting is that 57% of the voting public said climate change would greatly affect the choices they made in the election.  
**[0:41:31-0:41:47](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:41:31):**  And that went way up when you went down to the 18 to 34-year-old category.  It was 78% said I will be greatly influenced by the climate change policies of who I'm voting for.  And that's really encouraging.  
**[0:41:47-0:41:57](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:41:47):**  But to go back to this despair thing.  So, you know, people often feel despair when they wake up to what's going on.  And then they feel disempowered.  
**[0:41:57-0:42:08](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:41:57):**  And that's, again, part of the process.  And you just have to hang with it and figure out what you can do.  Because it's enormously empowering to realize there is something you can do.  
**[0:42:08-0:42:15](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:42:08):**  And that may be to march.  It's certainly to take responsible steps in your own life.  It's certainly to vote for whoever is promising to do the best thing.  
**[0:42:15-0:42:26](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:42:15):**  Absolutely.  And in my case it's to use law as well.  And then you get over that despair and you say, well, there's hope.  
**[0:42:26-0:42:34](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:42:26):**  There's actually actions.  There's activity I can do.  Yeah, of course, there's been the best example you can be as a human being in amongst it.  
**[0:42:34-0:42:38](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:42:34):**  You know.  There was a great interview I had.  Have you heard of Michael Thornton?  
**[0:42:38-0:42:44](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:42:38):**  You know Michael Thornton?  No? There you go.  So Michael Thornton has carbon analytics.  
**[0:42:44-0:42:49](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:42:44):**  Okay.  And it's brilliant.  So this would mean, say, James, you wanted to go and buy.  
**[0:42:49-0:43:05](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:42:49):**  You wanted to go into the coffee shop up the road and buy a sandwich.  What it would mean is the coffee shop can use his system as carbon analytics.  And it would then show what would be the impact of each product they have there.  
**[0:43:05-0:43:12](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:43:05):**  And it would show how much carbon.  So this sandwich versus this sandwich.  And then that goes, again, into the consumer.  
**[0:43:12-0:43:22](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:43:12):**  And the consumer will go, actually, I'm not going to buy that.  Look at the impact that's going to make versus this one.  And then suddenly you start to see, oh, that one's no longer going to be on the shelf because people are choosing this.  
**[0:43:22-0:43:27](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:43:22):**  So it's quite a really interesting model.  That's very good.  Yeah. I feel like I'm going to hook you up with Michael.  
**[0:43:27-0:43:34](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:43:27):**  I think he'd be a good person for you.  Yeah.  So that's the water. That's the sea. That's the air.  
**[0:43:34-0:43:53](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:43:34):**  We're a little bit into earth right now. We're into the soils.  Yeah, it really surprises me that because I interviewed another guy, the ethical butcher,  and we talked about holistic management and how then it was to get away from this industrial kind of farming influence,  
**[0:43:53-0:44:07](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:43:53):**  reintroduce the animals back to the earth.  And so they can then take on that process of you, holistic management means, say, this table, for instance, James, this area here.  We work like the apex predator and move the animals to this one area.  
**[0:44:07-0:44:15](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:44:07):**  And they literally just eat everything.  And then they poop and they pee and they stomp it in.  And then you move them to the next place and this just grows a whole new ecosystem.  
**[0:44:15-0:44:28](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:44:15):**  So we start to change at that level.  You know, it'd be great if you know, then that's an opportunity for the animals to be reintroduced to the environment,  but also to the humans to respect the animals within that process.  
**[0:44:28-0:44:45](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:44:28):**  You know? Yeah.  No, it's very exciting that we now in agriculture as well have all the ideas we need.  And the structural change that needs to happen there is really about how the money flows.  
**[0:44:45-0:44:59](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:44:45):**  So much of all of these issues is determined by where the money goes.  So if the money goes to coal-fired power stations to generate electricity, you know, then you're sunk.  If it goes to renewable energy, then you're good.  
**[0:44:59-0:45:14](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:44:59):**  You know, in agriculture, the way it's worked throughout Europe is under something called the Common Agricultural Policy,  which you will know.  And it's a vast subsidy system of more than 50 billion euros a year.  
**[0:45:14-0:45:25](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:45:14):**  Now, the farmers actually need support.  50 billion? 50 billion euros a year.  It's by far the biggest number in the EU budget every year.  
**[0:45:25-0:45:31](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:45:25):**  50 billion. More than 50 billion every year.  Now, the problem... And this is all agriculture?  This is... Yeah, okay. Yeah.  
**[0:45:31-0:45:38](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:45:31):**  Yes. So all agricultural activities.  Yeah.  So the... And it's in every country in Europe.  
**[0:45:38-0:45:52](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:45:38):**  And countries contribute, and then Brussels puts money back to the countries which are then distributed to farmers in payment schemes.  Yeah.  Now, the farmers need support.  
**[0:45:52-0:46:09](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:45:52):**  They need financial support, that's for sure.  The problem is that we've been giving them these bad subsidies, which you get it only if you do things that actually hurt the planet.  So you... To get the subsidies, you do industrial agriculture.  
**[0:46:09-0:46:20](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:46:09):**  That's what they subsidize.  And again, this was... We go back to environmental problems or mental problems.  This started with a good idea, which is after World War II...  
**[0:46:20-0:46:33](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:46:20):**  I'm trying to go with where would the idea be. How do you even come up with that?  Well, the idea was good.  The idea was, as so many things that go wrong started with good intentions.  
**[0:46:33-0:46:48](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:46:33):**  And the good intention was, we need to feed people after World War II.  So we need to produce a lot of food for people all over Europe after World War II.  So let's... And all of these great things were new then, new, very exciting fertilizers and new, exciting pesticides.  
**[0:46:48-0:46:59](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:46:48):**  You know, it's all going to be great.  And we can raise farmers' income by having them have big tractors and reducing the number of farmers, and then the farmers will each...  Increase their yields.  
**[0:46:59-0:47:13](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:46:59):**  Make money. And then they'll come up to the level of white collar workers financially, and it'll be a happy Europe.  So they weren't bad intentions.  It worked out wrong and really badly when we see the results, which is industrial agriculture today.  
**[0:47:13-0:47:25](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:47:13):**  But if you want your subsidies now, and everyone needs subsidies if you're a farmer...  They're still stuck in that paradigm.  That's the way you get them. So what do you do? Back to the earlier idea, you change the rules.  
**[0:47:25-0:47:41](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:47:25):**  So right now, the Common Agricultural Policy is up for renewal.  So we hired this brilliant lawyer who now has a legal team at Client Earth in Brussels,  working full time on helping to rewrite the rules of the Common Agricultural Policy,  
**[0:47:41-0:47:56](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:47:41):**  working with governments, working with NGOs, working with scientists,  bringing all of that information in to try and find a way to rewrite the rules so the money goes to the right stuff,  to sustainable agriculture, to regenerative agriculture.  
**[0:47:56-0:48:16](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:47:56):**  So if you can do that, and I'm sure we can to some degree, how much of the 50 billion we get moving in the right direction is the game to play for?  Huge score if you can get any significant portion of that moved to renewable and sustainable agriculture.  Because then the farmers will get paid only if they do the renewable sustainable agriculture.  
**[0:48:16-0:48:29](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:48:16):**  Now when you talk to farmers, they would be very happy to do that.  They can't do it now because...  Because they've become disconnected from the soils that their ancestors would have been so connected to over time.  
**[0:48:29-0:48:42](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:48:29):**  Yes, well...  And there must be a huge amount of guilt because they know, right?  Certainly some of them do. The head of our project in Brussels told me that he went around and interviewed a number of farmers  
**[0:48:42-0:49:00](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:48:42):**  who were running agricultural operations that were organic and others were running agricultural operations that were industrial.  And just to find out their attitudes and what they were doing so we could learn.  And he said later on when I went through my notes, something really struck me.  
**[0:49:00-0:49:14](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:49:00):**  He said, you know, I knew I'd met a bunch of people who were very happy and a bunch of people who were very depressed.  Some loved life and some could barely get up the next day.  And he said it correlated perfectly with whether they were doing the organic agriculture or industrial.  
**[0:49:14-0:49:26](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:49:14):**  Everyone who was running industrial farms was depressed, miserable, sick, and of course they're being exposed to all kinds of chemicals.  The people who were running the organic farms were all happy.  They wanted to go out the next day and be in nature again.  
**[0:49:26-0:49:34](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:49:26):**  And the needs met.  Yeah. Psychological as well as physical and...  Social, psychosocial.  
**[0:49:34-0:49:42](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:49:34):**  Yeah.  Spiritual because they're making a connection to the earth again.  That's right. And they're making a positive contribution to human culture by producing really good wholesome food,  
**[0:49:42-0:49:56](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:49:42):**  which must be a very good feeling.  You're a really important person if you're doing that.  And then if you can change those subsidies from pushing you towards industrial farming to regenerative farming,  
**[0:49:56-0:50:09](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:49:56):**  then they're not subsidies anymore. Then they're a good social investment in the future.  Yeah, which then is like we're talking about renewable energy. It's the same story, right?  Moving towards renewables.  
**[0:50:09-0:50:15](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:50:09):**  Yeah.  Brilliant.  Yeah. So it's possible to make all this stuff work.  
**[0:50:15-0:50:44](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:50:15):**  And the good experience I have from being in the midst of it is that there is in each of these big domains that we need to change,  you know, in industrial policy, agricultural policy, in fisheries, in energy policy, in transportation, all these things.  There are solutions now. And back when I started this type of work 35 years ago, the solutions were not always on the horizon.  
**[0:50:44-0:51:01](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:50:44):**  The problems weren't yet so intense either. But those of us who paid real attention knew these problems were coming.  They weren't so dramatic.  But the solutions weren't there always. And now in all of these arenas, you know, there are great solutions.  
**[0:51:01-0:51:20](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:51:01):**  And it then just takes the political will, so it takes people demanding it.  And then it takes governments writing rules, enforcing rules.  And where we often come in is in moving companies out of the way that are blocking the access to the market of good,  
**[0:51:20-0:51:32](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:51:20):**  young, smart companies who are trying to produce good things for people.  And they can't get the big old dinosaurs out of the road.  And the dinosaurs won't move off the road. And the governments won't move them off the road.  
**[0:51:32-0:51:47](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:51:32):**  So citizens have to take out their sword and get rid of the dinosaurs.  And then the young companies who want to produce renewable energy, who want to do the right sort of farming and so on,  will have access to capital, access to markets. And it all becomes possible.  
**[0:51:47-0:52:00](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:51:47):**  It's amazing.  The question is just how to make it happen fast enough.  And again, you can accelerate this by using the law as a carrot and stick and, you know, make people move.  
**[0:52:00-0:52:05](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:52:00):**  Making people toe the ecological line.  Yeah.  Yeah.  
**[0:52:05-0:52:20](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:52:05):**  It's one of drawing swords.  So when you went, going back 13 years to where you were when, right, okay, the conversation of what do we call this?  What is it you're doing? And Earth being the client to where we are now.  
**[0:52:20-0:52:34](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:52:20):**  Has it met your expectations of where you were at that point?  This is what we're going to be doing to where we are today.  Do you feel we on are we on the right path? Is it moving in the in the way you thought it would move?  
**[0:52:34-0:52:49](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:52:34):**  Has it accelerated far quicker than you thought? Maybe.  Well, let me let me answer in two ways. One is for the organization itself, Client Earth.  Back when I started this, I never dreamed that by now we'd have 165 people.  
**[0:52:49-0:52:55](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:52:49):**  You started off on your own, right? You said you're in your bedroom. Just you.  Yeah. Yeah.  Small desk in the corner of my bedroom.  
**[0:52:55-0:53:06](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:52:55):**  As inspiration for everyone.  Yeah. One small one bedroom apartment in West Amsterdam.  You know, and what do I do? That's what I did. And I had to design the program.  
**[0:53:06-0:53:22](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:53:06):**  I had to raise the money. I then had to find people to work with me.  And then the need became clearer and clearer and clearer.  And the power of using law to solve these problems as we did it became more obvious to people.  
**[0:53:22-0:53:38](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:53:22):**  So we've grown much quicker than I thought we would do. And that's very exciting.  And it's really a thrill to have so many smart people working with me, most of them quite young.  70% last time we counted women. It's an amazingly great group of people.  
**[0:53:38-0:53:51](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:53:38):**  And lawyers last time I counted from 17 different countries around the world.  So highly international, really smart.  And they come up with all kinds of wonderful ideas that I could never imagine.  
**[0:53:51-0:54:03](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:53:51):**  Because you have all these brains tuned in to the problems and potential sets of solutions.  And they just go in and they find them.  And that's, to me, the most exciting part of it.  
**[0:54:03-0:54:13](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:54:03):**  Now, the world itself. Are we about where I thought we were? Yeah.  I mean, you could foresee...  That adversity point.  
**[0:54:13-0:54:32](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:54:13):**  Yeah. 12 years ago, you could see that if you were really paying attention to the science.  It's true that all of the climate change, the further science, the later studies are always getting more scary.  We can see the acceleration of it now, right?  
**[0:54:32-0:54:42](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:54:32):**  Yeah. It is accelerating more.  But that doesn't surprise me based on what I knew then.  So the problem definition is about the same.  
**[0:54:42-0:54:56](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:54:42):**  What's exciting is that our own organization has grown so quickly that it's making such an impact.  And that's only part of this global awakening that we were talking about.  The shift in consciousness, basically.  
**[0:54:56-0:55:07](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:54:56):**  Yeah. And that's exactly what you need, right?  Because if environmental problems are indeed mental problems, then what you need is exactly a shift in consciousness.  Where people wake up and they say, why am I doing it this way?  
**[0:55:07-0:55:14](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:55:07):**  Why are we doing it?  Why am I doing this to myself, my children?  And then, you know, the Berlin Wall came down.  
**[0:55:14-0:55:21](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:55:14):**  Nobody expected it to. It was a shift in consciousness.  And then click, it came down.  The same thing can happen.  
**[0:55:21-0:55:30](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:55:21):**  Everybody could wake up tomorrow. It won't be quite tomorrow.  But everyone could wake up tomorrow and say, okay, we simply have to do it a different way.  And it's possible to do.  
**[0:55:30-0:55:39](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:55:30):**  Yeah, that's really an exciting prospect, isn't it?  Well, yes. And it's really possible.  Now, you have some people who will go kicking and screaming.  
**[0:55:39-0:55:48](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:55:39):**  And unfortunately, some of them are running big governments.  But the people aren't seeing it that way.  Yeah, I mean, that is a terrifying thing, isn't it?  
**[0:55:48-0:56:05](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:55:48):**  That you do have people in big positions that still have that naysayer kind of voice, right?  Even though there's so much science there, right?  And we can see the effects of it.  
**[0:56:05-0:56:18](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:56:05):**  You know, that's again compassion, right?  How do we then go to where we have compassion for these people within these positions that are making these decisions and still aren't seeing it?  Or are they?  
**[0:56:18-0:56:30](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:56:18):**  But there's something else there.  Well, I mean, if Donald Trump is really seeing it and not doing something about it, that would be surprising.  I think he's just really not seeing it.  
**[0:56:30-0:56:49](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:56:30):**  And here's you go back to mental problems.  If you have extreme narcissism, you're really only focused on information about yourself and information about others or the harm to others doesn't get through.  And so you simply have a difficult problem there.  
**[0:56:49-0:56:56](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:56:49):**  Is he able to wake up?  He might be able to.  What I'm hoping instead is that people wake up and throw him out of office.  
**[0:56:56-0:57:11](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:56:56):**  Yeah.  That would be, I think, a quicker win than trying to change his psyche, which has been pretty fossilized in this way of thinking for a long time.  But he's not there forever.  
**[0:57:11-0:57:19](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:57:11):**  No. Of course.  But the Earth will be, right?  The Earth will be. The question is whether we will be.  
**[0:57:19-0:57:22](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:57:19):**  Exactly.  Yeah.  That's up to us.  
**[0:57:22-0:57:28](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:57:22):**  The Earth will be around.  That's this period of time now, right?  Yeah.  
**[0:57:28-0:57:53](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:57:28):**  One of the things you're asking about, sort of the change in consciousness, change in view, that I found exciting is that a couple of years ago, it would have been impossible to think of David Attenborough saying on TV that civilization itself is in danger due to climate change and the loss of nature.  Amazing.  Powerful.  
**[0:57:53-0:58:09](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:57:53):**  Very powerful.  Now, some of us who have been paying attention to this have known this for some time, but he is somebody who has such a deep resonance in the UK culture.  He's so deeply trusted, and he is indeed very in touch with the science.  
**[0:58:09-0:58:36](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:58:09):**  When he turns around and says, not just we have a problem here, but civilization is itself in danger, that's really, really an important shift in the culture.  Yeah, because he's almost like, I always say that we're left mainly with elders rather than elders.  Elders who are wise and pass on what we needed physically, socially, and spiritually to evolve, let's say.  
**[0:58:36-0:58:56](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:58:36):**  I put him in that box as a wise elder.  So if that's on the box in everyone's house, when they're turning on the TV, it's a big, big opener, isn't it? Powerful, what they did there.  I think you have him and Greta Thunberg between them has been a big shift, big awakening, right?  
**[0:58:56-0:59:02](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:58:56):**  Very much, and they sort of bookshelf the age groups.  Yeah, exactly.  Really good.  
**[0:59:02-0:59:15](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:59:02):**  It's the middle, somewhere in the middle, that feels like that needs to change.  Deforestation, reforestation.  Where do you feel you are with deforestation?  
**[0:59:15-0:59:32](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:59:15):**  What are we doing about it?  Well, obviously it's another one of the world's big problems, right?  What we've been doing so far is working in Africa and Europe, and that's expanding in this next year to Asia and I hope Brazil.  
**[0:59:32-0:59:51](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:59:32):**  Our take on it was, again, using a legal leverage point.  We helped write a law for the whole EU that said that the EU may not import illegally harvested timber from other countries.  Okay.  
**[0:59:51-1:00:02](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=0:59:51):**  That came in around ten years ago now, maybe a little less.  Until then, there was no law banning illegally harvested timber.  So now there's an EU law.  
**[1:00:02-1:00:28](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:00:02):**  And then the EU made agreements with countries, some countries that were sending timber to the EU market.  And those countries would get preferential access to market, so very important.  And those agreements had certain conditions that the countries had to put in place.  
**[1:00:28-1:00:40](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:00:28):**  And they were very good conditions.  They were conditions about not only taking care of the forest, but taking care of the people who were dependent on the forest.  They were extremely good.  
**[1:00:40-1:01:10](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:00:40):**  And it was about giving people a say in how the forest was used and managed and getting some benefit from when trees were cut, even if legally.  So we took a look at some of those countries and said, well, maybe it would be helpful for us to go and work with people in those countries to make sure those rights,  which the governments were supposed to give them, actually are given to them.  
**[1:01:10-1:01:33](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:01:10):**  Because we started in Ghana, Gabon, Republic of Congo, and now we're also in Cote d'Ivoire in Liberia.  And we were looking at the countries and saying, on their own, the countries don't have the experience that's required in order to put these rights in place.  But we've developed that experience in Europe.  
**[1:01:33-1:01:50](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:01:33):**  So suppose we go to these countries and work with NGOs, so work with environmental groups and citizens groups in these countries,  and then work with local lawyers to analyze the system and see what needs to happen.  So we engaged in this kind of mutual learning process, which was great.  
**[1:01:50-1:02:07](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:01:50):**  So European lawyers working with African lawyers and African environmental and other social groups.  And we taught each other a lot.  And the result was that also laws changed in those countries.  
**[1:02:07-1:02:24](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:02:07):**  And it's been an exciting thing to watch, helping empower groups and learning in the process ourselves.  So building capacity in those countries to make the laws work.  And it has affected the legality of timber operations.  
**[1:02:24-1:02:38](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:02:24):**  And it has meant that groups that were affected by legal tree harvesting actually did get something out of it.  So they got money to build schools and hospitals.  So they're better off.  
**[1:02:38-1:02:50](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:02:38):**  And in the past, they didn't get anything from it.  So now they actually, technically it's called benefit sharing.  So they now share in the benefits when the forest is harvested or some of the forest is harvested.  
**[1:02:50-1:03:00](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:02:50):**  So there too it's possible to make improvements.  A lot of this depends on also understanding who owns the forest.  And in Africa, it's very complicated.  
**[1:03:00-1:03:12](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:03:00):**  There are ancient rights and then there are modern rights that come from the imperial powers that were there and so on.  It's a bit blurred then.  It has been.  
**[1:03:12-1:03:21](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:03:12):**  And we've been engaging this process with the Africans of trying to clarify all those rights.  And that's been a great process.  And that needs to happen now in Asia.  
**[1:03:21-1:03:39](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:03:21):**  So we're beginning to work in Asian countries over the next year to do the same thing.  To work with local groups and clarify the ownership rights and try and make sure that things are correctly and legally harvested  so that you can set up systems then that protect the forests.  
**[1:03:39-1:04:00](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:03:39):**  So protecting forests, it comes like all these other things to a question of how do you do it in the detail?  What's the day-to-day detail?  How do you set the system up in great detail so that it works and that the people involved are helped rather than harmed and they're involved?  
**[1:04:00-1:04:09](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:04:00):**  So coexisting again with the forest.  Yes, in this case the forest.  And so another exciting thing.  
**[1:04:09-1:04:21](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:04:09):**  And then the other big thing we've been doing is working in China.  So China has some of the worst environmental problems in the world.  I know.  
**[1:04:21-1:04:25](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:04:21):**  Bit of a siren in the background there.  I think we'll be okay.  I think we're good.  
**[1:04:25-1:04:38](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:04:25):**  China has some of the worst environmental problems in the world.  Air pollution, water pollution, soil pollution, carbon emissions.  And some years ago they decided to do something about it.  
**[1:04:38-1:04:59](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:04:38):**  And I got involved in five years ago now when I was invited in to go and meet a group of judges from the Supreme Court  who were drafting regulations that would allow Chinese environmental groups to sue companies that were polluting,  including companies owned by the state, which was really very cool.  
**[1:04:59-1:05:09](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:04:59):**  And so in this first meeting I said to the judges, the Supreme Court.  But in that moment they basically said responsibility and accountability, right?  Exactly so, yeah.  
**[1:05:09-1:05:19](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:05:09):**  So what they said is we need to move from a situation, because they had some pretty decent laws,  but they weren't being enforced at all.  So companies just got away with murder, well, literally with murder.  
**[1:05:19-1:05:32](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:05:19):**  Pollution, pollution, pollution.  And they said, you know, this is not going to change until we have a rule of law for the environment,  so we're going to start enforcing the law and we're going to allow citizens to start enforcing the law.  
**[1:05:32-1:05:42](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:05:32):**  And I said, where does this come from?  It's almost the last place you'd expect that conversation to be going on.  Yes, precisely.  
**[1:05:42-1:05:56](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:05:42):**  And when you see it happening there and you see them going after pollution in China, it gives you quite a lot of hope.  And I asked them why they were doing it.  And they said, well, look, we understand the pollution.  
**[1:05:56-1:06:06](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:05:56):**  We live in Beijing. Our kids have asthma.  And we understand that the people are very upset.  The citizens are very, very upset.  
**[1:06:06-1:06:24](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:06:06):**  It's what they're most upset about.  And we want to have, we've been here for 2,500 years, and we want to be here in another 2,500 years, our descendants.  We want them to be healthy people with a good economy, and that will only happen if we clean up the environment  
**[1:06:24-1:06:34](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:06:24):**  and keep it clean and bring back nature.  And I thought, wow, if only in the West, governments were thinking about 20...  Well, even 20 years.  
**[1:06:34-1:06:47](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:06:34):**  Not even 20 years, yeah. But I think 2,000 years.  Incredible.  Yeah. And they said, which was extremely interesting, a little bit like we were talking about the Common Agricultural Policy,  
**[1:06:47-1:07:04](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:06:47):**  and it started with good intentions and led to something, a terrible system.  And they told me a similar story. They said, look, you need to know something about us.  We've got these horrific environmental and pollution problems, but we started with good intentions.  
**[1:07:04-1:07:14](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:07:04):**  And here's what we were doing.  What we wanted to do was to raise the largest number of people from poverty in history, starting about 50 years ago.  It was our big effort.  
**[1:07:14-1:07:26](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:07:14):**  And we raised over 300 million people from poverty out of poverty.  And we're extremely proud of that.  We did not know that we were screwing the environment when we did it.  
**[1:07:26-1:07:34](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:07:26):**  It was simple ignorance.  We just didn't know.  So that is another example of good intentions with bad environmental consequences.  
**[1:07:34-1:07:42](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:07:34):**  They said, now that we know it, now that it's in our face and now that it's in our nose,  we simply have to do something about it, and we will.  So very encouraging.  
**[1:07:42-1:07:50](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:07:42):**  And you can believe them as well.  I mean, if they've managed to turn around that, removing so many people from poverty,  it's damn right that they're going to do it.  
**[1:07:50-1:08:00](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:07:50):**  It's kind of a commit to it, and it will be done.  Well, yes. And I asked them that too.  And I said, is this really a commitment of the government top to bottom?  
**[1:08:00-1:08:08](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:08:00):**  Because I realize that I must be sitting with some of the progressive intellectuals of Beijing here.  That's you.  And I can see that you want this.  
**[1:08:08-1:08:17](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:08:08):**  But is it really?  And they looked at me and said, we wouldn't be sitting here with you today  unless this was from the very top of government to the very bottom of government.  
**[1:08:17-1:08:27](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:08:17):**  This is not just a romantic idea. This is happening.  They said it took us a long time to get agreement top to bottom, but we've got it,  and we're just going to march now forward, and we're going to do this,  
**[1:08:27-1:08:34](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:08:27):**  and we're going to do whatever it takes.  And we want your advice and the advice of other global experts  because we want to do it in the best way.  
**[1:08:34-1:08:44](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:08:34):**  So we'll take the advice of people from around the world  on what's the best and quickest way to get there.  And you think, this is a really good way to think.  
**[1:08:44-1:08:50](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:08:44):**  And what about India?  India, we don't work in India right now.  India is much harder to work in.  
**[1:08:50-1:09:02](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:08:50):**  I mean, when you're invited in by the Supreme Court in China,  and then we started working in the Ministry of Environment,  and the prosecutors who, believe it or not, asked us to teach them  
**[1:09:02-1:09:13](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:09:02):**  how to sue the Chinese government, which is a wonderful thing, and we did.  So when you have those invitations...  I like the way your eyes are lit up, James. That's brilliant, right?  
**[1:09:13-1:09:25](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:09:13):**  That's one of the best things.  But when you have that invitation, and when you have people ready to go,  and they just say, help us, then it's a beautiful thing.  
**[1:09:25-1:09:42](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:09:25):**  In India, the government, Modi, is very much not interested  in having foreign influences come in and help things happen.  So there are some very good Indian environmental groups,  
**[1:09:42-1:09:56](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:09:42):**  and we've just been meeting some recently, and I hope to help them.  But there are some lawyers like us in India, a kind of small group of brilliant people.  And the Indian Supreme Court has been very good.  
**[1:09:56-1:10:15](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:09:56):**  So the law does work there in getting judgments on air pollution, for example.  The problem they're having right now is that the Indian Supreme Court did issue  a number of injunctions to stop the burning of crops in northern India,  
**[1:10:15-1:10:33](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:10:15):**  Delhi, and so on, which has been causing astounding amounts of air pollution.  And the local governments haven't obeyed so far.  So amazingly, just earlier this week, the Supreme Court of India said,  
**[1:10:33-1:10:50](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:10:33):**  if they gave a deadline, if these local governments do not stop all this burning,  requiring it being stopped and going out and seeing the farmers and making them stop,  if they don't stop it, the Supreme Court will allow citizens to start suing those governments  
**[1:10:50-1:10:56](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:10:50):**  for damages for their health.  It was an incredible thing.  Wow, big shift.  
**[1:10:56-1:11:03](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:10:56):**  Big shift.  And that's because the judges said, we're very tired of this.  The law is being broken.  
**[1:11:03-1:11:11](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:11:03):**  You are not complying.  People are being deeply harmed by this, and we've simply had enough.  And that's exciting.  
**[1:11:11-1:11:20](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:11:11):**  So something's going on in India too.  Yes, it's so good we have this conversation, you see,  because you get lost in the world of social media now  
**[1:11:20-1:11:32](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:11:20):**  and people, if we bring up sustainability or the environment,  and it's negativity and this is happening, this is happening.  It's so good to hear that this almost feels like it's going on behind the scenes, right?  
**[1:11:32-1:11:38](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:11:32):**  Yes.  But we don't hear it.  No.  
**[1:11:38-1:11:44](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:11:38):**  Why is this not?  This should be all over the press, right?  Well, thanks to you, people will know.  
**[1:11:44-1:11:53](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:11:44):**  But it isn't.  And people tend to go on the bad news.  And when it comes to China, they do have certain problems.  
**[1:11:53-1:12:02](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:11:53):**  I mean, human rights is a genuine issue, and in the Western press,  that's what gets picked up and written about a lot.  And then the positive stuff they're doing about the environment  
**[1:12:02-1:12:09](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:12:02):**  hasn't been in the press very much.  Well, even just releasing that number of people out of poverty,  yes, it had its consequences, right?  
**[1:12:09-1:12:15](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:12:09):**  But that's, again, I mean, huge.  What a wonderful thing to do.  Exactly.  
**[1:12:15-1:12:21](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:12:15):**  Yes.  And if foresight was in there,  then it would be an even more incredible thing to do, right?  
**[1:12:21-1:12:28](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:12:21):**  Well, what they're very keen on doing is learning from their mistakes.  Yes.  And that itself is pretty good.  
**[1:12:28-1:12:35](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:12:28):**  Well, that's putting your hand up and saying, yeah, we were wrong, you know.  Really great thing to do.  Well, and they're very open about it, you know.  
**[1:12:35-1:12:44](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:12:35):**  We made a big mistake.  You know, that's not something Western governments are frequently seen to do.  Yeah, I watched this fantastic, it was like a documentary.  
**[1:12:44-1:12:55](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:12:44):**  I forget the guy's name.  He was the advisor to Merkle, and he was talking about AI.  And he was talking, I think it's called the Third Industrial Revolution.  
**[1:12:55-1:13:02](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:12:55):**  So he brought in China and he brought in India.  And how they don't want to be late in this.  They want to be at the forefront.  
**[1:13:02-1:13:10](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:13:02):**  They want to be there, the leaders in what would be renewables  and cleaning up the air.  That's the way they see themselves for the future, you know.  
**[1:13:10-1:13:18](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:13:10):**  Yeah.  And they want to leave people behind.  But you'd never guess that because, again, through press and through social media,  
**[1:13:18-1:13:28](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:13:18):**  all you hear about is how far behind it all is and the pollution.  That's right.  Well, and the Chinese are way ahead on that.  
**[1:13:28-1:13:43](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:13:28):**  It's the Chinese manufacturers of solar cells that have brought the price of solar cells way, way, way, way down.  Yeah.  And it's the Chinese who have been producing more electric cars than the Western companies.  
**[1:13:43-1:13:57](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:13:43):**  In the cases, the clean air cases we were talking about earlier,  in a funny way, they'll actually help save the German car industry  because the Chinese were putting or putting such efforts into electric cars  
**[1:13:57-1:14:12](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:13:57):**  that they would have taken over the market and the German fancy car manufacturers would have been out.  I mean, for example, in London now, new taxis have to be electric.  And so you'll see the...  
**[1:14:12-1:14:18](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:14:12):**  What is that, like the... just any cab or is that like black cabs?  The new black cabs, yeah.  Yeah, I've seen them. I mean, you do see them, yeah.  
**[1:14:18-1:14:30](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:14:18):**  Yeah.  And they're... within about five years, as the fleet rolls over, you know, you'll have clean taxis, which is a wonderful thing.  Now, who's manufacturing them?  
**[1:14:30-1:14:34](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:14:30):**  A Chinese company.  Isn't that interesting?  Yeah, yeah.  
**[1:14:34-1:14:50](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:14:34):**  Because they're ahead on this stuff.  And they're really competing ferociously with the Americans for being first in artificial intelligence developments.  And, you know, I wouldn't necessarily bet on the Americans, you know.  
**[1:14:50-1:15:03](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:14:50):**  It's a very close-fought thing.  Well, it sounds like. I mean, if the Chinese are just prepared to open things up and just say,  yeah, we're moving, we're shifting, and shifting laws and legislation in place, you know,  
**[1:15:03-1:15:14](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:15:03):**  versus what could be happening in the US where you come off against the wall in that communication.  Well, that's right. And here we are in the Alan Turing Institute.  Yeah.  
**[1:15:14-1:15:24](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:15:14):**  Making this program, talking about AI and China.  And I know the chair of the Alan Turing Institute.  He's the chair of my client Earth as well.  
**[1:15:24-1:15:35](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:15:24):**  And he's an expert on what's going on in China and what's going on in the West.  And the Chinese are doing amazing things.  And they're doing a lot of things that aren't even being tried in the West.  
**[1:15:35-1:15:47](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:15:35):**  So, now, the hope is that because the Chinese also have this environmental vision,  that they will propagate that vision.  You know, they talk about creating an ecological civilization.  
**[1:15:47-1:16:02](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:15:47):**  And they understand that it has eight elements.  You know, they're looking at changing industrial policy, agricultural policy.  They're talking about changing the way economics is done because they say, quite correctly,  
**[1:16:02-1:16:12](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:16:02):**  that standard economic theory doesn't lead you to the right conclusions.  So, they're looking at how do you change economic theory, how do you change the legal system.  I mean, they're looking at it in this very profound way.  
**[1:16:12-1:16:27](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:16:12):**  And they're throwing hundreds of intellectuals and Westerners who are invited in to participate at this problem.  And they say, well, you know, there used to be agricultural civilization 10,000 years ago.  We invented that as human beings.  
**[1:16:27-1:16:39](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:16:27):**  Then human beings invented industrial civilization a couple hundred years ago.  And now the only way we're going to survive and be healthy for the next thousand years  is if we invent ecological civilization.  
**[1:16:39-1:16:49](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:16:39):**  And they say this is our main goal, inventing ecological civilization.  Are they right? Well, they're right.  And are they thinking about it in a more profound way than anyone in the West?  
**[1:16:49-1:16:53](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:16:49):**  They are.  Than any government in the West, I would say.  Well, they are.  
**[1:16:53-1:17:10](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:16:53):**  So, if they do succeed in making a workable system of ecological civilization,  then the question is how to propagate that, some version of that, perhaps not the Chinese version,  but some version of that around the world.  
**[1:17:10-1:17:23](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:17:10):**  So that those attitudes of deep transformation get shared.  So that indeed we can build ecological civilization.  And we all can have descendants here 2,000 years from now living in a good world.  
**[1:17:23-1:17:33](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:17:23):**  Brilliant. Love that.  I mean, that's sort of my theme of rewilding in a way that we, you know, become an eco-civilization.  Yes. Yeah.  
**[1:17:33-1:17:49](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:17:33):**  Rewilding can certainly be part of it now.  Yeah, I guess it's the – well, it's understanding that pre-agriculture even,  that we were once then part of the whole ecosystem, right?  
**[1:17:49-1:17:58](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:17:49):**  And it's just that agricultural through to industrial,  and then industrial agriculture has removed us in that sense.  Lovely.  
**[1:17:58-1:18:03](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:17:58):**  I think that's a very good way to finish.  I love that.  Couldn't be better. Thank you very much.  
**[1:18:03-1:18:06](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:18:03):**  It's been brilliant.  James, thanks so much.  Well, thank you, Tony.  
**[1:18:06-1:18:10](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:18:06):**  And thanks for inviting me here, man. This has been brilliant.  It's cool, isn't it?  Yeah.  
**[1:18:10-1:18:19](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:18:10):**  We had to talk about AI, you know, in the Alan Turing Institute.  Oh, yeah, as a point of thank you. You know, it's been brilliant. Thank you, man.  Well, there we have it, peeps.  
**[1:18:19-1:18:28](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:18:19):**  Not all superheroes wear capes.  What a guy. What a mission. What a legend.  I actually love what Client Earth are about and what they're doing.  
**[1:18:28-1:18:45](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:18:28):**  I've been on board ever since their book landed in my lap.  They're one of the organizations that I raise funds for on my crazy barefoot lands end Jono Grokes shenanigans.  Actually, talking about the book. So the book landed in my lap.  
**[1:18:45-1:18:53](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:18:45):**  I mean, and there was a part in the book where it just it just blew my mind.  Wow, this is great.  Anyway, and I wanted to read it to you.  
**[1:18:53-1:19:05](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:18:53):**  You may have heard me in the beginning of the interview where I said,  I'm going to read an excerpt from the book, Jono. I got so excited you need to feel I forgot.  That happens every now and then, doesn't it?  
**[1:19:05-1:19:13](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:19:05):**  So here it is. I'm going to read it to you now.  So I hope you're sitting comfortably. I hope you enjoy it.  I love this. So here we go.  
**[1:19:13-1:19:26](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:19:13):**  Superwoman beams in from another planet. That gives her planetary vision.  She sees the Earth will be devastated if it carries on along its present track.  As a superhero, she has to save it from disaster.  
**[1:19:26-1:19:40](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:19:26):**  It takes a while, but she finds an old phone box with a door that closes.  She strips out of her tights, tears the self-anggrandizing logo from her chest and folds up her cloak.  They're no use for a while.  
**[1:19:40-1:19:55](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:19:40):**  Now, she could quite easily clench her hands into a fist and rocket through the atmosphere and tackle crisis after crisis.  But the world doesn't need a savior.  It needs to take responsibility for its own actions.  
**[1:19:55-1:20:04](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:19:55):**  Brilliant, right?  She puts on an open-neck shirt, a dark suit, a pair of glasses and emerges from the phone box as Lois Lane.  There we go.  
**[1:20:04-1:20:16](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:20:04):**  Journalists are important.  She'll need those to communicate her message, but she's become a lawyer.  She can use those glasses to scrutinize the fine print on legal documents.  
**[1:20:16-1:20:33](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:20:16):**  That's where humans have codified their sense of the right and proper order of life on Earth.  She marches the urban streets and enters the offices of a public interest environmental law group.  Clark Kent, Clark Kent's head faces a computer screen.  
**[1:20:33-1:20:49](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:20:33):**  He is talking into a miniature microphone, but even so, he recognizes her as she enters.  Clark turns to Lois and he smiles.  He's been at this stuff for a while and as Lois settles down beside him, he works to bring her up to speed.  
**[1:20:49-1:20:59](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:20:49):**  They start local, looking at current environmental legislation at regional and national level and then go global.  Is that it?  Lois asks.  
**[1:20:59-1:21:06](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:20:59):**  Clark nods.  He looks rueful.  Environmentally, we live in a lawless world, he says.  
**[1:21:06-1:21:15](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:21:06):**  Lois takes off her jacket, rolls up her sleeves.  She's an enforcer.  What laws there are, she has set out to enforce them.  
**[1:21:15-1:21:30](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:21:15):**  Maybe she can clear away those obstacles that block entry to the courts so that citizens can take action for themselves.  Where laws don't exist, she'll write new ones.  That's all clear, but she's a superhero in Lois Lane disguise.  
**[1:21:30-1:21:40](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:21:30):**  She needs a clear, mean, powerful enemy.  She walks to the triple glazed window and looks out at a baking world.  Air conditioning chills her back.  
**[1:21:40-1:21:49](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:21:40):**  And as she says, who's responsible for all this?  A young legal intern sits beside the desk.  Me, she says.  
**[1:21:49-1:22:01](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:21:49):**  I'm responsible.  My suit was made by wage slaves in Bangladesh and shipped here in containers.  I received a scholarship to attend a university which was funded with the fruits of empire.  
**[1:22:01-1:22:16](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:22:01):**  Men died to mine the components of my mobile phone.  I once flew to Thailand to go snorkeling.  My hand cream contains polyethylene, which sends billions of nanoparticles into the oceans whenever I wash.  
**[1:22:16-1:22:25](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:22:16):**  As a citizen of the developed world, Lois puts her hand up to stop her.  She does not need this.  She needs public enemy number one.  
**[1:22:25-1:22:40](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:22:25):**  Here, Clark says, as photos of men in suits populate his screen.  They support corporate actions that increase the dump of carbon dioxide into the planetary sinks.  They profit by direct access to heads of state.  
**[1:22:40-1:22:48](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:22:40):**  Right, Lois Lane pumps a clenched fist into the air.  Let's sue the bastards.  So there we have it.  
**[1:22:48-1:22:57](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:22:48):**  I just love it, don't you?  Anyway, if you want to get behind James and support ClientEarth,  first of all you can go and go on Amazon and buy the book.  
**[1:22:57-1:23:08](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:22:57):**  It's brilliant.  But also if you want to help them, ClientEarth use the power of law.  That's what this is about, isn't it? If you heard James in the conversation.  
**[1:23:08-1:23:20](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:23:08):**  So to help them achieve this, this change to protect people, nature and the planet,  head to clientearth.org.  You can make donations, fundraise or even join.  
**[1:23:20-1:23:36](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:23:20):**  They have like a leadership circle. You can join that.  You can also help James and ClientEarth and Mother Earth by of course sharing this conversation wide and far.  But listen, don't just do it for ClientEarth or me or even you.  
**[1:23:36-1:23:48](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:23:36):**  The bigger picture is we're doing this for the next generations and generations to come.  So that's the bigger picture.  Hopefully that's enough inspiration to go sharing wide and far.  
**[1:23:48-1:24:08](https://anchor.fm/tony-riddle/episodes/James-Thornton---Client-Earth--Protecting-People--Nature--The-Planet-eda40l#t=1:23:48):**  So until the next time peeps, stay wild, stay connected, stay empowered.  You are loved.  