---
title: #10 Fertile woodchips and managing the tree line understory with Iain Tolhurst
---
### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2020-11-23)  

**0:00:00-0:00:16:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:23-0:00:27:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  these challenges.  
**0:00:33-0:00:38:**  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Hi everyone and welcome back to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:00:47-0:00:49:**  I'm your host Etienne.  Today we have the pleasure of interviewing Ian Tolhurst.  He's a vegetable grower and he decided to integrate trees into his operation five years  
**0:00:56-0:00:57:**  ago.  This episode will be interesting to everyone that wants to do the same and to vegetable  growers in general, but there are a few themes that will interest anyone interested in agroforestry.  
**0:01:08-0:01:10:**  Those are for example, woodchips.  Ian uses woodchips as the sole source of fertility for his vegetables.  And of course, biomass and woodchips are huge outputs of mature agroforestry systems and  
**0:01:22-0:01:28:**  understanding the potential that lies with them and how to use them in our different  productions is absolutely crucial.  And Ian gives us really interesting information in that respect.  
**0:01:34-0:01:39:**  The other element is that they've been running trials on planting the understory.  By that I mean the space in the tree lines and trying to utilize that space as better  as possible.  
**0:01:45-0:01:49:**  That's a big opportunity and a recurring theme in agroforestry, but it does come with some  challenges and considerations and Ian does a great job at talking about that and really  giving us a nuanced view on that opportunity and the conditions that must be present for  
**0:02:00-0:02:02:**  us to be planting these plants there.  Enjoy the interview.  Hi, Ian, and welcome to the podcast.  
**0:02:05-0:02:06:**  Hello, Etienne.  Yes, and thank you very much for your invitation.  You're welcome.  
**0:02:11-0:02:14:**  It's a pleasure and we have so many interesting things to discuss with you.  Maybe we could just kick things off by having a bit of a history of the farm and an overview  of your different productions.  
**0:02:21-0:02:22:**  Yes.  I've been an organic farmer now for more than 40 years, in fact, since 1976.  I've been on this particular farm for 33 years.  
**0:02:32-0:02:37:**  It's quite a small farm with just over 8 hectares in total.  We're situated in the south of the UK, not terribly far from Oxford, just to the south  of Oxford.  
**0:02:43-0:02:44:**  In fact, we're very close.  In fact, we can actually see the River Thames.  We grow a very wide range of organic vegetables and we are growing probably around more than  
**0:02:54-0:02:57:**  100 different types of vegetable in total.  That is not varieties, but that's types of vegetable.  Over the course of a year, we do around 300 separate zones and plantings.  
**0:03:05-0:03:06:**  We're very diverse.  We have field vegetables, we have garden vegetables, and we have tunnel and greenhouse production.  We produce all our own plants.  
**0:03:14-0:03:16:**  We are a stock-free organic farm.  That means that we are, for want of a better word, we are a vegan farm.  We don't use any animal inputs at all.  
**0:03:20-0:03:25:**  We don't use any manure or any product from livestock at all on the farm.  The farm is run predominantly on a rotational system with green manures, with supplementation  from ram yield chip wood, which we've been experimenting with in the last five, six years,  
**0:03:38-0:03:41:**  and also composted wood chip, which comes from local sources.  The farm is very much a self-contained unit.  We're not dependent on very much at all coming into the farm from outside in order to support  
**0:03:51-0:03:52:**  long-term fertility.  And we're cropping the whole year round.  We don't stop at all.  
**0:03:55-0:03:57:**  We crop every week of the year.  In fact, we're harvesting four days out of every week during the year.  Most of what we sell is sold very locally.  
**0:04:05-0:04:13:**  In fact, around 90% of our entire output is sold within a 10, 15-kilometer radius of the  farm.  In fact, half of that total is sold direct from the farm through our farm shop, which  
**0:04:19-0:04:24:**  has become very busy since the pandemic started.  So that's sort of general overview of the farm.  The farm is very much geared towards biodiversity.  
**0:04:29-0:04:35:**  And everything we do on the farm is really about promoting, encouraging, and working  with biodiversity.  So we like to think of the farm really as producing biodiversity as its main output.  
**0:04:42-0:04:47:**  But as a byproduct of that biodiversity, we are growing vegetables and fruit.  And we produce very good yields.  We have over 120, 140 tons of vegetables each year.  
**0:04:55-0:04:59:**  So we're quite confident this is a system which does work in the real world.  We are a fully commercial farm.  We have no support outside of the farm at all.  
**0:05:03-0:05:08:**  We rely totally on the farm income to support the farm and all the people that work on the  farm.  So agroforestry is something we've really only introduced relatively recently in the  
**0:05:13-0:05:15:**  last five or six years.  Although we've always been planting trees.  But we've only really made a concerted effort to establish agroforestry in the last five  
**0:05:22-0:05:23:**  years.  Yeah.  And before we go into agroforestry specifically, could you give us a bit more information on  
**0:05:30-0:05:33:**  what soil you have and your climate?  Right.  So our climate is maritime.  
**0:05:36-0:05:38:**  So we get quite a lot of rain.  Although actually it's a fairly dry part of the country.  Our annual rainfall is around 520 millimetres a year.  
**0:05:45-0:05:50:**  The temperature ranges from sort of in the depths of winter.  We may get down as low as minus 10 for a week or two.  In the summer, we rarely get above plus 30.  
**0:05:57-0:06:00:**  The last three or four winters have been very mild.  We haven't really had very much frost at all.  So it's become a very mild climate.  
**0:06:05-0:06:08:**  And we don't really get very much in the way of snow.  So in England means that we do get damp conditions.  Although it's not particularly wet, it is damp.  
**0:06:14-0:06:20:**  And we are subject to some pretty strong winds as well, which can be quite a problem at times.  The soil type is a clay loam.  It's not considered ideal for horticulture.  
**0:06:25-0:06:33:**  It's really, its suitability really would be more towards grassland and tree cover.  It's grade three bee land, which puts it as fairly low quality.  It's quite thin.  
**0:06:39-0:06:41:**  It's over chalk and stone.  Our total topsoil depth is in the range of up to around 200 millimetres.  So it's pretty shallow.  
**0:06:49-0:06:54:**  It tends to get quite dry in the summer because of our rainfall is usually quite low.  It's very stony.  We have more than 40% stone over 10 millimetres.  
**0:06:59-0:07:01:**  So it does tend to dry very quickly.  So it's not considered ideal for horticulture, although we have made it very fertile.  It was quite poor when we came here, but it's now producing really well.  
**0:07:10-0:07:15:**  And it, I think, goes to show that even poor quality land could be made fertile.  Yeah, that's fascinating.  And I'm sure we'll get an understanding of how you did that through the episode.  
**0:07:22-0:07:28:**  Maybe you want to explain to us how you came to agroforestry, why you felt the need to  experiment with that and how that occurred.  Yes, that's an interesting question.  
**0:07:32-0:07:38:**  It's something I've been thinking about for quite some time and planting trees, particularly  in the middle of a field where you're growing vegetables is something you do need to think  about because there are various implications, of course.  
**0:07:46-0:07:48:**  I've always been a great lover of trees.  I've always planted trees.  You know, we've won the few farms anywhere in the area that's actually put new hedges  
**0:07:53-0:07:54:**  in.  So we've actually created hedges and shelter belts way back in the past.  We've got some hedges and shelter belts now, which are over 33 years old and very productive.  
**0:08:02-0:08:08:**  But to actually divide the field up into smaller units was something which did take quite a  lot of thinking.  I wanted to, because I've always been passionate about trees, I wanted to try and see where  
**0:08:16-0:08:25:**  we could improve the biodiversity of the field as one reason, but also to improve the shelter  of the field.  Trees really don't like growing in windy places and we are in a fairly windy part of the country  
**0:08:31-0:08:35:**  and we have had quite a bit of damage from the past as a result of wind.  So one of the trying reasons, I suppose, really was to try and see if we could improve the  shelter of the field in order to create a microclimate.  
**0:08:44-0:08:48:**  You know, we can see how well it works by hedges, but once you get away from the haze,  the field becomes increasingly more open.  And some crops, particularly things like squash, are very sensitive to wind.  
**0:08:55-0:08:59:**  So it was really about trying to improve the shelter of the field.  But the biodiversity aspects were very important too.  And I just felt there had to be a unison between trees and crops.  
**0:09:10-0:09:16:**  In this country we've had, agriculture has been split up into sort of sections.  You've got somebody doing livestock somewhere, somebody else doing arable somewhere, somebody  else doing vegetable crops, someone else doing trees.  
**0:09:24-0:09:26:**  They don't seem to mix up.  They're all kept separate and not part and parcel of the whole system.  So we really wanted to bring trees in and make them integral to the whole farming system.  
**0:09:36-0:09:39:**  And that's really where we sort of got to.  And it took some while really to decide, A, how far apart we're going to plant the trees,  B, what species we're going to use, and C, how we were going to manage them long term.  
**0:09:51-0:09:55:**  Because at the back of my mind there's sort of slightly nagging fear that we're taking  land out of vegetable production, putting it into trees, which are not going to be as  economically viable as the land upon which they have been growing in the past where we've  
**0:10:05-0:10:08:**  had quite high value vegetables.  So we had to think about the economic implications of what we do.  The fact that we got a very well supported grant from the Woodland Trust in order to  
**0:10:20-0:10:26:**  pay for trees and also the guards and the stakes that went with the trees, I think was  the deciding factor.  If we'd had to pay for that out of the farm income, I think there's a possibility we may  
**0:10:31-0:10:32:**  not have done it.  I think it was the support from the Woodland Trust which probably really drove the things  forward and was the final sort of decision maker for us as a commercial farm.  
**0:10:45-0:10:49:**  Did you receive any technical support as well beyond the financial aspect?  Yes.  The Woodland Trust were very helpful in that sense.  
**0:10:52-0:10:57:**  I didn't feel we needed huge amounts of technical support because I've had a history of planting  trees over many decades so we're quite used to growing trees.  But nevertheless it was helpful, it was useful to have their support.  
**0:11:06-0:11:11:**  And I think for many farms this would be absolutely essential because a lot of people have no  experience at all of growing trees.  It's often something they've never ever done.  
**0:11:15-0:11:19:**  So I think having technical support is really critical.  So if it's something that's going to encourage more farmers then financial support, particularly  in the cost of the trees and technical support, I think is absolutely essential in order to  
**0:11:31-0:11:36:**  make it work properly and also in order to guarantee the success of what's being done.  But you had that experience and so which tree species for example did you choose and for  what reasons?  
**0:11:43-0:11:44:**  Right.  What we actually wanted was indigenous trees.  We didn't want to introduce non-indigenous species for various reasons but primarily  
**0:11:52-0:11:57:**  because there's a feeling that indigenous species will benefit biodiversity more.  That's not always true but it tends to be the case.  And also we didn't want to radically change the landscape with non-native material.  
**0:12:09-0:12:14:**  So we went for Cherry which has grown very widely around here.  It's one of the common trees.  It's older, Birch, Oak, White Bean and what else, there's one or two others.  
**0:12:25-0:12:27:**  I'm just trying to think now what else we have.  Oh, Maple, Field Maple.  So they are trees which we would see in this environment and also trees which we do understand  
**0:12:37-0:12:38:**  and know quite well.  And they have a range of diverse habitats which they create.  So the idea was to mix these up.  
**0:12:44-0:12:46:**  In that mix of trees we also planted apples.  So we have what we refer to as a low density apple plantation.  So we have apples every 15 metres and in between the apples we have these range of trees.  
**0:13:00-0:13:06:**  The Oak trees are primarily going to be managed for wood, for timber in the long term.  So it's a very long term view so it won't be in my life, it won't be beyond my lifetime.  And they'll be managed primarily as individual trees.  
**0:13:15-0:13:18:**  And the other trees we're going to manage in a variety of different ways.  So we were very keen to have purely just indigenous species.  In fact Woodland Trust I don't think would actually grant aid any trees unless they were  
**0:13:29-0:13:30:**  indigenous.  I think they have a policy of only supporting indigenous trees.  So perhaps that was a deciding factor as well.  
**0:13:36-0:13:40:**  But they were willing to fund some productive trees such as apples as well.  Or is that something that you just added on top?  They were quite happy to fund the apples and I think they have done in one or two other  
**0:13:47-0:13:48:**  situations as well.  I think partly because they saw our farm as being a good example and they want to be able  to take people too.  
**0:13:56-0:13:59:**  Because we are a well known farm we get widely visited by people from all over the world.  So I think from their point of view it was probably a promotional possibility for them.  Which is why they allowed us to plant apples.  
**0:14:06-0:14:09:**  But I think they have also done it on other farms.  Because the density is quite low I think it was acceptable.  I think if we decided to plant only apples I think, well I'm pretty sure they would have  
**0:14:16-0:14:18:**  said no we can't support that.  Which I think is probably fair enough.  So they did put a lot of money into this.  
**0:14:23-0:14:28:**  I think the total budget over a couple of years because we had to put additional guards  around the apple trees because of deer problems.  I think the total budget came to probably in excess of 3,000 euros.  
**0:14:36-0:14:40:**  So it was a pretty significant amount of money they put in.  But the 3,000 euros is the cost of the trees and then you add your labour on top of that?  The labour we had to supply ourselves.  
**0:14:49-0:14:51:**  They weren't going to pay labour and that was ok with us.  I think we accepted that right from the start.  We didn't really expect to get the labour.  
**0:14:56-0:14:59:**  And then we paid for them and something we did ourselves.  We had a few volunteers for a few days they also helped.  So it wasn't too much of a problem.  
**0:15:04-0:15:11:**  Although the ongoing maintenance cost is considerably higher than perhaps I'd thought about initially  and that's something we still got to deal with.  But the actual investment cost for us, if it's just labour, was quite deceptible.  
**0:15:19-0:15:22:**  We were happy to do that.  And then everything to do with tree guards or potential staking for some trees, mulch,  is that something that you brought or was there funding for that?  
**0:15:33-0:15:36:**  No they funded the tree guards and the stakes.  The mulch which we put down for weed control, we did that ourselves.  The material is virtually free but the labour we had to pay for and the transport obviously.  
**0:15:45-0:15:50:**  But they supplied all the fixed parts of the project.  There's a lot of things I want to come back to in what you said but just to get this kind  of clear image of your tree systems.  
**0:15:57-0:16:02:**  So we have an apple tree every 15 meters with some wild trees in between.  And then how much space do you have between each tree line for your vegetable production?  Right, ok so the apple trees are at 15, that's one five meters apart.  
**0:16:11-0:16:16:**  Then there's additional trees between those which are at 1.5 meters apart.  And then the actual row, the tree line, we refer to it as a tree line, the various tree  lines, there's actually six in the whole field.  
**0:16:23-0:16:29:**  The field is 7 hectares, no beg your pardon, the field is 2.5 hectares.  So we've divided that up into six blocks and between the tree lines, from the centre to  the centre we have 23 meters.  
**0:16:37-0:16:42:**  And the reason I came up with 23 meters, it sounds like an odd figure, why not 20, why  not 25, 23 meters happens to fit my irrigation system which is a large broom sprinkler.  So for us it was quite an important consideration.  
**0:16:54-0:16:59:**  We do use irrigation quite extensively in the summer because we are in a fairly dry  part of the country on the dry soil.  So this was the main criteria really for tree line spacing was really to do with the access  
**0:17:08-0:17:10:**  for irrigation.  And then between the trees we have vegetables growing as normally and we can fit 28 rows  in there.  
**0:17:17-0:17:22:**  And 28 rows also is quite a convenient figure for us because we tend to do things in multiples  of four or eight so that kind of works quite well too.  So we wouldn't want to go really much closer because I think the risk of losing too much  
**0:17:33-0:17:36:**  land is too great.  And we wouldn't want to go too much further apart given that we are looking at trees in  terms of improving biodiversity and shelter for winds.  
**0:17:46-0:17:47:**  I'm quite happy with the spacing.  We've had five years of trials with it now.  It seems to work ok.  
**0:17:51-0:17:56:**  It's looking very nice now because the trees are quite well established.  We've got autumn colours there this year which is beautiful.  Cherry are fantastic in the autumn.  
**0:18:02-0:18:05:**  So it kind of looks right for the size of the field.  The field is almost a perfect square which is very convenient.  It has a very slight gradual slope to the south which is also incredibly convenient  
**0:18:15-0:18:17:**  for vegetable growing.  So we have the trees running north south which I think for us is pretty essential.  I would probably not have done this if it had been east west because the shading effect  
**0:18:26-0:18:27:**  would be too great.  It's quite convenient and the rows are long enough to be sensible.  They are 150 metres long.  
**0:18:33-0:18:37:**  We would have liked them longer but that's the size of the field.  So the idea of having very long narrow cropping areas is actually quite conducive to use of  machinery.  
**0:18:45-0:18:48:**  Do the trees get in the way of the sprinklers?  I was just wondering how the trees grow if they might bother you in some way with that  aspect.  
**0:18:53-0:18:58:**  No, the irrigation system is mobile so it's a boom sprayer which pulls itself along.  The boom sprayer which is 20 metres wide fits in the middle between the trees.  If you've got trees at 23 metres the boom sprayer is 12 metres in the middle and covers  
**0:19:09-0:19:10:**  the whole plot.  And the trees get a little bit of watering on the edge.  They don't get full irrigation but they get some irrigation.  
**0:19:17-0:19:18:**  What are the outcomes?  Because you said that mainly you were doing this for wind and biodiversity.  Five years on, are trees big enough that you're starting to see some outcomes?  
**0:19:29-0:19:31:**  Or how do you feel about that?  Are you a bit disappointed or are they growing nicely?  Very well.  
**0:19:35-0:19:37:**  This is classic tree country.  It's not difficult growing trees here.  If you turn your back on land within 10 years it's growing trees.  
**0:19:43-0:19:45:**  It's that sort of thing.  And given our climate, trees grow remarkably well in this climate.  They really do.  
**0:19:49-0:19:51:**  It's the right soil type for trees.  So in terms of being good for trees it's perfect.  For trees it couldn't be better.  
**0:19:55-0:19:59:**  In fact, the irrigation also helps.  In terms of outputs, we are getting some outputs.  This year we had the first proper apple crop.  
**0:20:04-0:20:05:**  It wasn't huge.  It was quite modest.  It only took me half a day to pick it.  
**0:20:12-0:20:16:**  In total we have 60 apple trees.  I harvested around 120 kilograms of apples.  So it's actually really quite a small amount.  
**0:20:24-0:20:27:**  Some trees didn't produce hardly at all because we had quite a late frost.  We did some damage.  So we lost some due to weather.  
**0:20:30-0:20:31:**  That's normal.  We expect that.  Because there's a range of varieties it does give us some resilience to extreme weather.  
**0:20:37-0:20:43:**  So the ones that flowered early escaped the late frost and produced fruit.  This may happen from time to time when we are subject to late frost here.  It's quite a frosty part of the country.  
**0:20:49-0:20:51:**  But we did have an output.  Next year it would be much better, probably.  We're also getting a little bit of leaf fall now onto the soil, which is also beneficial.  
**0:21:00-0:21:01:**  Leaves are incredibly useful.  They've improved the tirth.  So we've got a little bit of that along the edges.  
**0:21:05-0:21:11:**  We also have, under the tree lines, we've also experimented with trying to integrate  other perennial crops.  So within two of the tree lines we have daffodil bulbs we've planted.  
**0:21:17-0:21:23:**  We planted 10,000 mixed daffodils when we did the trees some five or six years ago.  So we are getting a crop for those.  We picked those in the spring.  
**0:21:26-0:21:27:**  They come quite early.  They're between February and April.  They're a range of varieties.  
**0:21:30-0:21:31:**  So we get some daffodils.  Daffodils are not particularly high value crops.  In fact, they're quite low value crops.  
**0:21:36-0:21:40:**  But it does mean that we've got something nice to put into our farm shop so it helps  to sell other things.  It's difficult to put a direct value on it, but it does have a value.  
**0:21:46-0:21:49:**  We've also had rhubarb under one of the tree lines.  And that sort of worked OK for two or three years, but it's not working so well now, primarily  because we have an inherent disease in the field, which we took on when we took the field,  
**0:21:59-0:22:04:**  which is versosilnium wilt, which I didn't realize at the time, but rhubarb suffers quite  badly from wilt.  So that is gradually dying out.  
**0:22:08-0:22:14:**  Another crop we tried also not successful was globe artichokes, which also happened  to suffer from versosilnium wilt, which is something else I didn't realize.  You learn these things as you go along.  
**0:22:21-0:22:26:**  Knowing what I know now, it would have been a different scenario.  And we have another tree line where we have perennial flowers, which are herbaceous flowers,  which we raised specially with the idea to allow them to be picked for decoration and  
**0:22:39-0:22:42:**  for sales in the shop.  Some of those have worked quite well.  In fact, we have only just finished picking some of those a few weeks ago.  
**0:22:47-0:22:52:**  So our attempts at additional crops between the tree lines, some have been quite successful,  others not at all.  And I think with the experience we got, we would have perhaps done things differently  
**0:22:57-0:22:58:**  in that sense.  What would you have done differently?  Well, we wouldn't have planted the rhubarb, we wouldn't have planted the artichokes.  
**0:23:06-0:23:11:**  Or if we had, we would have perhaps done some biofumigation because we can use a green manure  for reducing the problem of this disease.  However, that would only work for a few years.  
**0:23:15-0:23:18:**  Eventually, the disease would gradually spread in from surrounding areas.  So it wouldn't be a long term solution.  So I think knowing what I know now, we would not have done rhubarb, we would not have done  
**0:23:24-0:23:25:**  artichokes.  We would have saved ourselves a lot of work and quite a bit of money as well.  So that's something we've learnt as part of the experience.  
**0:23:32-0:23:37:**  Growing crops underneath the trees is potentially problematical.  There are things which will work.  I mean, if we hadn't had a verticillium, the rhubarb and the artichokes would have worked  
**0:23:43-0:23:47:**  quite well for quite some years because they don't mind partial shade.  I do know people trying things like blackcurrants and raspberries, gooseberries, and yes, they  can be made to work, but it really increases the maintenance value.  
**0:23:57-0:24:01:**  And also these crops are not popular crops to be grown in UK.  They're very expensive to pick.  We have serious labour shortages in agriculture in UK.  
**0:24:06-0:24:09:**  It's even worse now because of the Brexit situation.  So to find people to pick these crops would be really difficult and they often really  don't pay at all because things like blackcurrants, people just do not buy blackcurrants.  
**0:24:18-0:24:21:**  They buy frozen blackcurrants and that's the only time they buy them.  Well, we're not really in the business of doing that sort of product.  So there are difficulties with finding alternative crops to grow underneath trees.  
**0:24:30-0:24:34:**  Crops which will grow, but whether they're economically viable, whether they're suitable  for marketing is another question.  So I think we're now at a stage where within the six tree lines, we have two which are  
**0:24:42-0:24:46:**  still producing the flowers and will do for probably quite some time, but the others have  more or less died out apart from the odd flowers.  We've kind of let them go back to nature and they're just growing a mixed vegetation.  
**0:24:54-0:24:56:**  Which in itself is incredibly valuable.  It contains a huge biodiversity resource and we've had surveys done of flora and fauna  in the field and we've got something like over 60 different wildflowers growing there.  
**0:25:07-0:25:10:**  So it's been very successful in that sense.  So one of the outputs really is the biodiversity and this is something we have been measuring.  There's been quite extensive measuring done on our biodiversity and at the end of the  
**0:25:20-0:25:26:**  day that was one of the original motivations for doing the agroforestry was to increase  biodiversity and that we are seeing quite obvious signs of that happening.  Bird life has increased quite dramatically because there's more places for birds to hang  
**0:25:35-0:25:39:**  out and that's helping to control things like voles.  We have a very high population, potentially high population of voles in the ground, but  we also have a very high population of predator birds, raptors.  
**0:25:48-0:25:50:**  We have red kites, goshawks.  The goshawks in particular have started to use the trees for perching so that's helped  the problem evolve.  
**0:25:56-0:26:01:**  So we're not looking really purely at the commercial output of the agroforestry but  looking as much as in being as important with the biodiversity aspect of the project.  And in that respect you said you saw some outcomes.  
**0:26:12-0:26:17:**  Do you really think it's a significant impact on your vegetable production or is it also  that you wanted biodiversity out of an ethical stance on your production methods?  Yes, it's more the latter.  
**0:26:24-0:26:29:**  We haven't seen any big increase in yields from vegetables as yet but it's still rare  to the early days.  If we do see an increase in yields it would be primarily due to a better microclimate  
**0:26:37-0:26:42:**  and possibly less wind damage but then against that we have the possibility of reduced light  levels in certain points of the rotation.  So it swings and roundabouts.  
**0:26:48-0:26:53:**  I don't think we went into this with the expectation that we were going to make a dramatic improvement  on yields but what we are seeing, we have seen a considerable improvement in our soils  in the last few years and that's not really just down to the agroforestry.  
**0:27:03-0:27:08:**  It's down to the fact that we've been using round-milled chip wood and composted wood.  That's made a much bigger dramatic difference to our output than the trees have.  Trees will become part of that round-milled chip system as well because some of these  
**0:27:19-0:27:21:**  trees we will be using for wood chips.  That's one of the reasons we plant them so we will have some raw material to use for  round-milled chip wood and for composting.  
**0:27:27-0:27:34:**  So in time they will be increasingly used for fertility building and that's something  which is still going to take some years but probably at least four or five years away  from any timber production in that sense.  
**0:27:42-0:27:46:**  So it's a long-term view really.  Before we go into the wood chips because that's something absolutely fascinating, I really  want to go into some detail on how do these trees change your operations with the vegetables.  
**0:27:57-0:28:02:**  The first angle is, is it easy for you knowing that you have vegetables growing with different  rotations to then come and pick your apples or prune your trees and I'd really like to  understand how the cycles of the trees and the vegetables kind of intersect.  
**0:28:13-0:28:19:**  Okay, well that's something we're still learning about.  I mean the pruning of the trees up to now it's mostly been the apple trees.  It's been relatively easy because they've been quite small trees.  
**0:28:28-0:28:33:**  We've got trees now which have a good shape and they're looking pretty productive for  the future.  The pruning is, because it's all done by hand anyway, we don't need machinery access for  
**0:28:38-0:28:44:**  that so it doesn't have any impact on where we grow vegetables.  If we have vegetables growing and they're quite close to the tree lines then yes there  is a potential problem there with access with machinery and that's something we've yet to  
**0:28:54-0:28:56:**  sort of deal with in the future.  We may end up losing a couple of rows either side of the vegetable growing plot in order  to allow the trees to spread but the intention, the longer term intention is to try and keep  
**0:29:04-0:29:05:**  the trees relatively narrow.  So we're not going to let them spread out too much so there will be an ongoing pruning  going on.  
**0:29:11-0:29:12:**  It won't be every year.  Because of the way our vegetable rotation works we have a seven year rotation.  Two of those years are in a green manure crop which we can use as a really convenient point  
**0:29:23-0:29:28:**  of access so we can get into the trees quite easily with machinery should we need to without  doing any damage or not much damage at all to the soil and not jeopardising the growing  crops.  
**0:29:34-0:29:39:**  So we have this long term fertility building part of the rotation is very beneficial for  tree management.  So we don't see a major problem in that sense in terms of access.  
**0:29:47-0:29:52:**  There's been some odd complications which we hadn't thought about previously and it's  really to do with crop covers.  We use crop covers sometimes primarily for keeping pigeons off.  
**0:29:58-0:30:01:**  We have a huge pigeon population in the area.  So we tend to use crop covers which were quite easy to move around the field because we could  just slide them sideways.  
**0:30:06-0:30:11:**  Now we've got a row of trees in the way we have to roll them up and take them off and  take them somewhere else.  It's not as easy as it used to be.  
**0:30:14-0:30:20:**  It's the only major disadvantage I've come up against and we've found a way of dealing  with that as one does and it's not particularly, it doesn't really take us that much longer  than it used to but it's a slight annoyance if you like and a hindrance.  
**0:30:31-0:30:33:**  Apart from that, the machinery is not a problem.  We're not a huge farm so we haven't got huge great big machines and we have nothing more  than three metres wide so everything fits quite well.  
**0:30:42-0:30:49:**  I did have to modify one of our hoeing machines because it was a bit too wide and tended to  be too close to trees so we had to leave a row out so I've modified that.  So we've made some minor modifications in order to allow for trees but nothing too major.  
**0:30:59-0:31:03:**  Once the trees grow then obviously we're going to have to do more work on them.  We're going to be cutting some, some will be coppiced and as I said earlier that fits  in quite well with our rotation because we'll do that during the two years when the land  
**0:31:11-0:31:18:**  is back into fertility bed and when we've got good possibilities of access.  That sounds good.  The fact that you work the soil and I assume you till the soil for your vegetable production,  
**0:31:26-0:31:30:**  is that enough to keep the roots of the trees kind of out of the vegetables way?  Is that something that's a concern for you or not at all?  It hasn't been a concern up to now because trees have been relatively small.  
**0:31:36-0:31:42:**  It's going to be more of an issue going forward from now on and what we intend to do on a,  I wouldn't say yearly annual basis but sort of within a rotational basis we will be running  a deep, a single deep time along the edge of the tree line in order to prevent any trees  
**0:31:53-0:31:55:**  spreading roots too far across the field.  We don't want tree roots across the field because that will impact quite seriously on  crop production.  
**0:32:02-0:32:06:**  There's one tree there which I think I'm going to remove and that's birch because they're  very shallow rooted.  It wasn't a good choice.  
**0:32:10-0:32:12:**  Knowing what I know now we wouldn't have used them.  The alder which are really deep and the oak which are quite deep, they're fine.  But yes some, some species tend to have shallow roots and I think you know knowing what we  
**0:32:20-0:32:25:**  know now we would have left those out and gone for a more deeper tap rooting type tree.  We will have to, you know these trees are going to be subject to a lot of management  in the future.  
**0:32:31-0:32:34:**  It's not as if we're just going to let them grow wild.  We do have to maintain and manage them because we need to continue with the vegetable production.  So yes we will have to do some, some root pruning down one side of the trees.  
**0:32:45-0:32:51:**  And earlier you mentioned when we were talking about the initial investments into establishing  the tree systems that actually what surprised you was that the maintenance was higher than  you expected.  
**0:32:58-0:32:59:**  What is taking so much time?  Is it the pruning?  Is it mowing the spaces between the trees?  
**0:33:04-0:33:05:**  Yes it's all those things.  We don't actually mow very often at all.  We tend to leave it for several years before we mow it.  
**0:33:11-0:33:15:**  It's really more to do with the shaping of the trees.  You know we had quite a bit of pruning to do on the trees.  So the apple trees have taken more effort per tree than the other trees but even so  
**0:33:24-0:33:27:**  it's still quite a bit of work going into the other trees.  Staking some of the stakes rotted before the tree was properly established so we had to  redo some stakes.  
**0:33:34-0:33:36:**  It's a lot of sort of fiddling around.  You know we had a problem in one tree line with brambles creeping in which we had to  manage by digging by hand.  
**0:33:43-0:33:46:**  That was quite a big job.  It's lots of bits and pieces really which if you add it up over the year comes to quite  a bit of labour.  
**0:33:52-0:33:54:**  I wouldn't say it's particularly onerous.  It's mostly winter work but it does add to the sort of the work load on the farm and  we are a very busy farm.  
**0:34:03-0:34:07:**  We don't really get a time in the winter when we're slack.  We're working right the way through.  We still have almost as many people working here in the winter as we do in the summer.  
**0:34:13-0:34:18:**  So we've had to sort of reorganise staff a little bit and what we're looking for really  is a person who will come in on a sort of fairly regular but perhaps you know half a  day a week during the winter to manage the trees, look after the trees and that may well  
**0:34:29-0:34:33:**  increase in the future as we start to coppice the trees or pollard the trees.  There will of course be a lot more work going into that but then you know we are producing  a product which for us will be the ram your chip wood or chip wood for composting.  
**0:34:43-0:34:46:**  So in that sense we can justify putting more labour in.  At the moment we're still at the maintenance establishment stage.  I must say the last 12 months has been less work because we did quite a lot two years  
**0:34:56-0:34:57:**  ago.  We have less this year.  So it goes in cycles really and I think we've yet to see longer term how much effort will  
**0:35:05-0:35:06:**  go into this.  We have 600 trees in total so it's quite a few trees there to be managed.  Some will be left to grow full size but quite a lot will be coppiced and pollarded so it  
**0:35:18-0:35:23:**  would be regular every sort of six, seven, eight years we'll be going in and doing work  on those trees.  And for the oaks that you're trying to give a timber shape let's say, how is that going  
**0:35:33-0:35:37:**  and are you having someone from the outside do this or are you able to do it on your own?  Well I've been doing that part of it myself because I quite enjoy it.  So the oak trees have been managed primarily to grow a tall straight trunk which is what  
**0:35:46-0:35:49:**  people will need in the future.  It's pretty simple, they grow really well.  The oak have established beautifully, in fact they've established better than the birch.  
**0:35:55-0:35:59:**  The birch are quite difficult to establish actually, birch do not like being moved.  Whereas the oak have established really well and they're looking very strong, we haven't  lost a single tree, they're all there.  
**0:36:06-0:36:08:**  So that part of it is quite simple.  I think managing the oaks is probably the least of our problems because we're only going  to be trimming the trunk to ensure a straight tree.  
**0:36:16-0:36:20:**  Once the other trees get well established it will encourage the oaks to grow straight  anyway so we think, well we don't know for sure but we think that's going to probably  work quite well.  
**0:36:27-0:36:32:**  The other trees, because they're going to be coppiced and pollarded, we'll be doing  that on a rotational basis.  Well it will be interesting to see how the trees evolve.  
**0:36:37-0:36:42:**  I mean I visited a farm not so long ago and he had planted a lot of timber trees and clearly  he didn't have the expertise himself or didn't benefit from enough technical support but  he was having a really hard time getting nice timber out of his aquaforestry trees because  
**0:36:52-0:36:57:**  obviously the tree wants to create branches further down and it's not growing in a forest  so you have to be really proactive in shaping it.  But it's great to hear that you're successful in that domain.  
**0:37:02-0:37:05:**  Yes, it certainly takes more effort.  I mean if you had oaks within a plantation you wouldn't have to probably spend as much  time on individual trees so there's definitely a higher input there.  
**0:37:14-0:37:19:**  But for us on this scale, which is relatively small, it's manageable, we can do it and as  I said earlier it's part of one of the costs that we have to endure in the way of we are  going to be producing a product at some point in the future which is going to give us a  
**0:37:30-0:37:35:**  good fertility maintenance factor for the farm.  I wanted to come back to something on this idea of your tree line and leaving kind of  natural biodiversity and grass has come back.  
**0:37:46-0:37:50:**  Are you concerned that this kind of acts as a seed reserve for weeds to come and colonise  or brambles because that's a concern we often hear and I'm wondering how that's affecting  the vegetables.  
**0:37:56-0:37:57:**  Yes, it's definitely a concern.  It was one of my concerns right from the start before we even planted.  There was always this sort of fear in the back of mind that you're going to end up with  
**0:38:05-0:38:06:**  horrendous weed problems.  So far we haven't because we're doing a fair bit of cultivation.  We are mint till rather than no till.  
**0:38:14-0:38:16:**  We've reduced tillage, we haven't stopped tillage.  It's difficult in basically to do no till.  We can control weeds quite easily with mechanical means.  
**0:38:23-0:38:26:**  We have steerage hoes, we've got inter-row equipment.  So weeds have not really been a problem and if there's anything at all, it's very close  to the tree line.  
**0:38:32-0:38:39:**  It's the very last row where we maybe see some weed pressure and definitely in one or  two crops there has been a slight yield reduction because of weed pressure but I don't see it  as being a major problem.  
**0:38:45-0:38:51:**  We're quite keen to encourage greater diversity of flora in the field so we have actually  sown a whole range of different species.  As part of our green manure we've actually sown what many people refer to as weeds but  
**0:38:59-0:39:03:**  we call them wildflowers within that to encourage greater diversity.  So we're not, we don't object to weeds.  We manage them in a specific way and we look at them in a much more positive way than perhaps  
**0:39:12-0:39:13:**  some growers would.  We do control them up to certain points within the cropping cycle.  We don't want weeds when plants are very small and we've got pretty good systems of dealing  
**0:39:22-0:39:23:**  with that.  So at the moment, maybe it's been 10 years time, but at the moment I don't see these  weeds as being a major problem.  
**0:39:32-0:39:36:**  Perennial weeds are perhaps more of an issue.  If we were to get problems with perennial weeds then we may have to have a strip either  side of the trees that we continually cultivate in order to keep that back and that may perhaps  
**0:39:45-0:39:48:**  reduce some cropping area but it's still doable.  We're quite confident we can control those weeds.  It's really about having a system of weed control.  
**0:39:55-0:39:58:**  We've always had field perimeters, we've got hessiers there already.  We're used to dealing with nature encroaching upon what we do.  That's what we're up against.  
**0:40:04-0:40:08:**  We're working with nature and we accept that nature does want to encroach so we have systems  whereby we can kind of keep that in check.  So I don't have a huge paranoia about that in the future because anything could change.  
**0:40:17-0:40:22:**  If we ran into a serious weed problem then we would just have to fire that piece of the  field which is doable but it could have an impact on yields for a year or two.  How wide is that strip, the strip on the ground where the trees are growing?  
**0:40:32-0:40:35:**  Well it started off not much more than a meter.  It's now got to sort of two and a half meters which is what I was expecting and we'll probably  end up with about three meters and we don't really want to go much beyond that.  
**0:40:44-0:40:47:**  So the tree line will be kept more or less within that space.  The apple trees are on a fairly tall rootstock.  They won't grow much wider than about four or five meters anyway.  
**0:40:55-0:41:04:**  So they'll be pruned really to try and maintain a relatively narrow band across the width  of the plot so we're not taking up vegetable space.  So it's going to be quite a heavily managed environment these trees so we are going to  
**0:41:12-0:41:15:**  keep them relatively narrow.  Time will tell as to how successful we are with that and we will inevitably be trimming  trees back and the moving branches at certain times of the year as well in order to give  
**0:41:28-0:41:34:**  us access but we're looking more for height rather than width so it's going to be relatively  tall and we expect, apart from the oak trees which would be allowed to go full height,  we are expecting a height of around five maybe six meters and we will probably not go much  
**0:41:47-0:41:50:**  beyond that apart from the oak trees.  Because thanks to your north-south direction in the lines you're not too worried about  competition for light for example?  
**0:41:57-0:42:03:**  No not at all because in the summer when things are growing that shade effect is actually  quite modest it doesn't really have much.  We're used to having this effect because we have quite a few hedges already so we know  
**0:42:11-0:42:16:**  the effect of hedges and we know that when they run north-south we don't have a problem  we can crop right up to the hedge whereas where the hedges run east to west we have  particularly on the southern side of the field we have quite a large area which is shady  
**0:42:26-0:42:31:**  for quite a long part in the winter it's shady as well as the old day.  So we're used to that and we don't see the shade as being a huge factor.  Some crops are quite tolerant of shade, not every vegetable wants full sun anyway.  
**0:42:41-0:42:46:**  A lot of vegetable battery will grow in a partial shady environment so we don't see  that as a major problem.  And just going back to the tree line because I do think it's an important part, you said  
**0:42:53-0:42:58:**  that you don't mow much but does that mean that you will not mow at all during the growing  season or you'll still come once and cut that grass?  We don't mow at all during the growing season.  
**0:43:04-0:43:09:**  We may mow early in the spring but we don't do every tree line every year, we do them  perhaps every two to three years.  The mowing primarily would be to control things like brambles, it won't be for any other reason,  
**0:43:18-0:43:22:**  we have quite a diverse species of plants growing there so we're quite happy to let  them look after themselves really.  If we get things like nettles growing there that's fine because nettles are an incredibly  
**0:43:29-0:43:35:**  useful way of improving biodiversity and they harbour a huge range of beneficial insects  so we're quite happy for things like that to establish.  We would only mow primarily to control aggressive perennial shrubs if you like, things which  
**0:43:45-0:43:49:**  may start creeping in, brambles are the main worry really.  And you go around with a brush cutter or are you able to mechanise that with some other  machinery?  
**0:43:55-0:44:01:**  Yeah, we have a mower, a tractor mower, a flower mower which we can use, it's got offset  arrangement so we can offset it between trees, it's a bit slow but it's only now and again.  A brush cutter, a strimmer, it is possible but it's quite slow.  
**0:44:13-0:44:18:**  We wouldn't want to do too much like that but we may use occasional brush cutting.  Very interesting and it's fascinating that you've actually, you're able to share an experience  about the understory and utilising that space because it's an incredibly appealing idea  
**0:44:30-0:44:36:**  both in terms of using space and this idea of intensifying production but clearly it  comes with some challenges and it's interesting to see that it seems now that having tested  these different options you're actually better off just leaving that strip going to natural  
**0:44:47-0:44:52:**  vegetation rather than trying to find a market and labour to actually increase production.  Yeah, certainly that's true in our case.  It may not be true for everybody on every farm but given that labour is our single one  
**0:45:01-0:45:08:**  biggest expense and getting skilled labour because even picking blackcurrants and gooseberries  takes an element of skill is a difficult factor for us in the UK.  We are very short of labour to deal with such things.  
**0:45:16-0:45:22:**  This year we picked over 2000kg of strawberries and that took quite an effort and we had some  problems at one point of getting people to do that because of the lockdown situation  and the person that was going to come from abroad was not able to come and been relying  
**0:45:32-0:45:34:**  on this person for some time.  So we had to find local labour and to be perfectly honest local labour is not used to dealing  with these sorts of crops and they found it very very hard work.  
**0:45:41-0:45:44:**  Even after two hours they've had enough.  So it's actually really difficult finding people to do these things and that is the  main consideration, it's not really an agronomic problem.  
**0:45:53-0:45:58:**  I think these crops can be managed to grow quite well but it is the labour input and  also on a relatively small area it takes a huge amount of effort to grow a crop on a  small scale and market it and package it and all the things you have to do.  
**0:46:10-0:46:15:**  We're very busy with vegetables pretty much the whole year and perennial fruit is actually  quite difficult to manage.  We do strawberries but we've had 40 years experience of doing it.  
**0:46:21-0:46:25:**  Very few people are able to manage perennial crops and vegetable crops at the same time.  If they're only growing perennial crops it may well work much better for them because  they haven't got the pressure of vegetables but vegetables for us a huge amount of work  
**0:46:34-0:46:42:**  from April right through till September, massive input effort needed which clashes very much  with fruit as well.  So on some farms I'm sure it could be made to work economically but on others less so.  
**0:46:50-0:46:54:**  But it's always a challenge to, especially if you're doing direct selling which is the  case of a lot of the farms we're talking to, it's always a challenge to find something  that both makes ecological sense, I mean by that being able to grow in shade for example,  
**0:47:04-0:47:06:**  and then that you can actually sell locally and that's exactly what you said with the  blackcurrants.  Even if you had the labour and everything it's a bit useless to have six lines of blackcurrants  
**0:47:12-0:47:17:**  if no one's eating them fresh and that's a huge part of the challenge.  I mean I'll come back to blackcurrants because it's an interesting example but 99.8% of all  blackcurrants grown in this country go for one source and that's blackcurrant drink.  
**0:47:30-0:47:35:**  And that's the outlet and it's all done by huge machines on vast scale.  You never see blackcurrants in the shops ever, they just don't exist, people don't use them.  So yes they'll grow and it's often used as a good example of what you can have within  
**0:47:45-0:47:50:**  tree lives but actually the marketing is incredibly difficult.  And if the labour wasn't an issue are there any other berries that could be interesting,  at least in the initial years where there's a lot of sunshine?  
**0:47:58-0:48:04:**  Yeah raspberries would be very well suited to this, certainly for the first sort of,  well probably up to ten years.  Once the tree carry got really dense you wouldn't be able to do it but yeah possibly up to ten  
**0:48:11-0:48:14:**  years you could grow raspberries which is about their lifespan anyway, they don't usually  produce much beyond that.  So they would be quite a useful crop to have.  
**0:48:19-0:48:23:**  Again it's down to the labour but I think you have a better chance for raspberries than  you have for blackcurrants.  But then you still have the issues of doing that in a kind of functional, practical way  
**0:48:29-0:48:34:**  where you can trellis them efficiently and all these considerations but it is an interesting  one.  There are some raspberry varieties, the autumn fruiting ones which you don't have to train,  
**0:48:39-0:48:42:**  you just cut them down every year which is far easier.  And you can also do biennial cropping on the other early fruiting raspberries as well and  crop them every other year so you cut one half one year and one half the next.  
**0:48:51-0:48:56:**  And that reproduces or completely eliminates the need to do much training.  So there are ways of doing it and I think it would be a really useful trial for somebody  to really take forward because I think raspberries probably amongst all the fruits have probably  
**0:49:07-0:49:08:**  got the best possibilities.  Because they naturally grow in that environment, like it's a natural environment under trees  and part shade.  
**0:49:13-0:49:20:**  Ian, you mentioned that you also wanted to use these trees to produce woodchips and biomass  for your fertility and I think this is such an interesting and important aspect because  woodchips are a huge potential output of agroforestry systems and it's so important for us to understand  
**0:49:31-0:49:34:**  the potential that they have.  Could you tell us a bit about how you've been using woodchips in the past and how you're  hoping to use your trees then to supplement that source of woodchips?  
**0:49:45-0:49:49:**  Ok well we started experimenting with woodchips about 15 years ago.  We were taking chipped wood from local tree sources.  This was a mixture of different species, mostly from gardens, all from very close by.  
**0:49:59-0:50:05:**  It all comes within literally a 4-5km radius of the farm so it's very local.  It's mostly material that would have gone to either landfill or to a central composting  site.  
**0:50:12-0:50:17:**  So it's very useful for us because it's local and very useful for tree sources because they  don't have to drive too far with it and take it to some huge site somewhere.  So we started composting that which has been very successful.  
**0:50:24-0:50:29:**  We've got a very good system of composting so we're producing around, well we're taking  around 400-500 cubic metres a year, composting that down to around 250 cubic metres.  It takes 12 months to do the whole composting process.  
**0:50:39-0:50:46:**  We're simply just putting it into windrows, about 4 metres wide, 2 metres high and as  long as we can.  Some of them are 30-40 metres long.  
**0:50:50-0:50:57:**  And we turn it every 3-4 months to produce a more evenly mixed and homogenous material.  And at the end of the 12 months it comes out as very beautiful dark black organic material,  I mean humus almost.  
**0:51:05-0:51:10:**  So it's a very useful product and we've been putting that onto green manure part of the  rotation.  We don't put it on bare soil.  
**0:51:12-0:51:16:**  Putting any organic material on bare soil is incredibly wasteful.  So it goes onto a long term green manure crop.  The reason for that primarily is that the soil at that point is able to accept this  
**0:51:27-0:51:31:**  material without running into any problems with denitrification because there is still  some wood which is not completely broken down.  And there's very high earthworm populations, very high micro fauna, lots of bacteria, fungi,  
**0:51:42-0:51:47:**  all these things which you need for the final processing of the composted wood happen on  the soil.  So it's a very modest amount, we're putting down around between 50-70 cubic metres per  
**0:51:53-0:51:54:**  hectare.  So it's sort of 5mm thick, a very small amount.  We do that twice during the 7 year rotation.  
**0:52:01-0:52:06:**  So it goes on 2 consecutive years when we have green manure crops.  And that's the only time we apply it.  So it's a very modest amount during the course of the whole rotation.  
**0:52:12-0:52:14:**  We've now been around the farm.  We're on the third, we've just almost completed the second rotation so we've done 12-14 years.  And we're seeing some enormous benefits in terms of soil biology, crop yields, pest disease  
**0:52:32-0:52:35:**  resistance, water holding capacity.  The soil has changed out of all recognition.  Prior to doing this we were using green years only which was fine, we've managed to maintain  
**0:52:43-0:52:47:**  fertility but we weren't getting fantastically high yields.  This has made a huge difference to the yield potential.  As well as the composted wood chip for soil applications, we're also using it for making  
**0:52:58-0:53:00:**  a propagation substrate.  So we're using it as a mix for plant raising.  It's not a huge amount, we use probably 5-7 cubic metres a year.  
**0:53:10-0:53:14:**  Really successful, we have the most amazing plant propagation from this material.  We don't add any fertilizer to it at all.  We do use a little bit of vermiculite to dilute it because it's very high in nitrogen so we  
**0:53:22-0:53:28:**  need to dilute it and also it improves the drainage and the water holding capacity.  And that's completely eliminated any brought in compost we may have had to use for plant  raising.  
**0:53:35-0:53:41:**  Most growers in the UK are buying in plant substrates which in most cases are based on  peat.  They may have reduced peat but they all contain some peat.  
**0:53:44-0:53:50:**  This is a serious issue in terms of climate change and damage to ecosystems.  Peat is a product which has to be banned and it is going to be banned in the future but  it hasn't been yet.  
**0:53:55-0:53:59:**  So we've been able to replace any element of peat completely by using wood chips.  So this has been perhaps one of the most successful parts of the composting process.  As well as composting wood chips.  
**0:54:07-0:54:10:**  This is, as I said earlier, a range of different species.  It may contain, a lot of it is actually ornamental trees because this is often what happens in  people's gardens.  
**0:54:17-0:54:21:**  They have ornamental trees, they get too big, they have to cut them down, they have to prune  them.  There's also quite a lot of cupressus leylandii which are evergreen conifers which were planted  
**0:54:28-0:54:33:**  for hedges, they get enormous invasive space and time and they cause all sorts of disputes  between neighbours.  So we get quite a bit of that.  
**0:54:36-0:54:41:**  Around about 25% of the material we get is from conifers.  This can be difficult to compost so we need a range of other timbers to enable us to compost  that successfully.  
**0:54:48-0:54:53:**  On its own it's very difficult because of the high level of resin and terpenes.  So as well as composted wood chip we also have a different product which is ramil chip  wood.  
**0:55:00-0:55:04:**  So ramil chip wood, I think you have more experience of it in France than we have in  UK because I think it's been done quite a bit in the past.  Ramil chip wood is fresh wood harvested direct from trees.  
**0:55:14-0:55:16:**  It's harvested during the winter.  It's wood which is generally less than 75 mm in diameter so it's fairly young wood because  it's higher in proteins and elements that we need for the process and it's spread direct  
**0:55:30-0:55:31:**  onto land.  So we don't compost it, we spread it fresh.  It's spread literally the day we chip it.  
**0:55:37-0:55:39:**  For that purpose we're using our own wood.  We have an area of coppice which I planted 15 or so years ago which is willow.  White willow we're using that and we're coppicing that on a rotational basis.  
**0:55:50-0:55:53:**  We're using that for ramil chip wood.  We've also been doing trials with this ramil chip wood comparing it with the composted  wood to see what the differences are and that's been an extensive trial done over the last  
**0:56:03-0:56:05:**  4 or 5 years which you can read up.  It's about to be published soon by the Organic Research Centre.  It's been a very interesting trial.  
**0:56:09-0:56:14:**  We've taken it from right away through the rotation almost from the green manures to  the application of the ramil chip wood right through to following crops and measured to  crop yield.  
**0:56:20-0:56:26:**  We're looking at earthworm populations, soil biology, we're looking at P and K levels,  phosphate to potassium are quite important to us obviously and also pH levels.  So we're looking at a whole range of parameters of soil analysis to see what's happening during  
**0:56:39-0:56:45:**  this process of applying ramil chip wood and comparing that with where we're applying composted  chip wood and where we're applying nothing.  So it's a pretty extensive trial and there's been some useful information coming from that.  
**0:56:53-0:57:02:**  I think probably the most useful information for us as farmers in terms of soil measurement  is the earthworm counts.  The earthworm counts have been really interesting in that we've seen huge populations of earthworms.  
**0:57:10-0:57:18:**  We have something in the region of 13 million earthworms per hectare where we've been now  doing this in its fourth year.  So we're seeing some big improvements in soil health due to primarily due to the earthworm  
**0:57:26-0:57:33:**  population which is really enjoying the application of both the composted wood and also the ramil  chip wood.  Really what we're looking at in terms of comparing the ramil chip wood compared with the composted  
**0:57:40-0:57:44:**  chip wood is do we need to compost the wood because there's a feeling that perhaps we  don't need to compost it we can just apply it direct.  And I think that is the case where we've got our own material but because we are bringing  
**0:57:53-0:58:02:**  in material from outside and because the use of the conifer wood we would have to compost  that.  We couldn't use conifer wood as ramil chip wood so it would mean that we can use that  
**0:58:07-0:58:09:**  material which normally go to waste.  It also means we can make a much more reliable plant raising substrate which we wouldn't  be able to do with just ramil chip wood.  
**0:58:18-0:58:20:**  It has to be composted in order to do that.  So it's been an interesting trial and certainly what we're looking at longer term is how much  of our farm would we have to be growing trees on in order to support fertility 100%.  
**0:58:34-0:58:38:**  Assuming that maybe at some point we may not have access to this material coming in from  outside.  And just to understand the ramil chip wood do you just apply it on the surface and what  
**0:58:45-0:58:48:**  quantities and at what moment in the year?  Yeah it goes onto the surface.  It should never be buried because that will cause problems.  
**0:58:54-0:58:55:**  It goes onto a green manure crop.  This is really important.  It's not going to work very well if it goes onto bare soil.  
**0:58:59-0:59:02:**  In fact we avoid bare soil on the farm as much as possible.  We always maintain cover crops.  And within crops we have green manure grown within crops to maintain soil cover.  
**0:59:09-0:59:12:**  So it only goes onto a cover crop.  And we apply, I think I've made some noise, we apply around 50 to 60 cubic metres per  hectare.  
**0:59:18-0:59:20:**  This is about 5 or 6 millimetres thick.  It's a very small amount.  And it goes on usually during the autumn or early spring.  
**0:59:28-0:59:32:**  We avoid going on during the winter because the land can be quite wet because it's a play  source so we don't want people running around with machinery when it's wet.  Autumn is the ideal but sometimes we have to pull it off till spring.  
**0:59:41-0:59:45:**  And how long does it take for the wood chips to decompose then?  Decomposes very quickly.  The ramil chip wood, if it's willow, I mean we've used a range of different species but  
**0:59:52-0:59:54:**  if it's willow it's gone within 6 months.  We don't see any sign of it.  And that's an indication really of the high levels of biological activity we have in our  
**1:00:00-1:00:01:**  soil.  So if you put that onto a soil which is very bad in terms of biological diversity it may  take much longer because it doesn't have the necessary fungi and bacteria to process it.  
**1:00:12-1:00:15:**  Other species of wood may take a little longer.  We've also, we're coppicing some hazes here on the farm, our own hazes which we planted  30 years ago.  
**1:00:20-1:00:23:**  We're coppicing some of those for ramil chip wood.  That's a mixture of blackthorn, hawthorn, hazel, spindle and one or two other things.  And that's taking a little bit longer to break down but still not much longer.  
**1:00:35-1:00:37:**  I mean it's gone within a year.  You may get the odd bit of wood lying around because sometimes you get a big chunk coming  out and it doesn't get completely chipped up.  
**1:00:44-1:00:49:**  And that may stay around but that hasn't caused any problems with denodification.  The fear really with using wood on soil is to lock up nitrogen for a long period of time.  Which is why we've only applied it to green manure crops where we already have very high  
**1:00:59-1:01:03:**  levels of nitrogen because we have a mixed species of green manure which contains some  legumes and also we have a lot of bacteria and fungi in the soil at that point in the  rotation to process the wood.  
**1:01:10-1:01:14:**  Let's say you were able to plant enough trees to be self-sufficient in inputs.  You think economically it would be worth it to be planting, managing and pruning these  trees to produce your own inputs.  
**1:01:23-1:01:29:**  The total price of the input produced yourself would be competitive compared to buying anything  else.  Yes, it's certainly I would say it's competitive to buying say fertilizers which we wouldn't  
**1:01:38-1:01:43:**  do anyway because we're organic or even organic inputs.  I would say it is comparable to that.  We've been trying to put some cost in that.  
**1:01:47-1:01:52:**  It's quite difficult but you know we've costed out our wood chip compost.  We know what that cost us per ton and we've costed out around your chip wood.  We know what that cost is.  
**1:01:56-1:01:59:**  It's very favourable.  Given that the benefits are beyond things you can measure in an economic sense.  This is a difficulty.  
**1:02:06-1:02:12:**  How do you measure resistance to pests and diseases?  You can measure increased yields but you can't measure some of the factors that go into increasing  those yields.  
**1:02:18-1:02:24:**  We're looking at the farm really in terms of what percentage of land on the farm would  we have to put into trees in order to generate enough fertility to carry on cropping at vegetables  as we are now at pretty high yields.  
**1:02:33-1:02:35:**  We do get some incredible yields.  We've just done this last few weeks or a month ago now we've finished harvesting potatoes  and we're getting yields comparable with conventional farmers on better land.  
**1:02:47-1:02:53:**  So that to us has a real financial value in that we're getting very high levels of cropping.  So in order to maintain that in terms of carbon which is really what we're looking at in the  long term is how much carbon we can put back in our soil and with green mures we can maintain  
**1:03:04-1:03:06:**  carbon but we cannot increase it particularly.  It's very difficult to maintain carbon through green mures only when you're taking crop off.  We did manage it.  
**1:03:13-1:03:16:**  We have maintained carbon for many years but we haven't seen a big increase.  With the use of round-wheel chip wood and composted chip wood we are seeing an increase  in carbon in the soil which is much more significant than it was when we only used green mures.  
**1:03:24-1:03:29:**  So looking at the long term benefit which is really the carbon element of the soil in  terms of making the soil more resilient, looking at higher yields, better pest disease resistance,  more water holding capacity, all these things have quite a profound economic benefit to  
**1:03:40-1:03:41:**  the farm.  So we're looking at around 20% of the farm would need to be growing timber crops in order  to keep this, we think, to keep this system going.  
**1:03:51-1:03:56:**  There's a popularity that we could reduce how much carbon we put on in the future because  we don't want to be just adding carbon for the sake of adding carbon.  If it gets to a point where it's getting too high because it can get too high.  
**1:04:04-1:04:07:**  There's a misconception amongst particularly organic producers that you can never have  too much organic matter in the soil, you can, you can go too high with organic matter and  that can cause all sorts of problems.  
**1:04:14-1:04:18:**  So if we saw organic matter getting too high we would reduce how much goes in.  So the idea would be to maintain what we have.  We've managed to increase it from where it was which is quite low and we get to a point  
**1:04:25-1:04:29:**  where we might suddenly say right okay we have enough carbon we can reduce how much  we put down.  So 20-25% of the farm in trees is the sort of figure we've come up with.  
**1:04:35-1:04:40:**  I mean it will vary from farm to farm, it will depend on level of cropping.  You may not need as much of that if you're doing crops which are less demanding of soil  than, I mean, horticulture is very demanding of soil.  
**1:04:48-1:04:52:**  And I think 20-25% of farm is a good working figure.  It means that you know the country as a whole needs to double its timber production in order  to maintain carbon content of soil.  
**1:05:01-1:05:05:**  I mean that's kind of a very loose figure but that's the sort of area we would be perhaps  looking at in a national sense.  We need to increase our forest area by at least the area it is now which is quite significant.  
**1:05:13-1:05:17:**  It has to be 20% of the country rather than 10%.  To recap the numbers then, you'd have to cover 20-25% of about 8 hectares if that's correct?  We've already got quite a lot of that.  
**1:05:26-1:05:27:**  We've got hedges.  Within that 8 hectares we have nearly 2,000 kilometres of hedge, 2,000 metres of hedge  which we can manage for coppicing.  
**1:05:36-1:05:37:**  We have the tree lines.  We have 0.3 of a hectare of coppice which is on a piece of land which was too wet to  produce anything else on.  
**1:05:45-1:05:48:**  It's a boggy part of the field that floods in the winter.  So we're already producing quite a lot now which hasn't interfered with cropping.  I mean we don't see this as land out of production.  
**1:05:59-1:06:04:**  We see this very much as land in production but supplementing the vegetable production.  We have to have realistic expectations.  We cannot expect to have 8 hectares 100% cropping vegetables because we have this fertility  
**1:06:12-1:06:14:**  building component.  Where people do have 100% of their farm cropping it's dependent on a huge amount of resources  coming from somewhere else either through fertilizers and rock materials or through  
**1:06:23-1:06:29:**  organic matter from some other part of the country or even some other part of the world.  So it's really about future proofing agriculture in the sense that we need to look at how sustainable  it really is in terms of nutrient input and output and also particularly so in terms of  
**1:06:41-1:06:47:**  carbon retention and also carbon building because we need to get some of the carbon  out of the atmosphere and the best way, everybody knows the best way to do it is to plant trees.  Even if you do eventually cut them down and chip them up and return that carbon so it  
**1:06:55-1:06:57:**  gets lost somewhere.  But we have to maintain that long term.  Actually this is slightly off topic but I can't help myself.  
**1:07:03-1:07:07:**  Could you just tell me what are some of the effects of having too much organic matter?  Well it depends firstly what you mean by too much because it varies from soil type to soil  type.  
**1:07:13-1:07:18:**  One of the problems that we've seen in the UK and I think it's happening in other parts  particularly where we have what we call biointensive horticulture where we have often very small  areas of land, maybe one hectare or less with very intensive raised beds dependent primarily  
**1:07:32-1:07:38:**  on all this fertility coming from outside in the form of usually compost or manure or  some organic material.  Often this material is used not really just for supporting fertility but also for controlling  
**1:07:46-1:07:52:**  weeds and where we're seeing very high inputs of organic matter over periods of time and  given that this sort of agriculture hasn't really happened much for the last more than  the last 10 years anyway.  
**1:07:58-1:08:03:**  Where we are seeing units that have been going for more than five years we've seen very high  levels of organic matter where we may have gone from 5% up to 8 or 10% in 10 years and  what we see there is very very high levels of phosphate, incredibly high.  
**1:08:15-1:08:21:**  I mean we've never seen levels this high anywhere in normal agriculture and very high levels  of potash.  Now what happens when you get particularly phosphate, well there's two problems.  
**1:08:26-1:08:31:**  One is you get phosphate leaching so all this phosphate has to go somewhere, it's not being  taken up by crops because there's just not enough crop being grown there even though  yields may be, often yields are very high on these systems, very high indeed so you  
**1:08:39-1:08:43:**  get very high yields but the crop isn't taking off anything like the amount of phosphate  that's being put on and that goes to potash as well.  So there's a danger of phosphate loss through leaching into water, groundwater and surrounding  
**1:08:54-1:09:00:**  areas so there's a potential environmental pollution problem and then there's another  problem which is more of an agronomic problem in terms of crops growing and that's where  you have very high levels of phosphate.  
**1:09:06-1:09:12:**  You can get problems with uptake of macro elements, particularly things like magnesium,  boron, molybdenum, I mean it can vary depending on soil type and initial soil levels of these  nutrients but often it leads to huge imbalances.  
**1:09:26-1:09:29:**  So what we actually have is an imbalanced soil.  We have very high potash and phosphate levels which is leading to a lock up of nutrients.  The nutrients may be there but plants can no longer assess them.  
**1:09:37-1:09:42:**  I refer to this as soil obesity.  I don't need to explain what that means, it's pretty obvious what that is.  You can overfeed soil in the same way you can overfeed animals and people.  
**1:09:52-1:09:56:**  So it's very much about over application.  Now often these intensities, and it's not exclusive to these intensive systems, it also  happens on other systems as well, but one of the other areas of these intensive systems  
**1:10:08-1:10:11:**  is that there's no tillage or almost no tillage.  So you haven't got a breakdown of organic matter.  So organic matter levels are building up even faster which sounds great, I mean this is  
**1:10:17-1:10:18:**  what we want.  We want to increase organic matter but what's happening, the mantra of more organic matter  has become the normal and this is what everybody, not everybody, but often people in very small  
**1:10:28-1:10:33:**  intensive systems have this mantra, you need to put more and more organic matter on.  Now there's been some surveys done in US and mostly US looking at some of these systems  and they've come up with some quite worrying figures and we've also done some work here  
**1:10:43-1:10:47:**  in UK or I've done some work with a colleague of mine and we've been looking at some of  these systems where they've been in place for quite a long time and we're seeing a very  common trend in that we've got these very high organic matter levels, very high phosphates  
**1:10:56-1:11:02:**  and potash, I mean in one case we've never ever seen anything so high, it was crazy.  And the reason we're looking at these is because I've been asked by the producers to try and  help because they're having some crop failures, particularly with greenhouse crops where tomatoes  
**1:11:15-1:11:19:**  are performing quite badly, they're not getting the yields they used to get and they're wondering  why and we're finding very high levels of phosphate, very high levels of organic matter.  So there is a link here, we're not sure what to do about this at the moment because the  
**1:11:29-1:11:34:**  only thing really we've been able to come up with and it's against what many people  believe in is to go back to tillage and to reduce organic matter.  I mean I was looking at soil analysis a few weeks ago and the amount of phosphate and  
**1:11:47-1:11:52:**  potash they have, they have enough to last for 20-30 years with continuous cropping,  they don't have to worry about it at all.  In a way you think well okay we don't have to put anything on the ground for a long time,  
**1:11:58-1:12:02:**  we need to maintain the organic matter but we can actually let it fall off a bit because  it was 9% and that is high.  Now I've been aware of this for a long time because I inherited soil here, we have a part  
**1:12:10-1:12:17:**  of our farm which is a wall garden, it's been in intensive food production for in excess  of a thousand years and most of that production would have been almost predominantly based  on the use of manure, mostly from human sources in the past but perhaps less so in the last  
**1:12:28-1:12:33:**  50 years but partly from animal sources as well and they would have applied quite large  amounts.  So I inherited a situation which was already very high in phosphate and potash, not ridiculously  
**1:12:39-1:12:43:**  high but it was very high and it was something I'd never experienced before and I thought  this is wonderful, this is fantastic.  However what I've seen in the last 33 years I've been using this soil, even despite what  
**1:12:53-1:12:57:**  I consider to be very modest organic inputs, we're still seeing organic matter level going  up in tunnels, not outdoors but in tunnels where it's sheltered to the point where I  have now reduced my organic inputs to once every six or seven years whereas we were doing  
**1:13:09-1:13:16:**  it once every two years originally and looking very closely at the P and K levels because  the P level is still very very high and we also have no dig in this system or we have  one section no dig and one not so we are comparing the two and seeing some obvious differences.  
**1:13:30-1:13:38:**  So there is a problem which a lot of small scale growers are really reluctant to acknowledge  to the point where they will not even get a soil analysis, they don't even believe that  soil analysis is a useful component, this is what I call Trumpism, they don't even acknowledge  
**1:13:48-1:13:55:**  that soil analysis is a useful measurement of soil health but actually we don't base  all our information on soil analysis, a lot of it is based on what you see, what you feel  and what you see growing but soil analysis is a useful way of looking at soil particularly  
**1:14:03-1:14:07:**  if you're looking at nutrients such as phosphate long term.  So whether this is going to become a national problem I don't know but with that we're seeing  there is a general trend towards these very not exclusive but generally very small units  
**1:14:21-1:14:27:**  that are accumulating vast reserves of nutrients and not utilising it.  There's another issue around this quite apart from any possible soil problems that they  might be heading towards.  
**1:14:33-1:14:40:**  There's also the problem or moral dilemma if you like in terms of why would one hectare  be using resources which could actually be feeding 50 hectares because there's only so  much organic matter and if we were to share it around they wouldn't be allowed to put  
**1:14:50-1:14:53:**  it on at its depth because it's just not available.  The reason this is happening is because it is available, it's because of green waste  compost which is often locally available to many people, the price is quite low, the price  
**1:15:02-1:15:08:**  in the UK really is transport only and the material is almost free because there's a  lot of it because of the increase in composting sites by local councils, by local companies  who are processing increasingly more and more organic waste which we always thought was  
**1:15:21-1:15:26:**  fantastic but we were hoping was going to happen 40 years ago and finally it has.  So there is a moral issue around the use of very very heavy dressings of material which  could be doing the same amount of benefit to soils but spread over a much wider area.  
**1:15:38-1:15:45:**  Ian, I think we've moved away from trees but I'm so happy we did allow ourselves this because  it's fascinating what you're telling us and you're putting your finger exactly on what  Dimitri and I have been trying to fight against is that as soon as you have simple mantras  
**1:15:56-1:16:00:**  that are all encompassing and final you always discover that there's more complexity and  nuance and problems and I had no idea that it was the case with these problems with no  dig market gardening and it's really interesting that you're bringing this insight, I'm so  
**1:16:09-1:16:10:**  happy you are.  Well it is interesting and it's part of the evolution of what we do and if you told me  this 20 years ago I wouldn't have believed you because I also felt that more organic  
**1:16:21-1:16:25:**  matter was better and that you couldn't put too much on, that's what we've been led to  believe.  But there's been some really interesting trials studies done in the US looking at long term  
**1:16:31-1:16:33:**  situations where organic matter has been put on.  If you look at very small scale domestic gardens, people's backyards, which tend to get huge  amounts of organic matter because they are small and this is showing up some quite horrendous  
**1:16:45-1:16:49:**  levels of nutrients.  In a back garden it's not such a big problem but if you scale that up to several hectares  and it's next to a stream or it's near a public water supply then there's an issue around  
**1:16:57-1:16:58:**  that.  The nitrate problem is another issue.  Some of these very intensive small scale operations are putting on in excess of 500kg of nitrogen  
**1:17:07-1:17:11:**  per year and that has to go somewhere too.  It doesn't disappear, it has to go into the environment.  It's either going up as nitrous oxide into the atmosphere or it's going into the water  
**1:17:17-1:17:22:**  and causing nitrates and nitrites which is another issue in terms of water quality.  So there are several potentially contentious problems which are coming up as a result of  what people think is a very organic system.  
**1:17:35-1:17:38:**  The organic certification has largely ignored this.  I've had some meetings with them in the last year about this.  They weren't actually aware of the issues around this because they haven't been asking  
**1:17:45-1:17:47:**  the questions.  And also these systems actually almost never fall within organic standards.  They may be certified but actually if you look at organic standards they're not conforming  
**1:17:55-1:18:01:**  to standards at all because they're importing vast amounts of fertility from somewhere else.  So there is going to have to be a change and there is one or two people now acknowledging  that this is a problem for the future and the process of awareness I think has started.  
**1:18:14-1:18:20:**  I may have upset some people a year ago because I wrote an article in one of our organic magazines  which pissed a few people off but at least people are talking about it and they're looking  a bit more closely at their soil now than they used to and that's good.  
**1:18:31-1:18:33:**  I don't condemn people for what they do.  They thought they were doing the right thing.  We did lots of things in the past which were dodgy and we're still doing something which  
**1:18:42-1:18:43:**  is slightly dodgy.  We're aware of it and we want to change it and this is the important thing that if a  part of your system is not right you need to be looking at it and thinking how you're  
**1:18:51-1:18:52:**  going to change it.  In terms of composting do you add anything to the wood chips you compost or all the nutrition  is coming from the wood chips?  
**1:18:59-1:19:00:**  Yeah we have two heaps.  We have one which is pure 100% wood chip and we have another which has some other material  which is really waste vegetables from our production so where we're packing and distributing  
**1:19:11-1:19:13:**  there's always a bit of waste.  Where we're cleaning out greenhouses and tunnels from crop residues that goes on so all the  foliage from tomatoes and peppers that goes on there.  
**1:19:22-1:19:24:**  It's quite a small amount of other material.  I mean it's less than 10% by volume.  It's probably only 5% so it's still predominantly wood chip.  
**1:19:31-1:19:34:**  Oh we put a bit of cardboard on there as well.  Any packaging goes on there but no it's pretty much still just we don't add anything.  We don't need to add anything.  
**1:19:41-1:19:45:**  We only use it because it's a really useful way of getting rid of waste materials.  I know that you're currently using a diversity of species but let's say you were to continue  planting specifically for compost making or for ram your wood.  
**1:19:53-1:19:59:**  Are there certain species that you think are more appropriate and others that are to avoid?  Well that's interesting.  I mean the one which has been we've used the most of is the willow.  
**1:20:05-1:20:09:**  It's a common white willow so it's Salix alba.  I mean this has been really successful A because it grows really fast.  B it grows on really poor land.  
**1:20:15-1:20:20:**  You don't need good land and even on relatively dry land it still produces quite a high yield.  It's easy to manage.  You know we cut it on a seven year rotation.  
**1:20:24-1:20:26:**  We get quite large material from that.  It's very easy to mechanize.  You could mechanize this completely if you had enough area to do it and it appears to  
**1:20:33-1:20:35:**  produce a really good result.  I mean as ram your wood it breaks down quickly.  It has lots of fungal activity.  
**1:20:41-1:20:44:**  The willow when it's growing is also biodiverse rich.  It has huge numbers of insects living within it.  It attracts lots of birds.  
**1:20:50-1:20:51:**  It sort of ticks all the boxes.  It's indigenous.  There's so many right things about it.  
**1:20:55-1:21:02:**  However I'm always slightly wary of single species anything so I would want to add other  things to that.  Hazel we've used also because we're coppice and that for our haze.  
**1:21:07-1:21:10:**  That's also produced really good wood chip.  It's not as productive as willow but it's a harder wood so you may get as much carbon  over the same period of time.  
**1:21:17-1:21:21:**  I don't know how different species compare in terms of carbon production.  I mean if we were to look at the ultimate test it would be how much carbon can we produce  in one year from one hectare.  
**1:21:27-1:21:32:**  I mean that would be the ultimate but I still think a single species perhaps is not ideal.  I think to add species adds greater diversity to what we're doing.  It adds more in terms of potential fungi and different bacteria and all the things that  
**1:21:41-1:21:42:**  live on wood.  So I would add hazel.  I would also add ash.  
**1:21:45-1:21:47:**  I mean ash is a fantastic timber in UK.  It grows everywhere.  Unfortunately we now have this disease which is affecting the ash.  
**1:21:52-1:22:00:**  So there is going to be a vast amount of ash going into wood burners, into chipping.  It's going to be available.  Whether it's going to be available long term I don't know.  
**1:22:04-1:22:09:**  But ash would be if it's possible to grow it in the present conditions with disease  then I would go for ash as well.  So we're really looking at hardwoods.  
**1:22:13-1:22:14:**  It is hardwood.  It's indigenous hardwoods.  I'm sure there's hundreds of other species we could be looking at.  
**1:22:19-1:22:21:**  Some of them may not even be indigenous.  It could be non-indigenous species which are perfectly acceptable in every sense of the  word.  
**1:22:26-1:22:31:**  I think because we don't really have a lot of experience with it I think there's huge  room for experimentation in the future on this looking at different varieties both in  terms of their woodchipped potential but also in terms of their biological function on the  
**1:22:41-1:22:43:**  farm when they're not being chipped.  Just to understand the machinery involved, if you have a lot of trees to woodchip do  you rent a big chipper once a year or do you have your own machinery?  
**1:22:53-1:22:55:**  Yes we wouldn't want to own a machine.  It's not worth it for something which is only one or two days a year.  So we have a contractor, in fact it's the person that brings our woodchip.  
**1:23:01-1:23:06:**  He's a tree surgeon, he has a large machine which is self-propelled.  It's about 30 horsepower.  It's pretty cheap.  
**1:23:10-1:23:15:**  I mean we've looked at the cost of doing this per cubic meter and also we're also looking  at how much carbon we use in the process through the diesel.  It's incredibly efficient in that sense.  
**1:23:23-1:23:25:**  The cost to us is quite low.  He comes and spends maybe just two days chipping up vast amounts of material.  He can do 50 cubic meters in that time.  
**1:23:33-1:23:40:**  Yes, it wouldn't be worth buying this machine in or even hiring it in and doing it ourselves.  He does the whole job for us and that suits us very nicely.  And in terms of turning the compost when you're actually composting woodchips, do you just  
**1:23:48-1:23:50:**  do it with a front unloader or do you have a specialized machine?  No, I have a swing shovel which I hire in for a week every three months so it's a medium  sized digger.  
**1:23:58-1:23:59:**  A loader is not suitable.  You need a lot of space for loaders.  It's quite slow.  
**1:24:04-1:24:08:**  The excavator is much better because it can turn 360 degrees.  You get a much better mixing.  It's much quicker.  
**1:24:11-1:24:19:**  I can turn 200 cubic meters of that material in just a day.  It's pretty efficient actually.  In that machine I can hire in for 300 pence a week.  
**1:24:24-1:24:25:**  It's not a big cost.  And you've mentioned cost a few times and I know you might not have numbers in the top  of your head but is there anything you can share in terms of the cost of different methods  
**1:24:35-1:24:39:**  of woodchips or compost if you've done those calculations?  The only figures I've got in my head which I can remember are to do with our plant grazing  substrate which we compared with buying material in.  
**1:24:49-1:24:53:**  It even allows the fact that there's a fair bit of hand labour that goes into this process.  We're only doing about six or seven cubic meters a year so it gets picked up several  times by hand by shovel.  
**1:25:01-1:25:07:**  The cost is comparable with buying in and I think the figure I came up with was something  like 20 pence per litre finished.  So it's comparable in that sense.  
**1:25:12-1:25:17:**  We could cut the cost of that dramatically if we had some relatively simple mechanisation  which on our scale we probably ought to have.  Well we have recently invested in a sieve, a large sieve because we were sieving by hand.  
**1:25:27-1:25:28:**  Now we have a rotary sieve.  I haven't costed it now but that's cut the time of production by more than a third so  that's had a huge effect.  
**1:25:34-1:25:41:**  I mean for the sake of spending 300, 400 euros we saved that back in just the first couple  of mixes really.  And as a final question, what kind of advice would you give to a vegetable grower wanting  
**1:25:48-1:25:54:**  to integrate trees both in terms of things not to do and maybe things to do as well?  Well the first thing to do is to think about it for quite a while and really do research  and more research than I did.  
**1:26:01-1:26:03:**  I don't think I did enough.  Looking and seeing and talking to other people that are doing it I think is absolutely essential  because you can only do research so much from a laptop.  
**1:26:12-1:26:14:**  You need to get out there and have a look.  I think that's probably the first thing I would say.  In terms of pitfalls I think choice of varieties is always difficult.  
**1:26:21-1:26:26:**  I made a mistake with birch again because I was probably somewhat lacking in knowledge  and because the people that were contributing towards advice would have no experience with  growing vegetables whatsoever.  
**1:26:32-1:26:38:**  They were really used to grassland and arable fields so they hadn't considered the possibility  of roots spreading across the field too far from that species either.  So choice of species I think is really important.  
**1:26:47-1:26:52:**  I think above all else is to take time in consideration.  This is not something to rush into.  I think you need to have a season or several seasons to think about it and certainly be  
**1:26:59-1:27:01:**  looking at what other people are doing.  Well thank you so much.  It's been really fascinating and we've learned a lot through this episode.  
**1:27:06-1:27:08:**  So thanks for taking the time in your busy schedule to talk to us.  That's good.  It's my pleasure and hope to meet up at some point in the future.  
**1:27:16-1:27:20:**  That's all for today and thank you for making it this far in the podcast.  I really would like to thank Tyrion for chipping in with some questions.  We really appreciate our listeners contributing content and we received some suggestions these  
**1:27:30-1:27:35:**  last days with amazing questions and content and we really believe that the podcast is  only going to get better with you contributions so please continue.  You know where to reach us now on our website or on social media and as usual all the links  
**1:27:47-1:27:50:**  relevant to the episodes will be posted just below.  See you next time.  