---
title: 11 Designing Modular Agroforestry Systems With Preta Terra
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2020-12-06)  

**0:00:00-0:00:23:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:23-0:00:33:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  these challenges.  
**0:00:33-0:00:47:**  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Hello and welcome to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:00:47-0:00:59:**  We're your host Dimitri Enyetien and today we're super happy to have on the show Paulo  and Valter from Preta Terra.  Preta Terra has a consulting company that specializes in agroforestry systems.  
**0:00:59-0:01:12:**  They're based in Brazil but they operate around the world and today they're going to tell  us a bit about how they operate and what they do.  This is a bit of a shorter interview than usual because they are extremely busy at the  
**0:01:12-0:01:33:**  moment which is very good news for agroforestry and this is the amount of time that we managed  to have from them but we hope that we're going to be able to interview them again later or  in the future in order to go into more depth on many issues and the many topics that we  
**0:01:33-0:01:42:**  just started touching upon today.  So without further ado we hope you enjoy the episode.  Hello Valter and Paulo, welcome on the podcast.  
**0:01:42-0:01:56:**  Hello guys Etienne and Dimitri, thank you so much for the invitation.  Yeah it's very good to be here with both of you.  We'd love to have a quick introduction of yourselves and also you know for you to tell  
**0:01:56-0:02:01:**  us a bit about what Preta Terra does.  So maybe I could start?  Yeah please.  
**0:02:01-0:02:29:**  Okay my name is Paulo, I am a Brazilian and well I'm a forest engineer and a biologist  as well so I started my work with forest restoration, degraded land reforestation and afterwards  I understood the importance of bringing people together through the forest landscapes so  
**0:02:29-0:02:51:**  I started to work with, I started working with biodiverse production systems.  That's why I invested all my career, most of my career with two agroforestry systems.  So I started working with smallholder farmers and remote communities and indigenous people  
**0:02:51-0:03:15:**  especially in the Amazon in many contexts in the Amazon close to NGOs and well after  a few years of experience with smallholder farmers and understanding the operational  part of agroforestry in a small scale I had the challenge to apply these to a large scale  
**0:03:15-0:03:41:**  and that's exactly where I met Valter, where we worked together in Fazenda da Toca which  is a very important intrapreneur, entrepreneurship here in Brazil where we applied our knowledge  to expand agroforestry and systematize it our knowledge to a large scale and that was  
**0:03:41-0:04:01:**  the challenge we had at that time to apply the knowledge to a large scale.  I introduce myself, my name is Valter, Valter Ziantoni, I'm the partner of Paula and the  foundation of Preta Terra and well I'm a forest engineer as well as she is.  
**0:04:01-0:04:18:**  I also hold a master on agroforestry, I am SSC on agroforestry from Bangor University  in the UK and I have several years of experience, I mean more than 15 years working with agroforestry  now all over the world basically.  
**0:04:18-0:04:43:**  After my masters I worked a couple of years in Africa, in Zambia, Mozambique, South Africa  and Kenya and then in Southeast Asia for UNDP, in Turkey for FIO and several other NGOs and  companies and initiatives especially in the Brazilian Amazon where I have together with  
**0:04:43-0:04:59:**  Paula also more than six years of experience in the Brazilian and Peruvian Amazon.  And since the beginning of my career I was always passionate by people and first dependent  people livelihoods.  
**0:04:59-0:05:22:**  So my specialization is basically on local knowledge or better saying the acquirement  of the local knowledge vision of how people interpretate their environment and why they  choose this species instead of those or everything else that is the decision made by farmers  
**0:05:22-0:05:38:**  in the field.  So from this perspective we believe the projects can be developed, the ideas, the designs and  they will rely in time, they will be more resilient facing climate change and other  
**0:05:38-0:06:00:**  challenges including market fluctuations and everything else that is our challenges for  farmers in the field.  And as Paula mentioned we met working and leading the RD section of Fazendo da Toca,  
**0:06:00-0:06:20:**  this large enterprise carried by Pedro Paulo Dines who was an entrepreneur who started  the biggest agroforestry challenge in the world probably by the time and we were hired  to be the leaders of the RD section, the research and development section of this company and  
**0:06:20-0:06:40:**  we worked there for around two years and there we learned, we brought a lot from our experience  and background but we also learned with challenges we were about to face.  And then we decided to found Preta Pera and bring you all this knowledge and capability  
**0:06:40-0:07:03:**  of creating replicable systems to the world.  Yes, so we merged all the experience we had in the operational part, in the local knowledge  acquisition part, in designing and economically modeling, economical modeling to put it all  
**0:07:03-0:07:17:**  in Preta Pera.  What Preta Pera does now, what we work with now is mainly designing complex production  systems and especially agroforestry systems.  
**0:07:17-0:07:41:**  Of course we always focus on putting trees in the landscape but the idea is to design,  to systematize, to plan properly the production systems because the problem we have so far  is well, of course everybody knows the monocropping is depleting soil and what we need is regenerative  
**0:07:41-0:08:04:**  production systems but a very strong challenge we face to do this transition is this systematization,  the systematization itself, the planning itself because when we have a complex production  system, farmers have a hard time to understand where to start, which species to manage, which  
**0:08:04-0:08:21:**  is going to be the fertilizer, how are they supposed to prune each new species and everything.  So it is a complex system, so we need to systematize, we need to plan, we need to have a proper  operational chronogram.  
**0:08:21-0:08:42:**  So that's pretty much what we do and especially the financial modeling.  Well Complimenti, I think the core of Preta Pera is bringing ancestral knowledge, so all  the knowledge that comes empirically from farmers all around the world and put it together  
**0:08:42-0:08:57:**  with technology.  So that's the main approach and I would say that's the core of our initiative and for  four years now we have been working systematizing empirical knowledge and put that into economical  
**0:08:57-0:09:21:**  modeling and process that's enabled farmers to replicate this process anywhere in the  world and part of our methodology applies or relies, part of our methodology relies  on modularity, replicability and elasticity.  
**0:09:21-0:09:37:**  We bring those concepts to farmers, through farmers.  I think that's very important to say because what we do, what we try to master since the  very beginning of our initiative is to see from the farmer's point of view.  
**0:09:37-0:09:56:**  So that's the main thing, if you see and if you understand what are the challenges and  what farmers are expecting, we are able to design something that will be acceptable and  that will be successful in time and when I say successful, not only resilient environmentally  
**0:09:56-0:10:11:**  but also economically because we face a lot of challenges regarding market prices, when  you produce commodities.  So you are looking for premium prices, you are looking for nutrient density, you are  
**0:10:11-0:10:33:**  looking for a better way to manage soil and when we use the replicability model using  modularity and using another methodology we have that we call functional niche that is  putting species into a kind of systematization.  
**0:10:33-0:10:52:**  So each species is selected and grouped in different niches.  It allows us to replicate systems that we have developed for Brazil, for example, to  any other place in the world.  
**0:10:52-0:11:13:**  So making changes and changing every species as it was a piece in a chess board, for example.  Each species corresponds to a niche with specific functions and specific demands and management  and everything else within specific markets.  
**0:11:13-0:11:27:**  So we can apply the same logic whenever we have a new project in a new biome or a new  region.  I think what would be useful is if you could maybe continue explaining this by using a  
**0:11:27-0:11:39:**  few examples of projects you are working on currently or that you've worked on in the  past.  We have a project in the Amazon we established, we started working in 2018 there, especially  
**0:11:39-0:11:57:**  focusing with cassava because that was the livelihood base.  All farmers plant cassava there.  So in any design we have, we are not going to bring a complete different logic.  
**0:11:57-0:12:07:**  The idea is that it's adherent and makes sense for them.  So we kept the cassava, of course, in the design pretty much in the same way that they  were used to.  
**0:12:07-0:12:29:**  The only difference is that we wouldn't do the slash and burn as they are used to do.  We just did the slash and moat technique, which is when we manage the biomass of the  secondary forest and organize all the biomass in the ground and plant over it.  
**0:12:29-0:12:48:**  We don't burn it as they are used to do.  And so the design we carried out and planted with the farmers, we designed lines of trees  every 10 meters in between the cassava plantation.  
**0:12:48-0:13:04:**  And every 10 meters we have in this line, we have a large cycle, high value timber tree.  And this is what we call the niche.  That's the interesting part.  
**0:13:04-0:13:18:**  We didn't mention a species, we just mentioned the niche.  So it's a timber tree or a non-timber tree.  And we have a few species that we can put inside according to what the farmer wants  
**0:13:18-0:13:33:**  or what they don't want.  So for instance, they could plant the Brazil nut, for instance, or other timber or andiraba,  which produces the oil or the rosewood also.  
**0:13:33-0:13:44:**  So they had this list of species, like 10 species, native species of high value that  they could allocate.  If they only wanted the Brazil nut, they could do only the Brazil nut.  
**0:13:44-0:13:58:**  But if they want to diversify, they could as well.  And so we have the design that every 10 meters we have the long cycle timber tree.  And in the line, it occurs every 10 meters.  
**0:13:58-0:14:11:**  And then along the line, in between trees, we have three fruit species as well.  And it's the same logic.  They could choose which fruit species they want.  
**0:14:11-0:14:30:**  So they could choose acai, they could choose graviola, they could choose the anona, acerola.  So many species that were native for them, that they knew, that they know how to manage,  that they had the market, they could choose and put in this functional niche of simply  
**0:14:30-0:14:45:**  fruits every two and a half meters in between these long timber trees, long cycle timber  trees.  And then finally, in between these lines of 10 meters, every five meters, we have a line  
**0:14:45-0:15:07:**  of bananas every five meters and a mix of seeds of service species that we call it.  We call service species the one that grows fast, produce biomass and can be pruned very  frequently so that we can boost the nutrient cycling.  
**0:15:07-0:15:20:**  And then in the first years, like two, three years, we just managed intensively these trees  and they will be planted by seed so that you don't spend much money on buying seedlings  and so forth.  
**0:15:20-0:15:36:**  And the idea is that these species produce a lot of biomass to cover the soil and to  produce, to boost the nutrient cycling process.  Yeah, I think this project is very emblematic because you worked in 22 unities scattered  
**0:15:36-0:15:51:**  around the place in the Amazon that was very difficult to reach.  So we used the bolts.  Most of the time, the truck has to be carried in a bolt.  
**0:15:51-0:16:06:**  So there are so many little stories that would have been nice to present.  I'm trying to make it less boring of talking just about the system itself because there's  so much to be said about this project.  
**0:16:06-0:16:15:**  It's beautiful.  Inclusive.  We have a YouTube channel with a few videos of the implementation process with the farmers  
**0:16:15-0:16:22:**  showing the species, showing the adventure it was.  Yeah, you can really...  That's perfect.  
**0:16:22-0:16:47:**  I think what I could say about this project is that what you used is maintaining the big  business as usual of the farmers in the region, but applying a layer of agroforestry system  without changing the livelihood, not changing intrinsically, but changing in time.  
**0:16:47-0:17:02:**  So what we did was implementing those lines every 10 meters, the service trees, but not  changing the first years of production using cassava as they always did.  So this was maintained the same.  
**0:17:02-0:17:19:**  So we didn't have this shock that could end up making problems for the project acceptance.  And that was very good.  And basically that was the biggest difference.  
**0:17:19-0:17:36:**  And one more thing is that we used everything that was nearby.  So all the inputs was found by the farmers or if not by the farmers or not produced,  if it was not produced by them, it was acquired really nearby.  
**0:17:36-0:17:47:**  So it's completely sustainable.  We didn't bring anything from far away.  And it made it possible, including of course, the help from the farmers working in work  
**0:17:47-0:18:02:**  groups to make it for the price of your one-tenth of the normal price of one hectare of agroforestry  system in the region.  So that's a project that we like to talk about, but there are several others, but I'd like  
**0:18:02-0:18:17:**  to mention a special one that we are working with.  We call that Pasto Vivo, like a live pasture land.  The name is in Portuguese, Pasto Vivo is carried out by a group of investors, basically involving  
**0:18:17-0:18:38:**  Meraki Impact Investments and Luxor Group and Progreso Family Office.  And we are finalizing the design after all the acquirement of information in the field,  you are finalizing the design and the economical modeling right now, in the very moment we  
**0:18:38-0:18:56:**  are speaking to you now.  And it will start in 1200 hectares of cattle ranching, and it's supposed to be scaled for  23,000 hectares in the next years.  
**0:18:56-0:19:16:**  And we will be implementing these plots, the 1200 in the next months.  Now, it's still this year, if everything goes well with the rain pattern.  And that's a project that is basically cattle ranching in 30 meters intercropped lines of  
**0:19:16-0:19:42:**  grass, in a sustainable, improved pasture land, where you use also Cajunas and Titonia  to improve the cattle fodder.  And the trees, we are using a cashelnut with Brazilian native timber called Arrueta, and  
**0:19:42-0:19:55:**  also Makauba palm tree that produces essential oil.  And of course, those trees can be changed and the nuts can be changed.  And also Baru, which is another native nut.  
**0:19:55-0:20:07:**  Yeah, it's a very important and pricing one.  And of course, it's the same logic, as I will not repeat the part of the ecological niche  or functional niche, but they can change.  
**0:20:07-0:20:18:**  So not necessarily we have to maintain the cashelnut, but we are using the cashel also  for the cattle.  For fodder, right?  
**0:20:18-0:20:26:**  For the fruit.  The fruits are used for the cattle as well.  So that you can understand what the elasticity of this design is.  
**0:20:26-0:20:45:**  For instance, we have the Baru tree, which is a nut native from the Cerrado biome.  And it's very much appreciated in the last years in the market.  But if they choose, they can change the Baru for Carite, for instance.  
**0:20:45-0:20:52:**  It's another, which is the name of Carite?  Share butter.  Yeah, share butter.  
**0:20:52-0:21:04:**  They can exchange the Baru tree for share butter tree.  And that's an interesting opportunity in the market.  So if you find an opportunity in the market for a few years from now to sell the share  
**0:21:04-0:21:22:**  butter tree, to sell the share butter, you can choose to plant it instead of the Baru.  Or along with the Baru, you can intercalate it in the system.  And for instance, the cashelnut, if you want to change it, you can put macadamia in its  
**0:21:22-0:21:31:**  place.  So that in one line you have the cashelnut, in the other line you have the macadamia.  So you can have a biodiverse production system.  
**0:21:31-0:21:39:**  It will depend on the market.  It will depend on the availability of seeds and seedlings at the time that you're going  to plant.  
**0:21:39-0:21:55:**  It will depend also if the farmer is interested in that, if they have the know-how developed  and the knowledge to manage these species.  But step by step, every new plot that they will implement, they can add a new layer of  
**0:21:55-0:22:09:**  complexity.  So the first one will be complex, but not that much.  Let's try to simplify and choose species that we already know, we already understand, and  
**0:22:09-0:22:16:**  perfect.  So we implemented 10 hectares that it's a little bit easier so that we can learn the  management.  
**0:22:16-0:22:26:**  And then the next 10 hectares, we can add more complexity.  Next 10 hectares, a little bit more so that we can have the time also to find the market  for each species.  
**0:22:26-0:22:40:**  So that's the logic that we call the elasticity of the system.  Yeah, very well explained.  I just want to add that that's not an intrinsic agroforestry system.  
**0:22:40-0:22:55:**  It's kept being a normal system, but with regenerative approach, mainly regarding the  soil practices.  So all the intercropping lines, the 30 meters before the cattle coming, or I mean, like  
**0:22:55-0:23:15:**  for the three or four first years where the trees are still growing, the lines of trees,  we are having maize and soybeans being planted, but in a more regenerative way and using green  manure to soil covering during this time to aggregate more biomass to the soil.  
**0:23:15-0:23:33:**  So you have exactly the same farm producing maize, producing corn, producing soybean.  But at the same time, the trees are growing and you can expect much more income in the  future from the trees.  
**0:23:33-0:23:51:**  And as soon as the cattle comes, all the animal welfare is absolutely covered by the shade  and the better environment provided by those trees.  Furthermore, you have all the income from the non-timber forest products and the fodder  
**0:23:51-0:24:06:**  to the cattle.  And what's nice about this design is that we have cash flow since the first year.  So as soon as we plant the trees, we plant the maize as well in this 30 meter row in  
**0:24:06-0:24:20:**  between them.  And as soon as we harvest the maize, we plant the green manure.  Then the next year we plant the soybeans, we harvest the soybeans.  
**0:24:20-0:24:34:**  So the soil is never left bare.  It's always with a live covering.  And then in the fourth year, when we plant the next maize harvest, we plant also the  
**0:24:34-0:24:52:**  grass with it.  So as soon as you harvest the corn, the maize, you have the grass established.  And then in between this grass, we diversify with other kinds of fodder, like bush kinds  
**0:24:52-0:25:09:**  of fodder, like the cajon and the titonia, which are two species that are very, very  interesting for not only for soil improvement, but also for fodder diversification, especially  in the dry season.  
**0:25:09-0:25:31:**  Yeah, and basically we're just grasping the complexity of those systems and how we can  go deep into the economical modeling and indicators of the system and the expectations and prognosis  we are trying to design beforehand to understand what will be the management and which will  
**0:25:31-0:25:46:**  be the impact in the environment.  And for that, we are also calculating or having a methodology to imply which will be ecosystem  services that will arise from such a system.  
**0:25:46-0:26:10:**  And that is just a little bit of what we can say about our methodology.  But regarding the amplitude of our projects, we are starting now a more social project  in the Atlantic rainforest of Brazil, nearby where we have our farm, our Preta Terra farm.  
**0:26:10-0:26:33:**  That's like 400 kilometers from San Paulo capital, San Paulo city in the San Paulo state,  but in a very remote area, super remote with familiar agriculture and smallholder farmers.  And we are right now, this very December, we are starting a project funded by UBS Optimus  
**0:26:33-0:26:49:**  Foundation from UBS bank.  And they are financing the implementation of 100 hectares and you're involving 30 farmers,  30 families, and we are taking agroforesting plantations.  
**0:26:49-0:27:08:**  I'm sorry, I say again, we are taking coffee plantations that are monoculture so far, and  you are applying this layer of agroforestry.  So basically, mostly it will be coffee plantations that are being converted to agroforestry,  
**0:27:08-0:27:27:**  but we are also working with restoration of degraded lands, especially on springy waters.  So what we wanted to get into and to understand a bit better, digging into a few of the things  that you talked about now with especially the project in the Amazon and then in pasto  
**0:27:27-0:27:43:**  vivo, if I remember the name correctly, we're curious to know how, when you're including  all these extra tree species, and especially at such a scale, for example, with the second  project you described, it's going to incur a lot of management costs, and especially  
**0:27:43-0:28:02:**  with the support or the service species, as you call them, we'd be really curious to know  how you, you know, what's the economics behind that?  How do you make those species and make that extra complexity valuable economically?  
**0:28:02-0:28:14:**  That's a good question.  Well, first of all, each project is a new project.  So the one we implemented in the Amazon, it's a little bit more complex and relies more  
**0:28:14-0:28:26:**  on management of the trees, especially because we are dealing with the smallholder farmers  that they have a workforce available.  They have their family available too.  
**0:28:26-0:28:43:**  However, in this specific project, pasto vivo, which is in Matagrossa state here in Brazil,  in the Cerrado region, this project, well, since it's large scale, we cannot rely on  much of management on labor.  
**0:28:43-0:29:09:**  So what we do to plan the labor and especially the costs of the labor, we need to plan ahead,  to understand ahead for each species, which are going to be the management process.  So for instance, we know that we have the barrow tree and the barrow produces the cashew,  
**0:29:09-0:29:18:**  the nuts once a year.  Okay.  So we plan all the management involved in these specific species.  
**0:29:18-0:29:31:**  So for instance, we know that in the first year, three months after replanted, we need  to do a first pruning process.  So the first pruning process in the first year, and then every two years we do a, we  
**0:29:31-0:29:49:**  do a new formation pruning that we call right after the harvesting process.  And so we understand, okay, how much, and this is another very important aspect of the  financial modeling is that you need to do it by module.  
**0:29:49-0:30:08:**  That's why we call our systems modular because you either do it by hectare or by area, by  unit of area, or you do it by species, by tree or by plant.  So for instance, for one barrow, I know that for doing this formation pruning, I will take  
**0:30:08-0:30:19:**  30 seconds.  And so I can extrapolate that for the entire hectare.  I know that I'm going to plant, for instance, I'm not really sure.  
**0:30:19-0:30:30:**  I think 88, right?  88 trees of barrow in one hectare.  And so if I take 30 seconds to prune each one for this formation pruning, this first  
**0:30:30-0:30:46:**  year pruning, I will know how many minutes or how many hours I will take to manage the  entire hectare.  And I know how much it costs for the farmer to pay for one hour or for one day of labor  
**0:30:46-0:31:03:**  of one specialized person in pruning.  So if you're going to pay for, for instance, 100 reais, which is the currency there, 100  reais for one day of labor of eight hours, I will know how many trees this person will  
**0:31:03-0:31:10:**  prune in one day.  And then I will know how much this pruning will cost, right?  For each tree.  
**0:31:10-0:31:32:**  So the idea is that for every operation I have, and we're talking about a very large  chronogram with a very large number of operations, of course, because it is a complex system,  for each and every operation, I will know how much it will cost by tree per tree and  
**0:31:32-0:31:45:**  per hectare.  And in the end, I will know which is going to be the price, the least price that I have  to sell this product so that it is viable in the future.  
**0:31:45-0:32:00:**  So if I do all this process and I understand how much will the management of the, of the  barrow cost, and it doesn't cover the price that it's paying today in the market, I have  to change my design.  
**0:32:00-0:32:19:**  I either have to rethink about the management or I have to do it more, the operation better.  I have to improve my operation, maybe mechanize it, or I have to reduce the number of trees  per hectare, or I have to look for a better price in the market.  
**0:32:19-0:32:36:**  So the idea is not what is a viable system, a viable production system.  The selling price, the price the market will pay for you have got to cover your costs and  have got to give you some profit on it.  
**0:32:36-0:32:47:**  So you have to understand all the costs so that you know how much you're going to sell  it for.  And this is a very profound study that you have to do in each design so that you can  
**0:32:47-0:33:07:**  say, okay, this design is viable only if you sell the kilo of the nut of barrow per, for,  I don't know how many heyes, you know, so, so that you can make the, have the decision  making based on, on the financial modeling.  
**0:33:07-0:33:24:**  What's fascinating here is that on 1,500 hectares, or I can't remember exactly, you've managed  to work out that including trees 30 minutes, 30 meters apart covering this whole area is  profitable based on your current assumptions.  
**0:33:24-0:33:35:**  Is that correct?  That's more than correct.  And that's, it allows us to compliment the answer Paola has given so broadly.  
**0:33:35-0:33:58:**  In fact, when you have those other products there, it will be much more profitable.  And you're not talking about the profitability of a premium price because it's a regenerative,  organically or for any other thing or fair trade or any other stamp that you have on  
**0:33:58-0:34:09:**  your product or welfare.  But what you're talking about is that the barrow nut or the cash on that, it can compete  with the cattle in price.  
**0:34:09-0:34:17:**  So you are diversifying, having more income.  That's the idea.  So yes, the answer is yes.  
**0:34:17-0:34:40:**  I just, I just think it's important you compliment that you have environmental services, ecosystem  services being produced by such a system that will guarantee the resilience of your enterprise  because your soil is the most important asset you have.  
**0:34:40-0:34:49:**  And if you don't save, conserve, promote or keep your soil fertile, you lose income in  time.  So that's the first idea.  
**0:34:49-0:35:04:**  So you have to understand this and that's why you're applying agroforestry system.  But that's not enough, not in time.  So of course, we have embraced these challenges to ourselves as Preta Terra to make biodiversity  
**0:35:04-0:35:16:**  profitable and scalable.  And that's what we are trying to do and what you have been doing for over four years as  Preta Terra and what we are doing now in this Pasto Vivo project that is actually 1,200  
**0:35:16-0:35:33:**  hectares, this first plot, and in all the other projects.  And I'm wondering in that challenge that you've taken, what role has mechanization?  Because to explain, one of the problems we are confronted in in Massey Farm is the more  
**0:35:33-0:35:45:**  we can flexify systems, the harder it is to mechanize them in some cases.  And I'm wondering, have you invested time and research in mechanizing these systems  and innovating in that domain?  
**0:35:45-0:35:56:**  And how is that going for you?  Very good point.  So this domain that is one of the main challenges of agroforestry that is developing technology  
**0:35:56-0:36:10:**  and machinery that's not only for agriculture nor for forestry or civic culture, but for  agroforestry.  And that's what we have to develop together.  
**0:36:10-0:36:25:**  And yes, in this project, there is a lot of mechanization there because that's a large  farm and this is a group of investors that are putting the upfront money to make it to  happen.  
**0:36:25-0:36:45:**  So we can use mechanization and there was mechanization available.  But where our intelligence or our agroforestry intelligence comes in place is at the moment  where we choose the trees and the crops accordingly to what we already have in hands.  
**0:36:45-0:37:02:**  And we consider tree architecture and succession and strata to understand what would be the  best mechanization.  And so in that very example you mentioned, there is a lot of mechanization.  
**0:37:02-0:37:21:**  But if we come back to our first example in our talk today where we talked about the Amazon  example, there we have basically zero mechanization.  Let's say that you have a chainsaw sometimes or an only chainsaws, but nothing else.  
**0:37:21-0:37:27:**  So everything you're-  The earth auger.  The earth auger, this drill to make the holes.  
**0:37:27-0:37:35:**  Motorized.  Yeah.  And sometimes not always, but yeah, that was basically all the mechanization.  
**0:37:35-0:37:55:**  So depends where we are, mechanization is always good, but depending on the special  price you have or how steep is your land or how precise is the management of your system,  it's not really necessary, but definitely it's a challenge and you have to address mechanization  
**0:37:55-0:38:12:**  and prepare modular equipments, not huge equipments, but think about what we already have and can  be adapted to work properly on agroforestry.  So for you, it's going through developing specific tools or is it also that you're working  
**0:38:12-0:38:24:**  at a scale where you have such a huge amount of land that these farms can afford to have  many different machines?  Because to put things in context, one of the problems we often realize is when you're trying  
**0:38:24-0:38:37:**  to have a very diversified operation on a small scale, it's been very hard because if  you had to have all the machines that it takes to produce and process this diversity, it's  very hard to be economically viable.  
**0:38:37-0:38:50:**  But what's interesting in what you're doing is that you're working on thousands of hectares,  so maybe that problem doesn't occur so much.  Yeah, yeah, I think that we mentioned two projects that are very much, each one in the  
**0:38:50-0:39:08:**  extreme, right?  One that is without any mechanization and the other one is super mechanized.  Basically the size of the rows is defined by the size of the machines of the tractor.  
**0:39:08-0:39:24:**  The operations that we defined are defined by the implements that we have available in  the farm.  So for instance, one very important operation that we have in agroforestry is soil covering.  
**0:39:24-0:39:38:**  And especially covering in the lines, along the lines.  So this is a challenge that people are facing everywhere.  So how do you organize the soil covering and not do it by hand, right?  
**0:39:38-0:39:49:**  Just with a rake.  This is super inefficient.  And so actually in Fazenda da Toca, in Toca Farm where we used to work, we used to plant  
**0:39:49-0:40:09:**  the green manure and to mow the green manure mechanically with the tractor and then use  an implement called rotary rake.  So it's like a rake, but it rotates so that it throws all the biomass into a line.  
**0:40:09-0:40:33:**  It was very efficient, but the problem is that this is a very specific implement.  Not everybody has it available.  So in this farm, they have had available another truck with dispenser of biomass.  
**0:40:33-0:40:55:**  And this truck goes along the line and leaves the biomass along the line.  So they already had this available because they used it a long time ago when they used  to feed the animals.  
**0:40:55-0:41:02:**  So this is like a distributor of forage.  Yeah, forage wagon.  That's the name of this.  
**0:41:02-0:41:12:**  That's what we are using.  So the idea is that you need to understand your operations.  You need to understand what you're looking for, what is the results you need in the field,  
**0:41:12-0:41:26:**  and you need to understand the machineries you already have available so you will adapt.  So eventually you find a way to solve it.  But I think that Walter mentioned one of the most important point of views that we need  
**0:41:26-0:41:45:**  to have for mechanization, which is using modular machines.  So not only machines, but for instance, the EarthAlgar.  It's a very simple machine and you use it with a lot of, it's improved so much the work.  
**0:41:45-0:41:59:**  Yeah.  I mean, I think just to close this topic, not closing, but just to emphasize one point.  There are projects that you don't use any machinery, others that you use everything  
**0:41:59-0:42:12:**  that's available, like the wagon distributor.  There are places like this 100 hectares project from UBS that definitely we are having a tractor  in every plot.  
**0:42:12-0:42:29:**  We have a brush cutter to cut all the biomass, especially the grass, but also the pruning  material, all the biomass, the branches that are generated from the pruning, and that will  be necessary.  
**0:42:29-0:42:43:**  And since the 100 hectares are close by, this will be available.  So in this sense, you have this tractor to work within the coffee in the intercropping.  But there are others that we cannot.  
**0:42:43-0:42:57:**  But the main thing is try to adapt to what you already have and try to be modular.  That's what you are trying to do.  See what exists in Europe, in United States, or even China, and what you can do with this  
**0:42:57-0:43:11:**  like adapting machinery that are maybe used for another system or another kind of production,  but you can adjust it for our tropical purposes here.  So that's what you have been trying to do.  
**0:43:11-0:43:25:**  Something that I'm very curious about is, are there any machines that you use to prune  the trees?  What mechanization for tree pruning and tree management have you included in your modeling?  
**0:43:25-0:43:45:**  Well for this one, specific for tree pruning, we need to use the basics actually.  We use the scissors, we use the saw, and of course we have a motorized saw, but it's not  interesting to use actually.  
**0:43:45-0:43:58:**  You just use the motorized saw when…  And the multifunctional.  The multifunctional tool is probably what we most use with a chainsaw.  
**0:43:58-0:44:21:**  Yeah, but when you need to use a motorized saw, it's because the branch has grown too  much, like it's past the point of pruning.  So that's a very important challenge because it's not only the mechanization, so pruning,  
**0:44:21-0:44:35:**  even when you're talking about monocropping of trees, well here in Brazil we have a lot  of monocropping of trees, even for timber.  Like 20 years, you plant it now in a monocropping and you're just going to harvest it from  
**0:44:35-0:44:52:**  20 years from now, and you plan to have at least three or four pruning processes along  the cycle, along this 20 year cycle.  One of the other challenges that we come across is some things might make ecological sense.  
**0:44:52-0:45:08:**  You were talking about niches before, and so it might be tempting to fill in these niches  with certain plants that fit well in the agro-ecosystem, but that doesn't always fit the needs of  the markets, whether it's the local markets on more small-scale projects or the commodity  
**0:45:08-0:45:23:**  markets if you're working on large-scale projects.  So I'm wondering how you accommodate that tension sometimes between what makes sense  to design and ecologically and how you can actually sell that diversity afterwards.  
**0:45:23-0:45:42:**  Well I believe the main thing is to educate the consumer.  The storytelling is a very important part of the whole process, and that's what we are  doing here right now together, you guys, I mean you Etienne and Dimitri and with us,  
**0:45:42-0:45:55:**  Preta Terra and with all other people that you have interviewed so far.  That's our mission all together, because definitely we know that you have to do something for  the environment, we have to change the way you do agriculture and monoculture mainly  
**0:45:55-0:46:09:**  around the world.  So maybe you are just starting and grasping the very beginning of it, but it will be mainstream.  And we hope it will be mainstream as soon as possible.  
**0:46:09-0:46:27:**  And together with this we know that you are producing real food, food that are nutrient-dense  and that has all the benefits of being real food instead of ultra super mega processed  stuff from the industry.  
**0:46:27-0:46:43:**  And so we embrace this, we defend this, but we have to show this as well.  We have to go to the consumer, we have to tell people that what you are doing is the  right to do for the environment and for us as human beings.  
**0:46:43-0:46:57:**  And I think that's the main thing here.  We have to have a storytelling, you have to tell why you are doing agroforestry.  We love the planet, but we love to be real human beings and eat like humans.  
**0:46:57-0:47:13:**  I think that's the main purpose we have and that's why you do agroforestry, because you  like to eat.  Well I think that the most important challenge that farmers come across is the commercialization,  
**0:47:13-0:47:29:**  is to sell their products.  And especially today that, well, the farmers, they are the weak part of the chain, right?  The most explored and vulnerable part of the chain.  
**0:47:29-0:47:45:**  And especially if you only have one product, you only rely on one market.  And this is very dangerous for him.  It has a huge risk related to it.  
**0:47:45-0:48:04:**  So to diversify, for one hand it's harder, of course, because you need to know much more  about many other species and you need to access many other markets.  But in the other hand, you are much more safe, you are much more secure.  
**0:48:04-0:48:21:**  Because if you have only, for instance, soybeans to sell and you have a super crash in the  market, it lowers the price suddenly.  So while you thought you were going to sell, it costs nothing anymore, it's not worth it  
**0:48:21-0:48:33:**  for you.  So you just go bankrupt from one year to the other.  And on the other side, if you have, of course, there's no problem, you can sell commodity  
**0:48:33-0:48:51:**  by commodity prices, you can have them.  But you could also have diversified production that you sell locally, you sell to your neighbors,  you sell in a street fair or you sell for a regional supermarket, you sell for a regional  
**0:48:51-0:49:01:**  cooperative.  So you need to find in different scales, in different spheres, what are the markets that  you can access.  
**0:49:01-0:49:13:**  So if you have a global crisis, you still have the local communities buying your products.  So you're not going to die of hunger at least.  So this is the resilience.  
**0:49:13-0:49:30:**  And I understand it's hard to access this market, but it's much more safe for the farmers.  And that's what we're looking for, to give safety for the farmers, to make them understand  that diversity is their resilience, especially their economical resilience.  
**0:49:30-0:49:51:**  And I think this is the most important strategy to access markets in different scales, in  the local scale, the regional scale, in the national scale, in the international scale,  and working with other farmers in the region, trying to make a huge bulk of production to  
**0:49:51-0:50:00:**  sell it for a better price.  And farmers need to organize, of course, especially if you're a smallholder or a mediumholder  farmer.  
**0:50:00-0:50:17:**  You don't have a power, bargaining power, the market, but if you get together, you'll  be able to dictate the price much more than if you're alone, if you're by yourself.  So this is also a movement that is very important.  
**0:50:17-0:50:39:**  Farmers' organizations, so that they can understand that they can be a strong and powerful part  of the chain, not only the weakest and the most explored part.  And I think that's also the focus of our job, of our work, to give power to farmers, to  
**0:50:39-0:50:59:**  encourage them, to make them understand how powerful they are, if they organize, if they  plan ahead, and if they diversify and get more resilient.  Well, there's a lot to dig into there, and we'll have to do it on another episode or  
**0:50:59-0:51:12:**  at another time.  But definitely some very interesting strategies there for farmers to think about.  And this is something that's coming up as a theme as well in our interviews about selling  
**0:51:12-0:51:26:**  locally and the resilience that it brings about, stepping out of the commodity markets,  which is, as you said, not always easy for all farmers to do, especially when they're  already in the system and they have to transition out of it.  
**0:51:26-0:51:43:**  So that's really great.  And thank you so much for your time and for sharing your amazing story and work.  And good luck with your projects as well in both the Amazon and in Pasto Vivo and closer  
**0:51:43-0:51:48:**  to home in Sao Paulo state.  Perfect, guys.  Thank you so much.  
**0:51:48-0:52:00:**  I think we have a lot to share.  I hope that you guys understood a little bit more.  If you have any doubt, just please, anybody that is listening, just send us a message,  
**0:52:00-0:52:12:**  get into our website, our email, our Instagram.  We are super available.  We really want to be close to farmers and to spread the logics and the knowledge of  
**0:52:12-0:52:19:**  Agroforestry to everybody.  If you want to know more about what we do, we have a YouTube channel and an Instagram  channel.  
**0:52:19-0:52:28:**  There is an English version of it.  It's called the Instagram.  It's called Pretaterra.academy.  
**0:52:28-0:52:46:**  This is our English version to speak to the world.  But there is also a lot of subtitles videos in our YouTube channel.  And if you want to know about opportunities for working with us, there is our link.  
**0:52:46-0:52:56:**  It's everything Pretaterra.academy.  Okay, perfect.  We'll link everything in the show notes for anybody who's hearing this and who wants to  
**0:52:56-0:53:05:**  get involved.  I also saw that you were offering positions, you were looking for people to hire.  Is that still up and running?  
**0:53:05-0:53:09:**  Yes, pretty much.  It is.  Okay, nice.  
**0:53:09-0:53:18:**  Cool.  Yeah, just to finish up, that's a very important strength for us.  We need people.  
**0:53:18-0:53:29:**  We need good people to work with us.  And we are really looking forward to find and gather this great team because we have  so much work to do.  
**0:53:29-0:53:38:**  We have so many amazing projects, so many farmers willing to change their production  system.  We need people to work with agroforestry.  
**0:53:38-0:53:53:**  Perfect.  So if any listeners are good people and have knowledge in agroforestry, please go ahead  and get in touch with Pretaterra so that you can discover about their work opportunities  
**0:53:53-0:54:01:**  and in general their work and their adventure.  Thank you so much for listening to the episode.  We really hope you enjoyed it.  
**0:54:01-0:54:09:**  As always, all the links are below.  You can find out more about us on our website and don't hesitate to get in touch with us  on our website or through our email address.  
**0:54:09-0:54:38:**  See you next time.  