---
title: 12 Grazing Cattle In The Woods With Brett Chedzoy
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

<script src="https://cdn.podlove.org/web-player/embed.js"></script>
    <script>
        document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', function () {
          if (document.readyState === 'interactive' || document.readyState === 'complete') {
            podlovePlayer('#player', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast/12-grazing-cattle-in-the-woods-with-brett-chedzoy.json', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast/config.json').then(registerExternalEvents('player'))
          }
        })
  </script>

### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2020-12-26)  

**0:00:00-0:00:23:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:23-0:00:33:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  these challenges.  
**0:00:33-0:00:47:**  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Hello and welcome to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:00:47-0:01:05:**  We're your hosts Dimitri and Etienne and today we're interviewing Brett Chedzoy.  Brett is a forester working for the Cornell Cooperative Extension as well as the owner  and manager of Angus Glen's farm in New York state and a large ranch in Argentina.  
**0:01:05-0:01:22:**  It's been a while now that Etienne and I wanted to get into silver pasture.  We haven't had an episode focused only on this yet and today Brett gave us an amazing  interview to get started because he really provided a really good overview of the differences  
**0:01:22-0:01:36:**  between standard rotational grazing on pasture and rotational grazing in a silver pasture  system.  And he's going to talk about his experience in two very different contexts, both in Argentina  
**0:01:36-0:01:58:**  and in New York state in the USA, which provides a really, really interesting overview of silver  pasture for people that just want to get started in understanding what are the basic concepts.  So we do also go in a bit of depth, but this is really a big picture overview of some of  
**0:01:58-0:02:08:**  the key concepts.  So we hope you enjoy it.  So Brett, welcome to the podcast and yeah, maybe you could start by just telling us a  
**0:02:08-0:02:20:**  bit about how you got into silver pasture and the story of your farm.  Very good.  My experience with silver pasturing started almost 30 years ago.  
**0:02:20-0:02:45:**  I worked as a forester in central Argentina in the early 1990s and had the good fortune  to work with some large cattle ranchers who were also foresters and they were doing large  afforestation projects in the Sierra mountains of central Argentina.  
**0:02:45-0:03:09:**  So as a young forester, that was really my first exposure to silver pasturing and opened  my eyes to the beneficial aspects of grazing livestock together on forested landscapes.  You mentioned to me that you have two farms and how did you bring back that journey to  
**0:03:09-0:03:29:**  the US then?  So I worked much of the 1990s in South America and in 1994 when my wife Maria and I were  married we purchased our own ranch in the Sierra mountains in Argentina.  
**0:03:29-0:03:48:**  Maria's family are farmers in central Argentina and I really fell in love with that whole  region.  So in 2002 we moved back to where I grew up in central New York in the Watkins Glen area  
**0:03:48-0:04:08:**  which is part of New York's Finger Lakes region.  And our family farm had been a dairy up until the early 1980s but much of the time that  I was gone it sat being used by another farm that was leasing the tillable acreage on the  
**0:04:08-0:04:24:**  farm.  When we settled back here we wanted to do something that would be enjoyable and profitable  and grazing livestock seemed to be the best fit for our farm.  
**0:04:24-0:04:34:**  Could you tell us a bit about your local context both in terms of your climate and also your  markets for your produce?  Sure.  
**0:04:34-0:04:54:**  So the farms both here in New York and in Argentina are, they have obviously some similarities  but some big differences as well.  Interestingly though it rains about the same amount at both of the farms.  
**0:04:54-0:05:09:**  So both here in New York and in Argentina we get about 40 inches of rainfall a year.  But that rainfall in Argentina is more seasonal in nature and it comes in very heavy rain  storms typically.  
**0:05:09-0:05:32:**  So one of the big benefits of the civil pasturing in Argentina is that the trees really help  to buffer the heavy rainfall events and reduce the amount of runoff and flash flooding and  allow more of that precious moisture to infiltrate into the soil.  
**0:05:32-0:05:59:**  We raise black Angus cattle at both of the farms and in Argentina it's much more of a  commodity market where we market our yearling animals into the, usually it's private sales  to other farm operations that will then finish those animals as grass-fed beef.  
**0:05:59-0:06:21:**  Here in New York we also sell most of our yearlings to other finishing farms and so  I guess the cattle would look very similar in both locations but the landscape and the  types of trees growing on the two different farms are quite different.  
**0:06:21-0:06:34:**  And so yourself, you're kind of traveling frequently between Argentina and New York  State?  I don't travel as frequently as I would like to to Argentina.  
**0:06:34-0:06:47:**  We try to make it there once a year.  Our children are now in college or beyond so they have more flexibility to spend time  there than we do.  
**0:06:47-0:07:08:**  We hope to start spending about half of our year in Argentina here and maybe another five  years when my wife and I are semi-retired.  So Brett, what we wanted to understand with you today is already have an overview of silvopasture,  
**0:07:08-0:07:22:**  some of its opportunities and challenges, and really understand the interaction between  the different elements.  By that I mean between the forestry aspect and also the animal aspect.  
**0:07:22-0:07:42:**  And if that's okay with you, maybe we can start by looking at the impact that animals  have on the forest when you make the decision to include them in a forest.  You know, I know that sometimes this has bad reputation that people think that including  
**0:07:42-0:07:58:**  animals will actually damage the forest.  Could you give us a bit more information on that aspect?  The whole key behind silvopasturing is that we are grazing the animals in a way that doesn't  
**0:07:58-0:08:14:**  cause short-term or long-term harm to the trees or any of the other resources like the  soil.  And intensive rotational grazing is really a fundamental part of any successful silvopasturing  
**0:08:14-0:08:40:**  system and that's what allows us to minimize or completely eliminate any of the negative  impacts that were traditionally associated with woodland grazing.  Here in the northeastern United States, such as New York, we had a long history of teaching  
**0:08:40-0:08:57:**  farmers to not graze their livestock in wooded areas and that was because our small family  dairy farms and livestock farms were often treating their farm woodlots as sacrifice  paddocks on the farm.  
**0:08:57-0:09:22:**  And when you allow livestock, especially heavy livestock like cattle, to access natural woodlands  for weeks or months at a time, year after year after year, in other words there's really  no rotation or period of rest and recovery, over time that will start to negatively affect  
**0:09:22-0:09:38:**  the trees.  And here in upstate New York we have the most viable hardwood forest in the world.  We grow walnut and cherry and maple and ash and oak, woods that are widely exported to  
**0:09:38-0:09:58:**  the rest of the world.  So if we cause damage to these high-value trees or damage their root system or compact  the soil and cause decline in the trees' health and quality, that can have some very significant  
**0:09:58-0:10:13:**  economic impacts.  It's a little different than where silvopasturing is widely practiced in other parts of the  United States, such as the southeastern or western parts of the United States or where  
**0:10:13-0:10:41:**  our ranch is in central Argentina, those are primarily conifer forests.  And conifers are not only lower in value on a per-tree or per-ton basis, so there's still  economic loss, but it may not be as significant as when you have a loss of a high-value, say,  
**0:10:41-0:11:00:**  oak tree that might be worth hundreds of dollars versus a pine tree that might be worth only  a few dollars.  Pines, however, are also on the higher range in terms of resistance to some of the potential  
**0:11:00-0:11:17:**  impacts from livestock grazing.  They have deep root systems and are often associated with soils and sites where compaction  may be an issue or lower fertility may be an issue.  
**0:11:17-0:11:36:**  But the message I'd like to share is that silvopasturing can be done in any forest type  with any kind of trees.  It's just a matter of managing the grazing in a way that doesn't cause a long-term decline  
**0:11:36-0:11:50:**  in the value and health and vigor of those trees.  And you just mentioned that coniferous trees are more resistant to compaction.  How does that occur?  
**0:11:50-0:12:05:**  Is it just in general coniferous trees are more resistant and deciduous trees are less?  Or could you give us an idea of the different resistance of different trees in silvopasture  systems?  
**0:12:05-0:12:25:**  If you look where these different tree species and tree types such as hardwoods versus conifers  naturally occur, you start to see a pattern.  And there are some tree species, and I'll talk about the tree species that I know here  
**0:12:25-0:12:40:**  in New York.  So we often associate species like maple and birch and ash with our best quality fertile  sites.  
**0:12:40-0:12:58:**  Then on the lower quality sites where you have more rock, maybe lower fertility, maybe  more shallow soil, that's where you start to see other hardwood species like the oaks  dominate.  
**0:12:58-0:13:20:**  But also we have some native pine species that also thrive in those kinds of sites.  And so when you're thinking about what trees to promote in your silvopasture, you first  have to understand what the inherent site quality is of that silvopasture and work with  
**0:13:20-0:13:35:**  species that seem to be better suited for that given site.  Diversity is good.  I like to maintain as many different species of trees as possible in our silvopasture,  
**0:13:35-0:13:56:**  but I want to favor trees that seem to be best suited for any given portion of our silvopasture.  Nice, that's fascinating.  Just to go one step back on the compaction that you talked about, or let's say the damage  
**0:13:56-0:14:07:**  of the animals in the trees, what are the key things to watch out for?  You mentioned compaction, but is that the main one, the most important one, or are there  others as well?  
**0:14:07-0:14:37:**  The issues that can be associated with overgrazing or poorly managed grazing in silvopasture  areas would include soil compaction, physical damage to the trees, and in some cases, animals  eating young trees that are part of the regeneration system.  
**0:14:37-0:14:58:**  However, regeneration is something that foresters, we think of regeneration as an event in the  life cycle of a forest.  So we often don't worry about animals browsing or eating young trees if we're still decades  
**0:14:58-0:15:21:**  away from needing to recruit new young trees to make the next generation of forest.  That's a silvicultural principle that I don't really want to go into today, but compaction  and physical damage such as girdling trees or chewing the bark off trees or damaging  
**0:15:21-0:15:38:**  the shallow feeder roots on trees, those are all avoidable issues through proper grazing  management.  And if you think about a rotational grazing system where animals are constantly on the  
**0:15:38-0:15:56:**  move and where we have the ability to put animals in the right spot at the right time,  there's really no reason why we should see compaction or damage to the trees in our silvopasture  system.  
**0:15:56-0:16:21:**  Compaction is really going to be a reflection of having animals there far too long.  And in the rotational grazing that we do with silvopasture management, the animals are being  moved frequently, in some cases daily, maybe even multiple times a day, but probably at  
**0:16:21-0:16:40:**  least once a week.  And that's also what really eliminates the issue of animals damaging trees because when  we leave animals too long in any given spot, bored and restless animals become destructive  
**0:16:40-0:16:59:**  animals.  So if animals are being continuously moved to fresh pasture and fresh forages and browse,  they will do what they should be doing, which is grazing and eating.  
**0:16:59-0:17:14:**  They won't be looking to go and start trying to chew the bark off of our trees because  they just were bored.  And humans behave the same way.  
**0:17:14-0:17:27:**  When we're bored, we start crumpling up papers or chewing bark trees as well.  It happens to me sometimes.  Yeah that's great.  
**0:17:27-0:17:43:**  So it's very similar to intensive rotational grazing on pasture.  And I'd be curious to know more about how it differentiates itself to pasture intensive  rotational grazing.  
**0:17:43-0:18:02:**  So again, silvopasturing and intensive rotational grazing are, in my opinion, synonymous.  We can't really be talking about silvopasturing without talking about intensively managed  rotational grazing.  
**0:18:02-0:18:26:**  And it's interesting you ask how they might differ.  I think the one area where they might differ is here in New York, for example, and it's  not the same all across the world, but we definitely have wet rainy seasons where we  
**0:18:26-0:18:46:**  can have saturated soil conditions.  And typically what we do in our treeless pastures is we speed up the rotation.  When the soil conditions are really wet, because we don't want to leave the animals there  
**0:18:46-0:19:02:**  too long where they're starting to compact the soil and really puncture into the soil  surface.  In silvopastures, on the other hand, where we have to also be thinking about the fine  
**0:19:02-0:19:29:**  tree roots that won't recover as quickly and as well as grass roots, we may want to just  simply keep animals out of our silvopastures when the ground conditions are really poor.  In some situations we don't have a choice, but we like to save our silvopastures for periods  
**0:19:29-0:19:54:**  of the grazing season when the ground conditions are quite dry and firm, versus like early  spring or late fall where the ground conditions are going to be saturated and soft.  So you would say that the tree or the silvopasture system is more sensitive than a simple pasture  
**0:19:54-0:20:11:**  system in general?  I think a silvopasture system has, I don't believe saying that it's more sensitive is  quite the way I would phrase it, because I really think silvopastures in many ways are  
**0:20:11-0:20:26:**  more resilient and robust than treeless pastures.  But there are, we have to always be thinking about how the grazing is going to affect the  trees.  
**0:20:26-0:20:41:**  We have to go in there and graze in less than ideal conditions when the ground is soft and  the animals may be punching things up a little bit and perhaps damaging the shallow feeder  roots of the trees.  
**0:20:41-0:21:09:**  Trees can recover fine from a short term or short lived or an acute stress like that.  But if we do it frequently or continuously, the trees are very long lived and resilient  organisms so we might really beat up on our trees for years and years, even decades before  
**0:21:09-0:21:19:**  we see the symptoms of that.  But once we see that we pushed it too far and that we really did damage, lasting damage  to our trees, we can't reverse that.  
**0:21:19-0:21:47:**  So in an open pasture or a treeless pasture, if we really beat up on our grass and our  forbs, we can usually undo that harm that we caused by letting it rest longer or reseeding  it or possibly fertilizing it or delaying the next time the animals graze it.  
**0:21:47-0:22:02:**  But if we start to see decline in the health of our trees that are part of our civil pastures,  it's too late.  The damage is done and there really is no practical fix to that.  
**0:22:02-0:22:17:**  And when you think about the decades, many decades it might take to establish new trees  in there, that's a mistake that you have to live with for a long time.  That's a very costly mistake.  
**0:22:17-0:22:35:**  But you mentioned now that you, in your opinion, the civil pasture system is more resilient  than a pastured system and I'd love to know a bit more about that.  The reason I say that I believe civil pastures are in many ways more resilient than treeless  
**0:22:35-0:22:58:**  pastures is that, well, I'll point out some examples that come to mind in the context  of our farms here in New York and in Argentina.  The trees certainly add plant diversity to the grazing system and along with that plant  
**0:22:58-0:23:23:**  diversity comes soil microbial diversity.  We also have these large plants called trees that might handle weather extremes such as  droughts better than our small plants like the grasses and forbs.  
**0:23:23-0:24:00:**  But I feel that civil pastures have a high degree of, I think of it as biomimicry.  These are grazing systems that simulate natural savanna-like ecosystems and they don't require  a lot of energy input to maintain trees naturally want to grow in this part of the world.  
**0:24:00-0:24:21:**  In many areas where we graze, forest is just part of the natural vegetative landscape.  So instead of spending a lot of energy trying to keep the woody plants from growing back  into our pastures, I think of civil pasturing as a way of just working with those woody  
**0:24:21-0:24:38:**  plants that want to naturally occur in our pastures.  BRET, I'm curious to understand, obviously you need some flexibility to be able to bring  the animals in at some point and then exclude them from a silver pasture at other points.  
**0:24:38-0:24:57:**  So how much out of your total acreage, how much do you have of kind of straight pasture  and how much do you have in silver pasture?  So on our farm here in New York, our farm is about half silver pasture and half open  
**0:24:57-0:25:15:**  pasture.  We're grazing a total of almost 500 acres and so half of that is silver pasture.  And our long term goal though is to have the entire 500 acres look like silver pasture.  
**0:25:15-0:25:40:**  Some of it is going to be plantation silver pasture where we planted the trees into pasture  and other portions of it is where we've taken a naturally existing woods or forest and thinned  it out and managed it in a way that we could grow forages underneath it as well.  
**0:25:40-0:26:04:**  And I think that those two directions of silver pasturing exist all across the world.  By contrast though, where our ranch is in Argentina, even though that's a high rainfall  area of receiving about 1000 millimeters of rain a year, the Argentines like to joke that  
**0:26:04-0:26:26:**  God gave them great soil and climate and moisture but then forgot to put the trees there.  So they almost saw it as like their duty to finish the job and incorporate large afforestations  into these natural rangelands.  
**0:26:26-0:26:43:**  I think of it as a real win-win situation there.  It certainly changed the appearance of the landscape to see forest where there really  wasn't forest before but it's been so beneficial both from an environmental standpoint and  
**0:26:43-0:27:00:**  also a social and economic development standpoint.  Actually I was curious, it's really interesting what you're telling us, but I'm wondering  you don't see the need to then keep some part of your farm as a straight pasture.  
**0:27:00-0:27:18:**  I'm thinking of some objections sometimes, I remember hearing some objections to silver  pasture in the sense that having trees makes it harder to cut hay and to dry it homogeneously.  And I'm just wondering if you would see any point in keeping full pasture to have that  
**0:27:18-0:27:37:**  diversity of ecosystems and use it for managing the cattle.  I feel that there's always good reasons and benefits to keeping a little bit of everything  on a farm ecosystem.  
**0:27:37-0:27:55:**  And you're right in that if we were trying to produce hay in the same silver pasture  areas the trees would be a bit of an impediment.  Much of our hay production to feed our animals in the wintertime is done on leased land and  
**0:27:55-0:28:17:**  we just happen to lease that land from neighbors that have no interest in alley cropping or  silver pasturing or putting any trees into their hay fields and that's fine with us.  But here in upstate New York we really farm in the forest.  
**0:28:17-0:28:38:**  So we have trees, two-thirds of New York State is covered by forest land so our agricultural  land is really the minority of the landscape.  But in terms of the grazing, which is the focus of what we do on both of our farms,  
**0:28:38-0:29:03:**  we feel that the silver pastures give us the greatest good for every acre of land versus  managing it as simply as woods or as treeless pasture.  And if we manage our silver pastures well I feel that we can still be getting largely  
**0:29:03-0:29:32:**  the same benefits in terms of plant diversity and richness and wildlife habitat but we're  in essence layering multiple beneficial production systems on top of each other.  So we have a productive forest growing together with a productive pasture and then the animals  
**0:29:32-0:29:55:**  are able to utilize both the trees and the forages, primarily the forages, but our animals  do browse in our silver pasture systems as well.  The animals benefit even more so though from the trees just from the shelter and the shade  
**0:29:55-0:30:14:**  that they get.  And if you look at any grazing animal, it doesn't matter if it's black cattle like ours  or white sheep or goats, any time it's much above 70 degrees Fahrenheit or about 22 degrees  
**0:30:14-0:30:32:**  Celsius the animals are seeking out shade.  So just watch what your animals do in warmer weather and you quickly realize that silver  pastures are providing those animals with what they really want which is to get out  
**0:30:32-0:30:46:**  of the hot sun and be comfortable.  Well actually this is the next set of questions is really trying to understand the benefits  from the perspective of the animals but before we go there I kind of wanted to conclude this  
**0:30:46-0:31:07:**  section on trees and the sections where you are planting trees into pasture, what kind  of spacing are you using?  We've planted extensively on both farms here in New York and in central Argentina and the  
**0:31:07-0:31:26:**  spacing and the design of the planting really depends on the species that you're planting  but also on the site quality and also thinking about the eventual uses or markets for the  trees that you're planting.  
**0:31:26-0:31:47:**  To give you an example, here in New York we typically planted a much tighter spacing,  probably something less than 3 by 3 meters on average and that's because we feel that  we will have the opportunity to go in and harvest those trees at a fairly young age  
**0:31:47-0:32:04:**  or small size to start thinning out these young plantations and planting more trees  initially per hectare gives us more options in terms of nurturing and selecting and leaving  the best trees.  
**0:32:04-0:32:23:**  On our ranch in Argentina, 4 by 4 meter spacing is about the minimum spacing that we would  use now and that's for two reasons primarily.  One is that there are no markets that allow us to go in and profitably thin out young  
**0:32:23-0:32:39:**  plantations so we want to delay that thinning as long as possible in hopes that we can do  it when we can at least break even by selling the trees that are being initially thinned  out.  
**0:32:39-0:32:51:**  With thinning, we use the term thinning in forestry the same as a gardener would use  the term weeding.  So when I say thinning, I'm talking about really weeding out the young forest that we've  
**0:32:51-0:33:17:**  created and the other reason though that we have a fairly wide spacing when we're planting  these mostly pine mixtures in central Argentina is because pine is a sun loving tree species  and it really the growth of it can slow down very quickly if it starts to get too crowded  
**0:33:17-0:33:39:**  amongst itself so we want to plant it at a nice wide spacing.  The pine species that we're using there are ones that come largely from the southeastern  United States like slash and loblolly pine, pinus ilioti and pinus taeda and those trees  
**0:33:39-0:33:58:**  don't need a lot of competition or crowding to grow nice and straight and prune their  lower branches naturally whereas many hardwood species like oak for example or walnut that  you would commonly see in silvopasture plantings if we don't plant them with enough density  
**0:33:58-0:34:15:**  they want to grow like a big bushy tree and we would have to invest a lot of time and  money into correctively pruning those trees.  And that's actually one of my questions is what kind of impact can you expect on tree  
**0:34:15-0:34:32:**  growth and quality when you include animals in the management of your forest and by that  I mean both by thinning an existing woods and including in forestry practices and also  when you're planting out trees in silvopasture systems in the pasture.  
**0:34:32-0:34:58:**  The livestock play a essential role in both our New York and our Argentine silvopastures  in Argentina the greatest risk to our trees there is fire in the winter time.  Even though we get a thousand millimeters of rain that rain comes from spring through  
**0:34:58-0:35:25:**  fall and then we have a very notable dry period in the winter and fire is the constant challenge  and if it wasn't for the grazing animals that go in there and eat a lot of the grass and  control the fuel loads the fire risk would be much greater.  
**0:35:25-0:35:48:**  Here in New York our biggest challenge are the non-native so-called invasive species  and every time there's a disturbance in our woods or our silvopasture whether it's a human  caused disturbance like we went in there and thinned trees out or weeded trees out or it's  
**0:35:48-0:36:09:**  a naturally occurring disturbance such as a windstorm blew some of the trees down or  a non-native pest like currently we're losing all of our ash trees in this area because  of a non-native pest called emerald ash borer but anytime there's this disturbance and more  
**0:36:09-0:36:33:**  sunlight reaches the ground level plants start to grow and it's not just grasses and clover  and baby oak trees it's grasses and clover and lots of stuff that we really don't want  overrunning the landscape like multiflora rose or European buckthorn is another very  
**0:36:33-0:37:00:**  common problematic species here but we have native species as well that can just overtake  an area if not managed so the livestock in both of those cases though is really our workforce  that is helping us manage that vegetation to have a healthier more productive and lower  
**0:37:00-0:37:18:**  risk system than if the animals were not there.  I can imagine as well that the activation of the nutrient cycles right by with the manure  that there is that also accelerating somehow?  
**0:37:18-0:37:50:**  That's an interesting question I believe that there is in a well-managed silvopasture there's  going to be a symbiosis between the animals the forages in the trees an area that's probably  very understudied is this nutrient cycling between the livestock and the plants any grazing  
**0:37:50-0:38:21:**  animal needs three crucial things to survive they need food they need water and they need  minerals and I've read that a good portion of the minerals that are being given to livestock  are passed through the livestock and so there's no doubt that there's going to be some importing  
**0:38:21-0:38:43:**  of minerals and nutrients just through that grazing to what extent those minerals and  nutrients actually benefit the trees I'm not aware of any studies at least not here in  New York or Argentina where they've looked at that but I think over time you're going  
**0:38:43-0:39:05:**  to see an increase in soil health so I think of silvopasturing as a very regenerative system  and that's certainly the case for us in Argentina where the trees are providing a huge amount  of organic matter input to the soils in a relatively short period of time and that organic  
**0:39:05-0:39:29:**  matter is a big part of what helps increase the capacity for the soil to retain that moisture  that we get in those hard summer storms and allow it to infiltrate.  Okay very interesting there's so many things that we would love to go in more depth about  
**0:39:29-0:39:46:**  on basically every sentence that you say and that's not really possible because it would  just be a 25-hour podcast but we wanted to go back to what Etienne had mentioned earlier  on which is the or to move on to what Etienne had mentioned which is looking more about  
**0:39:46-0:40:02:**  you know how the animals behave and looking more the animal aspects inside the silvopasture  system and you started talking about it a bit when you mentioned you know the behavior  of the animals when they are stressed for example and they attack the they eat the bark  
**0:40:02-0:40:21:**  of the trees creating damage so in a more general way how do cattle how does cattle  behavior change when it's put inside a silvopasture system as compared to a simple a pasture system  for example?  
**0:40:21-0:40:40:**  I'm trying to think of animal behavior is really that much different in a open pasture  versus a silvopasture I think the first thing you notice though is that animals seek out  the plants that appeal to them and it may not be really a conscious effort to seek out  
**0:40:40-0:41:03:**  those plants grazing animals have strong sensory feedback systems so often when we move our  animals into a fresh silvopasture area which is pretty much every day on the farm here  in New York the first five to ten minutes many of the animals spend browsing woody plants  
**0:41:03-0:41:24:**  it might be low hanging tree branches it might be shrubs it might be rose bush but it might  be young tree seedlings that are trying to come up but there's something in that woody  browse that those animals are craving I don't know what it is I don't think the animals  
**0:41:24-0:41:46:**  know what it is but it's probably minerals and nutrients that are less available in the  grass and forbs and then after maybe a few minutes of that then the animals turn their  attention towards grazing the other plants the herbaceous plants or the forage plants  
**0:41:46-0:42:13:**  and they often then go back after a while and eat a little bit more browse so the animals  have this very strong innate ability to seek out whatever is best for their needs and that's  something that silvopastures offer very well is just that wider variety of plants that  
**0:42:13-0:42:34:**  they can choose and select from another thing though that we see in our silvopastures in  both ends of the world is that the animals they have fairly uniform shade it's ideally  light shade because we still need enough dappled sunlight or filtered sunlight reaching the  
**0:42:34-0:42:58:**  ground to productively grow forage plants but the animals are comfortable grazing throughout  the entire pasture area because it's shaded throughout whereas when we turn the animals  into one of our pastures that does not have trees or only has trees along the edge they'll  
**0:42:58-0:43:19:**  eat for a little while but then they're either clumping together trying to seek some protection  from each other for flies or they're trying to seek out the little bit of shade that there  might be on the edge of the pasture so you get less clumping together of the animals  
**0:43:19-0:43:41:**  or congregation of the animals in silvopasture areas.  That's really interesting and do you you mentioned so we would call it tree fodder as we usually  hear about it when they're eating from when they're browsing from the perennial plants  
**0:43:41-0:43:57:**  that are around do you have techniques to make those more available for example you  know in the in the peak of the summer when the grasses are a bit less vigorous do you  come in and do you do you manage the forest in a way to make available some of the leaves  
**0:43:57-0:44:18:**  of the of the various trees there for example?  Fodder systems are prevalent throughout the entire grazing world we do not use much on  either of our silvopasturing operations in New York or Argentina for the simple reason  
**0:44:18-0:44:42:**  that we don't have a lot of extra time so I think fodder I think of fodder systems is  fairly management intensive fairly time intensive because you have to be out there pruning trees  or managing the trees for that fodder and we let the animals do the work for themselves  
**0:44:42-0:45:06:**  so now one exception to that was this past summer we had a historic drought here in New  York we received only about a quarter of the normal rainfall from late spring till early  fall that we would normally receive and as a result of that our pastures were much less  
**0:45:06-0:45:25:**  productive than normal so towards the end of the summer where the pasture was really  struggling to keep up with the rotation we decided that we were going to cut a bunch  of the small trees trees that we had intended to gradually thin out of our silvopastures  
**0:45:25-0:45:45:**  anyhow the last major thinning that we did in our silvopastures was in 2015 so five years  ago and in that five year period the trees continued to grow and the sunlight levels  at the ground level where we needed that sunlight to grow forage had continued to diminish so  
**0:45:45-0:46:06:**  it was we were due to do another thinning in our silvopastures and the drought became  the perfect opportunity to do that thinning because we went out every day and spent an  hour cutting small trees but when I say small trees I'm not talking about nice young trees  
**0:46:06-0:46:32:**  with high potential for the future I'm talking about the suppressed trees the slow growing  trees the defective trees the trees that needed to be called out and by cutting maybe somewhere  between 50 and 150 of these small trees every day it not only supplemented the cattle with  
**0:46:32-0:46:53:**  something green and nutritious but it also gave them something to do and help take the  pressure off the other forage plants.  Okay and just to clarify outside of this context the plants that they're browsing on are just  
**0:46:53-0:47:11:**  the brush and the young seedlings that are the regrowth that's low and that's available  right?  No, no not so what they're normally grazing on the silvopasture would be herbaceous plants  
**0:47:11-0:47:40:**  so grasses and forbs there are woody plants scattered and beyond the trees there are woody  plants scattered throughout our silvopasture some are shrubs some are invasive shrubs some  are seedlings or saplings that's to say young trees but the majority of the forage base  
**0:47:40-0:47:59:**  is in the form of herbaceous plants.  And talking about these herbaceous plants I was wondering how do they differ from the  ones in open pasture because I assume you've been able to observe differences both in terms  
**0:47:59-0:48:17:**  of the types of forages that develop in the shade and maybe in terms of quantity and quality  as well?  That's a good observation and you know the tricky part of doing this when I'm talking about  
**0:48:17-0:48:41:**  two really different types of silvopasture and two really different parts of the world  is that you get a different answer for both of our farms.  So what we observe growing in our silvopastures here in New York is similar to what we would  
**0:48:41-0:48:58:**  see in the treeless pastures but most of our forage plants here in New York are what we  call cool season forages.  They grow very well in May and September that's to say late spring and early fall that's where  
**0:48:58-0:49:17:**  almost all the annual growth of those plants occur.  So these same plants grow very little if at all during the hot summer period.  Under the silvopastures we see the same cool season forages but they tend to behave a little  
**0:49:17-0:49:38:**  differently in that they often start growing about the same time in the spring but they  continue growing later into the early summer and I would attribute that to it just simply  being cooler, moister, shadier in the silvopastures.  
**0:49:38-0:49:53:**  The studies that have been done in this part of the world show that the ground temperatures  average about 10 to 15 degrees Fahrenheit cooler at the soil surface in a silvopasture  versus in a treeless pasture.  
**0:49:53-0:50:15:**  That makes sense, likewise those same cool season forages will often start to grow back  a little bit earlier in the summer as long as they haven't run out of moisture.  So I think we're extending both the spring and the fall growth period for our cool season  
**0:50:15-0:50:43:**  forages by probably two to three weeks in both of those periods in our silvopastures  and that is what offsets possibly slightly lower overall growth of those same forages  simply because they're growing in less sunlight.  
**0:50:43-0:51:06:**  However many cool season forages grow better in light shade than they do in full sun.  So in Argentina in our silvopastures there what we've noticed over the years is a transition  from what I call wire grasses or bunch grasses and these are small very coarse high silica  
**0:51:06-0:51:35:**  type grasses that can tolerate the hot exposed conditions in soil that has very low organic  matter and under the pine silvopastures so the grasses and forbs that start to dominate  our broad season grasses and some are cool season grasses, others are just broadleaf  
**0:51:35-0:51:46:**  warm season grasses.  Many of the warm season grasses though tend to have a lower degree of shade tolerance  than cool season grasses.  
**0:51:46-0:52:04:**  I'm wondering does the increase in terms of growth later in the season when they're benefiting  from shade and cool is that offset by the fact that they might start growing slower  at the beginning of the season for the exact same reasons that the soil might take a longer  
**0:52:04-0:52:21:**  time to warm up?  I don't think the spring growth period starts any later in our silvopastures and that's  because these grasses are normally starting to grow well before the tree leaves come out  
**0:52:21-0:52:46:**  so I really don't think that the trees are keeping the soil that much cooler in the early  to mid spring period when the forage plants are starting to wake up.  It's not really until they leaf out that they're having any appreciable effect on the soil  
**0:52:46-0:53:03:**  temperature.  I have not closely compared the green up period between the silvopastures and the open pastures  but I would say that they're just about the same.  
**0:53:03-0:53:25:**  If there's any difference though it would be mostly just because you might encounter  some plants growing in the silvopastures that green up early, plants that might not be as  prevalent out in the open pastures.  
**0:53:25-0:53:45:**  There's largely an overlap in the grass and forb species but there are some that seem  to be more common in the silvopastures.  I wanted to know if you had maybe measured Brix levels in the forages for similar plants  
**0:53:45-0:53:59:**  that are underneath the trees, yes, underneath the pasture.  I would be curious to know if there's like a difference in their sugar content for example  because from what I understand we don't graze animals on our farm but this is something  
**0:53:59-0:54:17:**  that graziers measure quite often to measure the quality of their pasture.  So I'm not aware of anybody who has compared Brix levels from silvopasture forages to open  pasture forages.  
**0:54:17-0:54:39:**  I think you're right in that you might see slightly lower Brix levels in the light shade  of silvopastures but I've never read or heard anybody who has taken the time to compare.  We do not measure the Brix levels in our forages because we just do the best management possible  
**0:54:39-0:54:52:**  and it is what it is.  So likewise we don't measure or we don't test our hay quality.  We just go out and try to harvest and grow the best hay that we can to feed our cattle  
**0:54:52-0:55:04:**  in the winter and testing it would give us useful information but it isn't going to change  the quality of our hay.  I was going to ask a question a bit along the same lines but you might not have the  
**0:55:04-0:55:18:**  answer and that's totally okay.  But I remember reading that some crops had a higher protein level when they were growing  in partial shade and I'm wondering if some studies have come out showing that quality  
**0:55:18-0:55:38:**  is higher in terms of protein for forages growing in partial shade.  Yeah, so forage quality is not my area of expertise but you're right in that light shade  can boost crude protein levels in some forage plants.  
**0:55:38-0:56:12:**  I don't believe it's a uniform reaction amongst all forage plants but the other way that shade  can affect forage quality is that heat stress can lignify many forage plants.  So I've heard experts on forage quality say that there's less lignification and greater  
**0:56:12-0:56:41:**  digestibility in forages that are growing in lightly shaded silvopastures but I have  no data or personal experience of my own to really say that that's true.  We were curious to find out how basically what are the skills and also the type of equipment  
**0:56:41-0:57:07:**  that a farmer or rancher needs in order to shift from grazing animals on pasture to grazing  animals in a silvopasture system or in a wood.  So the grazing skills are the most important and I would expect any livestock farmer to  
**0:57:07-0:57:33:**  be able to develop the necessary grazing skills to manage their silvopastures well.  The forestry skills and knowledge, that's something that it's useful to have a basic  understanding of how trees grow and forestry principles but in many areas you can find  
**0:57:33-0:57:53:**  forestry experts, we call them consulting foresters and that's what they do.  They're there to help you figure out how to achieve your objectives with regards to your  woods.  
**0:57:53-0:58:21:**  So when we think of silvopasturing as taking an existing plantation or natural existing  woods and managing it in a way or thinning out trees to develop it into a productive  silvopasture, that could be a very daunting task if you don't feel comfortable with woodlot  
**0:58:21-0:58:40:**  management or forest management.  In that case I would seek out a local expert or professional and utilize the expertise  of that forester to get that part of the project done and done well.  
**0:58:40-0:59:02:**  Okay, and are there different types of equipment that we need to use?  For example, I'm thinking of moving fencing in rotational grazing, that's one of the big  challenges on pasture and I can just imagine it being even more challenging in a forest  
**0:59:02-0:59:20:**  context.  So, setting up and moving fencing in an open pasture is challenging enough and it's even  more so in silvopastures, not only because of the more limited access but anybody who  
**0:59:20-0:59:41:**  uses portable fencing like Electronet realizes that Electronet likes to catch on or snag  on every little tree and branch and stump.  So Electronet is an awesome tool for grazing many livestock species, especially the more  
**0:59:41-1:00:00:**  difficult to control species like pigs or goats or sheep.  And all livestock species can be very useful in silvopastures but one of the reasons that  we raise primarily cattle in our silvopastures is that they're very easy to contain or keep  
**1:00:00-1:00:19:**  fenced in with single strands of electrified fence.  If we were going to go back to raising sheep and goats, we used to raise a lot of sheep  and goats on our farm or expand our pig production, we would probably be using Electronet fencing  
**1:00:19-1:00:38:**  and Electronet, if I had to put up Electronet in my silvopastures, I would have dedicated  alleyways or trails where we set that fence up because I'm not going to try to set up  Electronet in a brushy, woody silvopasture.  
**1:00:38-1:00:57:**  Brett, could you give us a bit of a comparison between a normal rotational grazing in pasture  and in silvopasture, especially on the elements of stocking density and the timing of moving  them around?  
**1:00:57-1:01:12:**  In both of our silvopastures and open pastures, we try to periodically graze at a very high  density and that might only be during one rotation or part of a rotation every grazing  season.  
**1:01:12-1:01:32:**  And the reason that we do so goes back to what I was saying earlier about using livestock  impact as your main tool to manage the vegetation in a silvopasture area.  If I don't graze at a high enough density in my open pastures and they become very weedy  
**1:01:32-1:01:51:**  or we start to see an encroachment of woody plants, we can go out there with machinery  or chemicals or some other method and correct that.  It's much more difficult to do so in silvopastures because we can't go out there and just readily  
**1:01:51-1:02:08:**  mow or reseed.  But achieving high density in silvopastures is more challenging than in open pastures  because animals tend to avoid all the little objects that are in the way, the trees, the  
**1:02:08-1:02:26:**  stumps, the tree branches, the shrubs.  So in order to get about the same impact in a treeless pasture versus a silvopasture,  you would actually have to have a much higher density.  
**1:02:26-1:02:47:**  And consequently, here in New York we've come to accept that we often cannot get a high  enough density to control the really noxious and problematic plants in our silvopastures  during the growing portion of the year, the green portion of the year.  
**1:02:47-1:03:05:**  So what we try to do there is utilize our rotational bale grazing in the winter to target  those undesirable plants.  And a very common example on our farm are the invasive blackberries and the multiflora  
**1:03:05-1:03:20:**  rose.  So we like to put round bales in the center of those patches of soft brush.  And a friend of mine, another forester, an agroforester by the name of Joe Orrifici calls  
**1:03:20-1:03:34:**  them bale bombs.  And I think that's a great image where you're putting this round bale that then draws maybe  up to a couple dozen hungry cows to stand around it for hours at a time devouring that  
**1:03:34-1:03:54:**  400 kilo round bale.  And you're creating well over a million pounds per acre of density for that period of time,  which is much higher than we can achieve even through the best intensive rotational grazing  
**1:03:54-1:04:09:**  in the summertime.  So it's just a way of using something that we had to be doing anyhow, which is feeding  hay to our cows during the four months of winter that we have to feed hay and doing  
**1:04:09-1:04:27:**  it in a way that it helps improve our silvopastures.  The other nice thing about feeding the hay in our silvopastures when the ground is frozen,  we try to stay out of there if things are soft and muddy, is that every place where  
**1:04:27-1:04:49:**  we feed a bale of hay, we're importing nutrients and seed and organic matter.  And that in turn helps create a new patch of nice lush grass.  And that grass will also help keep the undesirable woody plants from coming back in in that spot.  
**1:04:49-1:05:11:**  So to give you a personal illustration from the farm in New York, we across the 500 acres,  we have about 130 permanent paddocks.  And so if the animals are moving daily, that's on paper about a four month rest and recovery  
**1:05:11-1:05:27:**  period.  So the animals are only grazing on any given acre of our farm or any given paddock, just  a handful of times throughout the entire grazing season.  
**1:05:27-1:05:51:**  And having that many paddocks not only allows us to graze at a very high density, but it  also gives us a lot of flexibility in terms of when we put animals where.  So if the animals are about to move into some silvopasture areas, but that happens to be  
**1:05:51-1:06:10:**  the same week that we get very high rainfalls and the ground is very saturated, we can bounce  them in a different direction and then maybe delay moving into that silvopasture till the  ground conditions improve again.  
**1:06:10-1:06:31:**  In the summertime, we expect ground conditions to change very quickly in the winter.  Where we are now, the ground conditions change more slowly.  There's periods where it freezes up and then we have frozen ground, which is very resistant  
**1:06:31-1:06:52:**  to compaction, but we might also have weeks of soft, muddy conditions.  Brett to kind of conclude this interview, would you mind giving us a bit of a step by  step how-to of establishing a silvopasture system?  
**1:06:52-1:07:10:**  When we're establishing silvopastures in areas where we already have trees, either trees  that we planted or trees that nature put there for us, there's three steps.  The first step is that we have to thin those trees out to allow a sufficient level of sunlight  
**1:07:10-1:07:23:**  to reach the ground.  And what we're doing there really is we're reallocating sunlight from all the trees that  occur to just the best trees that occur.  
**1:07:23-1:07:47:**  And the great news about silvopasturing is that we can often be growing just as many  good trees per hectare as if we were managing it strictly as a woods or for timber production.  And here in New York, and it's really about the same numbers in Argentina, we're really  
**1:07:47-1:08:06:**  trying to grow the best 30 to 50 trees per acre, so roughly the best 100 or so trees  per hectare.  But when we take out all of those lower quality trees and the slower growing trees, the rut  
**1:08:06-1:08:21:**  trees, the suppressed trees, the defective trees, the diseased trees, then instead of  giving that sunlight to those less desirable trees, we can then give it to the forage plants  on the ground.  
**1:08:21-1:08:37:**  So the first step is thinning out the woods to reallocate sunlight to the ground level.  The second step is creating conditions so that forage plants will germinate in the silvopasture  understory.  
**1:08:37-1:08:52:**  And in order for that to happen, we have to be thinking about some soil scarification,  but not too much.  We don't want deep rutting or mud, but we often need to have some soil scarification  
**1:08:52-1:09:07:**  because many of our forage seeds will not germinate well if there's a thick layer of  undecomposed pine needles or oak leaves on top of the soil surface.  That's like having a mulch layer on top of the soil.  
**1:09:07-1:09:25:**  So the timing for going in and doing the thinning can be very important to make sure that we  get adequate soil scarification.  In a common situation that happens here in New York is that we do a lot of our forest  
**1:09:25-1:09:47:**  thinning in the winter time, often on frozen ground and on top of snow.  And if that's the case, when spring comes, we thin the woods out, but we still have that  thick leaf layer we call the duff layer and we're just not going to get good germination.  
**1:09:47-1:10:01:**  Now sometimes it helps to go in and do some sort of supplemental seeding, either just  before harvesting or just after harvesting.  It's often more easy to do it just before harvesting because now you don't have to contend  
**1:10:01-1:10:22:**  with all the tree tops or logging debris, we call that slash that's in the way.  Plus the logging activity can help incorporate that forage seed into the soil surface.  But in many farm woodlots and plantations, there's already a good existing seed bank  
**1:10:22-1:10:40:**  of desirable forage plants.  So unless you really think that you need to augment that with some sort of broadcast seeding,  I would try to rely in most cases on the natural existing seed bank.  
**1:10:40-1:11:01:**  The third and kind of final phase of the silvopasture establishment is that once you get all this  green stuff growing in the silvopasture understory, we have to keep in mind that it's going to  be a mix of the good stuff that we wanted to see growing there and the not so good stuff  
**1:11:01-1:11:27:**  that is just taking advantage of this void that we've created and this increased sunlight.  So this is where the intensive rotational grazing and the animal density and impact  come in because we need to graze that silvopasture understory in a way that we're either promoting  
**1:11:27-1:11:48:**  the growth of the good stuff or we're discouraging the growth of the bad stuff.  And a common example of how that's accomplished in the grazing world is through this mob grazing  or high density grazing where the animals are put into a paddock for a short period  
**1:11:48-1:12:04:**  of time at a high density.  The animals eat the best portion of what's there but there's enough animals that they're  trampling and smashing and knocking down all the other plants that they might not want  
**1:12:04-1:12:14:**  to eat.  And in other words, every time they go in, they kind of wipe the slate clean and set  everything back to an equal footing.  
**1:12:14-1:12:35:**  And that sounds easier than it is to actually achieve but any skilled grazer can get to  the point where they can use their animal workforce to largely accomplish that through  their rotational grazing system.  
**1:12:35-1:12:59:**  And then one of the natural steps that we often think about is allowing for forest regeneration,  for the next generation of trees to come in after harvest of the trees.  Could you quickly comment on how that works in a system that's so disturbed by the animals,  
**1:12:59-1:13:12:**  by the cattle?  Probably one of the most frequently asked questions anytime we talk about silvopasturing,  especially to a non-forester audience, is what do you do about regenerating young trees?  
**1:13:12-1:13:28:**  So a silvopasture is defined as a sustainable system.  That's to say that we can perpetuate this balanced mix of trees and forages and livestock  over time.  
**1:13:28-1:13:43:**  It's not an area where we're just putting the animals in there to graze today until  we get around to clearing all the trees off or the trees die of old age or some disease  issue.  
**1:13:43-1:13:55:**  It's not that the silvopasture is always going to look the same over time.  These are dynamic systems.  So in the early stages, we may have more trees and less forage and a more mature silvopasture.  
**1:13:55-1:14:10:**  It may look like more forage and less trees or vice versa.  But I made a comment earlier and I'd like to go back to it in that regeneration is an  event in the life cycle of a forest.  
**1:14:10-1:14:26:**  So many of the tree species that we would value in our silvopasture systems are sun-loving  species.  It doesn't matter if you're talking about pines and firs or oaks and maples or beech  
**1:14:26-1:14:40:**  or whatever your chestnut trees, your walnut trees, your apple trees.  Almost all tree species need full sunlight conditions to develop beyond the seedling  stage.  
**1:14:40-1:14:59:**  Consequently, we're not going to grow the next generation of forest under the canopy  of the current generation of forest.  In forestry, we use what are called even age regeneration systems to establish a new age  
**1:14:59-1:15:19:**  class of trees and then eventually recruit that young age class of trees up into the  next forest.  In our silvopastures, we feel that we're still decades away from needing to replace the current  
**1:15:19-1:15:36:**  trees with new young trees.  So in that period of time until we need to regenerate, we don't really value having regeneration  in the understory.  
**1:15:36-1:15:56:**  If it happens, it happens and in some cases we may see opportunities to free up or release  small patches of that regeneration so we can have this mosaic of younger age classes starting  to pop up across our entire silvopasture base.  
**1:15:56-1:16:14:**  And the fences that keep our animals in our silvopastures today can also keep our animals  out of our silvopastures tomorrow when we feel that there's a need to regenerate.  But the bigger issue for regeneration in this part of the world is not the livestock, it's  
**1:16:14-1:16:36:**  actually the whitetail deer that browse to death all of the desirable young tree species  that we would like to replace in our forest.  Listen, Brett, I think we're gonna take this interview to an end and thank you so much  
**1:16:36-1:16:48:**  for your generous time.  I would like to know, because we've read a few of the documents that you shared with  us, but I'd like to know if the audience could or where the audience could get a hold of  
**1:16:48-1:17:02:**  extra resources, extra reading, if they're interested in delving deeper into this topic.  Sure.  So it'd probably be easiest to email those to you, but if you'd like them on the recording,  
**1:17:02-1:17:27:**  I can cover those really quickly.  So we have a couple of different resource websites for silvopasturing.  One is, we call it the Silvopasture Forum, the URL is silvopasture.ning, that's N-I-N-G.com,  
**1:17:27-1:17:43:**  it's a Ning forum.  And this is a network of people interested in silvopasturing.  We try to archive good articles and resource documents also on that forum, but the main  
**1:17:43-1:18:00:**  purpose of the forum is to share personal experiences and ask questions and tap into  other people's learning curves.  The other resource website that we have for silvopasturing information is the Cornell  
**1:18:00-1:18:28:**  University Cooperative Extension, Forestry Extension website.  The URL for that is forestconnect.info, forestconnect.info, and under the publications section, you have  to dig a little bit, but there's a whole section on silvopasturing, including the presentations  
**1:18:28-1:18:49:**  from silvopasturing conferences in 2011 and 2014.  There's also a link there to a number of silvopasturing webinars, also documents that we feel would  be useful for any silvopasture practitioner.  
**1:18:49-1:19:05:**  Thank you so much for listening to this episode, we really hope you enjoyed it.  As always, all the links will be posted in the description below, and again, please get  in touch with us if there's any recommendations, any feedback, or anybody you'd like us to  
**1:19:05-1:19:36:**  interview, so don't hesitate, you can find all of the contact forms on our website.  Thank you so much, and see you next time.  