---
title: 14 Integrating Fruit Trees And Arable Crops With Stephen Briggs
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2021-01-25)  

**0:00:00-0:00:23:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:23-0:00:35:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry.  In order to find out how it can help us with these challenges, we'll be interviewing farmers,  
**0:00:35-0:00:47:**  scientists, and other experts to share with you their experiences, practical advice, and  scientific research.  Hello and welcome to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:00:47-0:00:57:**  We're your hosts, Dimitri and Etienne.  And today we interviewed Stefan Briggs from Whitehall Farm, where he has set up one of  the biggest agroforestry systems in the UK.  
**0:00:57-0:01:11:**  Maybe now you're starting to get used to the way we do things on the podcast.  So with Stefan, we're going to unpack the functioning of his system, and then we're  going to look at some of the strategic implications and some of the ways that agroforestry has  
**0:01:11-0:01:22:**  affected the strategy of his farm.  And we're going to find out that Stefan is very happy with the way that he's integrated  apples in his grain operation.  
**0:01:22-0:01:33:**  And I invite you to keep going so you find out exactly how that works.  Hi Stefan and welcome to the podcast.  Good afternoon and it's great to be here.  
**0:01:33-0:01:44:**  Well, I was thinking to get us started, maybe you could give us a bit about your story and  how you got started on Whitehall Farm.  Okay, yeah.  
**0:01:44-0:02:09:**  So it's a, as is always the case, it's a fairly complex backstory.  After leaving school many, many years ago, I actually trained as an engineer.  And after a number of years working in engineering, I decided that actually my true passion led  
**0:02:09-0:02:27:**  in the outdoor world.  So I did some traveling around the globe and then I retrained in agricultural engineering.  And that took me to work, do some work in Africa for a few years.  
**0:02:27-0:02:47:**  And then I did some more training as a degree in agriculture and then a master's in soil  science.  I then went back to work in Africa on soil projects for a few years and then in India  
**0:02:47-0:03:04:**  for the World Bank and FAO.  And then I came back to the UK with my wife.  And as a qualified soil scientist nearly 30 years ago, there were very few farmers interested  
**0:03:04-0:03:28:**  in soil other than organic or biological farmers.  So I started working with organic farmers, doing advisory work on agronomy and then started  my own consultancy business in 2000, which is still going today, working with farmers  
**0:03:28-0:03:43:**  all over the UK and internationally.  There's a consultancy group called Abacus Agriculture.  But deep down my passion of both myself and my wife, my wife's from a farming family in  
**0:03:43-0:04:02:**  the north of the country, and our passion was always to go farming ourselves.  So in 2005, we were in a position to buy a very small piece of land of about 10, 12 hectares.  And we started farming that organically.  
**0:04:02-0:04:19:**  At the same time, we started applying for farms to rent because our pockets weren't  deep enough to purchase a farm outright or a large farm.  So we applied for a number of farms and got turned down and eventually we applied for  
**0:04:19-0:04:38:**  Whitehall Farm and were given initially a 15 year term to rent the farm to start our  farming operation.  So that's, I guess, the quick answer to how we ended up here.  
**0:04:38-0:04:58:**  And I'm kind of wondering, how did you then get involved with agroforestry?  So as I alluded to already, I guess my background is very much to do with soils, having done  a master's in soil science.  
**0:04:58-0:05:26:**  So when we moved on to the farm back in 2007, and I should say the farm, so listeners know  where the farm is, we're in Cambridgeshire, which is in the east of England.  We're about one hour north of London, about 30 minutes northwest of Cambridge.  
**0:05:26-0:05:41:**  And we're just on the edge of a large city called Peterborough.  So the area is very low lying.  It was drained by the Dutch in the mid 1600s.  
**0:05:41-0:05:53:**  It's known as Fenland here in the UK, but the Dutch would call it a polder or reclaimed  land.  So it's a very low, we're only just above sea level, in some places just below sea level.  
**0:05:53-0:06:13:**  So it's an artificial drained landscape, very flat, the whole farm, which is just over 100  hectares, there's only about one metre difference from one end to the other.  The soils are very high quality, we have heavy clay soils, and we have some peat soils with  
**0:06:13-0:06:27:**  up to 20% organic matter, organic carbon in them.  So they're really very fertile.  But they're very prone to erosion by wind.  
**0:06:27-0:06:55:**  And when we moved on to the farm in 2007, I was shocked to see the amount of erosion  that was occurring from wind, and the soils get dry without any cover.  And as a scientist, I found that completely unacceptable that our most important and valuable  
**0:06:55-0:07:15:**  resource was being eroded.  So I started thinking about ways that we might be able to mitigate the damage done by wind.  And I thought back to some of my time actually working and living in Uganda with my wife  
**0:07:15-0:07:39:**  on soil projects where I've been involved in some tropical agroforestry.  And I started to think that maybe that might work here in the UK in a temperate environment.  So back in 2009, we actually decided after about two years of planning and talking to  
**0:07:39-0:08:00:**  our landowners about putting trees on the farm, we put in place an agroforestry system  covering 52 hectares.  We planted for 4,500 trees in a silver arable alley cropping system.  
**0:08:00-0:08:16:**  And the primary function was about trying to stop soil degradation and wind erosion.  But the other things that come with agroforestry, which we'll discuss, are all benefits.  Yeah.  
**0:08:16-0:08:29:**  And before we go more in detail into the agroforestry stuff, I was wondering, just to finish this  kind of picture of your farm, what are your main productions and how do you commercialize?  Yeah.  
**0:08:29-0:08:55:**  So historically, when we moved on to the farm, the farm, I guess, for probably 30 years would  have grown wheat, barley, oilseed, maple, some sugar beet and maybe potatoes.  So it was always a mixture of root crops and cereals.  
**0:08:55-0:09:19:**  When we moved on to the farm in 2007, we wanted to convert the farm to organic production,  which we started straight away.  And over the last decade, we've grown wheat, oats, barley.  
**0:09:19-0:09:52:**  We've grown root vegetables like leeks, pouro in French, and also batrouge, red beet.  And some brassica vegetables like cauliflower and broccoli.  At one stage, we were growing up to 100 acres or 40 hectares of broccoli and cauliflower.  
**0:09:52-0:10:19:**  We had quite a diverse organic rotation, growing cover crops and growing cash crops of cereals.  For a number of years, we specialized growing seed crops and vegetables.  And at one stage, we actually, for seven years, we contract farmed another 150 hectares of  
**0:10:19-0:10:35:**  land elsewhere.  But that came to an end three years ago.  And the reasons for that were partly the landowner wanted to change the policy.  
**0:10:35-0:10:55:**  But also, we decided that we wanted to better connect with consumers.  So we turned one of our buildings into a farm shop and cafe.  So at the moment, you sell on the wholesale market and then you also have a bit of this  
**0:10:55-0:11:08:**  direct selling through the cafe.  Yeah, yeah, exactly.  So two things happened, which we'll talk about later, but in 2011, I traveled the globe under  
**0:11:08-0:11:22:**  a Nuffield farming scholarship looking at agroforestry.  And what impressed me as part of that journey was farmers and farming businesses which have  connected better with consumers.  
**0:11:22-0:11:36:**  And my wife and I have always had a passion to better educate and connect consumers and  the public with farming.  So we converted, we did the building work and converted one of the buildings into a  
**0:11:36-0:11:51:**  farm shop and a cafe.  And some of our produce is sold directly to the public through the shop and some is contracted  on the wholesale market.  
**0:11:51-0:12:04:**  I'm curious to know more about the agroforestry trees that you planted because you mentioned  you planted 52 hectares of agroforestry.  But what trees were they?  
**0:12:04-0:12:20:**  So there were a number of parameters which I guess informed our choice.  The main one being actually that we don't own the farm, that we rent the farm for 15  year agreement.  
**0:12:20-0:12:34:**  So if we were going to plant trees, we needed an economic market return within the lifetime  of our rental agreement.  So that meant that we couldn't say plant an oak tree or a walnut tree and wait 30 years  
**0:12:34-0:12:49:**  for it to mature.  We needed something that would grow quicker.  So we actually decided to grow fruit trees and we decided that we would grow apples mainly  
**0:12:49-0:13:08:**  because actually apples had been grown in this region historically but actually over  the last 25-30 years the amount of apples had declined.  A consequence of the sort of common agricultural policy I guess was that a lot of apple production  
**0:13:08-0:13:23:**  in the UK decreased massively because it was easier to bring the fruit in from elsewhere  in Europe.  But actually organically at least there's a bit of resurgence in demand for UK apples  
**0:13:23-0:13:50:**  and we planted 13 varieties, half of which were heritage varieties, very old varieties  to try and produce English organic heritage apples.  And yeah so 4500 trees, 13 varieties of apples and we either sell them as eating or cooking  
**0:13:50-0:14:10:**  fruit or we turn it into juice and sell it as apple juice.  Ok nice and the apples that you're selling for as fresh apples are they going on the  wholesale market as well or are they being sold mostly at your farm shop?  
**0:14:10-0:14:24:**  No we sell everything ourselves so we don't go into wholesale markets at all.  We want it to be price makers rather than price takers.  And what spacings are your tree lines on?  
**0:14:24-0:14:49:**  So we set the system up based on a 24 meter alley and then the tree lines as an alley  cropping system face nearly north-south which is important to minimize shade with the sun  coming up in the east and down in the west.  
**0:14:49-0:15:10:**  We're a little further north here in the UK than you guys in France so at this time of  year the sun's pretty low so we wanted to minimize shading so that the trees are north-south  a 24 meter alley with a 3 meter strip of pollen and nectar and flowers underneath the trees  
**0:15:10-0:15:22:**  to attract pollinators.  So the actual tree rows are 27 meters apart 1.5 meters either side leaving a 24 meter  alley.  
**0:15:22-0:15:47:**  Ok and the trees on the tree line what's the spacing between each apple tree?  So 3 meters between each tree and a 3 meter strip a 24 meter alley and our field sizes  are the biggest field is 13.5 hectares the smallest field will be 4.2 hectares 7 fields  
**0:15:47-0:16:05:**  all together in a 52 hectare block.  Ok and I'm curious to know about the fertilization and irrigation plan that you have for those  agroforestry areas.  
**0:16:05-0:16:27:**  Yeah so well the easy one on irrigation is that we don't.  The only irrigation is what falls out of the sky.  In some ways we have a very high water table you know we're only at sea level and the water  
**0:16:27-0:16:46:**  table is only 1.5 meters 1 to 1.5 meters below ground so actually stressing the trees and  getting them to put down deep roots means they can drink from the bottom.  Anyhow today we've had a lot of rain already this winter we've got some fields where we  
**0:16:46-0:16:59:**  have standing water we have ponds in the fields because we've had so much rain which is a  bit of an issue although the agroforestry fields are much drier than the fields without  the trees.  
**0:16:59-0:17:12:**  I guess the trees are helping with that drainage.  Do you fertilize the apple trees in any specific way or do they just have to do with what there  is there?  
**0:17:12-0:17:39:**  Yeah so we've looked at the fertilization program for the trees and actually we are  fortunate to have good fertile soils with good levels of potassium phosphate and nitrogen  so the trees largely look after themselves although we have to keep an eye on the calcium  
**0:17:39-0:18:01:**  and occasionally have to add some calcium in the form of either sugar beet byproducts  or a lime product.  We've only done that once in 10 years so generally they look after themselves pretty well without  
**0:18:01-0:18:14:**  much intervention.  I have to say when I talk to you I can't help but feel a bit jealous because it seems like  really really good farming lands between the abundant fertility and the high water table.  
**0:18:14-0:18:34:**  Yeah it's good the challenge what was interesting is when we moved on to the farm the soils  yeah they're good fertile soils but biologically they were dead and they were completely inert  and it was very difficult to get crops to establish because the biological status was  
**0:18:34-0:19:00:**  really poor you know it had very high use of fertilizers and pesticides for soil sterilants  for production and it took us seven eight years to actually get the soils to function  better biologically and now they work really well and our yields have been going up.  
**0:19:00-0:19:18:**  And yeah the other thing that made me curious is when you were describing that three meter  strip you know of for pollinators below the trees did you sow that when you planted the  trees and then you kind of just let it be and mow it from time to time or what does  
**0:19:18-0:19:39:**  that look like?  Yeah so before we planted the trees in the immediately following the harvest in 2009  we sowed the three meter strips under the trees with a mixture of legumes, clovers,  
**0:19:39-0:20:01:**  wildflowers about 30 well we had about 20 different species that we planted on some  fields we did one mixture on some fields we did another mixture and then we planted the  trees into those mixtures and over the last 10 years those mixtures have changed massively  
**0:20:01-0:20:26:**  so and initially some species the pioneer species came up and then later on the legumes  the clovers and the sanfoins and the daisies dominated and even though we didn't plant  any grass the grass has come into the strips as well over the last decade.  
**0:20:26-0:20:48:**  But they provide a really important refuge for pollinating insects which we need for  the trees but also beneficial insects which we need for managing the crops around the  rest of the farm biologically so there's a lot of abundance of biodiversity in those  
**0:20:48-0:21:14:**  strips in fact we've been working with some universities and we've had two PhD students  and about six MSc students studying the biodiversity and the species richness and the distribution  of insects and it's significantly better in the agroforestry and they publish that research  
**0:21:14-0:21:32:**  in scientific journals.  Well that's fascinating and I'm thinking and it doesn't cause any problems for you in terms  of management then that you know for example seeds of weeds or anything I'm saying that  
**0:21:32-0:21:45:**  because I think some farmers could be scared of leaving such a strip in the middle of their  cultures.  Yeah well I guess it's we make sure we don't leave it we actually manage it so yeah there  
**0:21:45-0:22:13:**  probably are a little you know a few more weeds along the edge but not massively detrimental.  The strips themselves we manage by cutting 50% of the strip with a sort of ride on lawnmower  in usually sort of July each year and then the other half between the trees in September  
**0:22:13-0:22:25:**  that allows us to actually harvest the harvest the crops in the alleys with a nice clean  edge.  So one of the design features is that all the apples that we have the apple trees they're  
**0:22:25-0:22:46:**  all later varieties so some of the varieties we picked we couldn't have fruit that was  ready to pick in August because we still had to harvest the cereals so the cereals wouldn't  typically be harvested here till mid-August in a very hot year it might be early August  
**0:22:46-0:23:02:**  the fruit the fruit is not ready to harvest till sort of late September early October  so we can harvest the cereals plant cover crops and then go and go and harvest the fruit  afterwards so it's a double harvest here.  
**0:23:02-0:23:17:**  That's really interesting how that fits kind of and you can spread that through the year  and that's really interesting.  Now that I think we have a bit of a you know clear idea of what your farm and your agroforestry  
**0:23:17-0:23:34:**  systems look like I was thinking maybe you could share with us some of the observations  you might have had over the few years and I'm thinking you know we're always interested  in the interactions between trees and the cultures and obviously you planted them for  
**0:23:34-0:23:53:**  wind protection so maybe the first question is were you able to see and observe actual  improvements in the wind erosion?  Yeah so not only you know what we've observed as farmers but working with universities in  
**0:23:53-0:24:14:**  terms of doing research we're seeing less less soil erosion in the agroforestry because  the trees are slowing the wind and the wind is predominantly from the southwest for a  maritime climate when the wind blows strongly the trees are protecting the soils and we're  
**0:24:14-0:24:32:**  seeing less less erosion so that it's doing its job there.  Secondly you know one of the things that attracted me to the agroforestry was having a mix of  perennial plants and also annual plants in a climate change world that we now live in  
**0:24:32-0:24:57:**  planting a seed every season and asking it to start from scratch and not knowing whether  it's going to be a hot year, dry, cold year, dry year, wet year is like gambling, professional  gambling farming and having a mix of annuals and perennials I think helps mitigate some  
**0:24:57-0:25:16:**  of the risks around climate change.  And have you seen any kind of effects of potential competition between the roots of the apple  trees and your main crop?  
**0:25:16-0:25:33:**  So in terms of those sort of observations a couple of things, first thing you know one  of the reasons we planted fruit trees is because we didn't want the trees to get too big so  we prune the trees every winter that allows us to pick the fruit by hand so the trees  
**0:25:33-0:25:56:**  are only maybe three and a half four meters tall but at four meters tall they're giving  40 meters of wind wind interruption and the alleys are only 24 meters wide so there's  a nice sort of wind interruption going on.  
**0:25:56-0:26:15:**  Every year in the autumn when the trees lose their leaves and the energy goes back into  the roots we actually root prune so we use a subsoiler a deep surface calculator to go  along the edge of the tree strip and actually just as we prune the canopy we prune the roots  
**0:26:15-0:26:37:**  to help force the roots down deeper in the soil so they're not competing in the same  zone as the annual crops so there's a differentiation between where those roots are occupying.  What we've noticed in the last few years now the trees are large and established is that  
**0:26:37-0:27:01:**  when it's really wet last winter this winter we've had excessive rainfall where we're set  to see more of that with climate change that the fields are a little drier and the drainage  is improved by the presence of those tree roots but then conversely in the summer when  
**0:27:01-0:27:27:**  it when when if it gets really hot we had a really dry year last year in 2020 and there's  perhaps a little bit of wind reduction lower evapotranspiration and perhaps a bit of shading  from the trees and what we found is that the crop immediately adjacent to the sort of three  
**0:27:27-0:27:48:**  to six meters immediately adjacent to the tree strips was was twice the crop that it  was in the middle of the alley so last year we had we had probably 15 to 18 percent lower  yields because of drought but the trees the crop immediately adjacent to the trees was  
**0:27:48-0:28:02:**  significantly bigger significantly higher yield and then those trees are adding to that  sort of resilience.  That's amazing because you know obviously if we're doing this podcast as we think agroforestry  
**0:28:02-0:28:17:**  is interesting but you know it's so great to hear from observation how powerful integrating  trees can be that's really great.  The other bit of research we've been helping with is we've been looking at mycorrhizae  
**0:28:17-0:28:37:**  so working with some universities where we've got the perennial trees in place in the agroforestry  strips the mycorrhizae levels are much higher and they spread out into the alleys so there's  also probably an effect of better access to water and nutrients from those mycorrhizal  
**0:28:37-0:28:55:**  associations so having those in the system is just it's like having a turbocharger on  a car in terms of getting access to water and nutrients at the right times.  And so you've actually been kind of followed by a lot of scientists and it seems like a  
**0:28:55-0:29:10:**  lot of data is coming out of your farm.  Yeah well we're not so we're not we didn't set up the system to be research it's a commercial  business that has to make money we have to pay the rent you know we're a commercial farming  
**0:29:10-0:29:38:**  business but I wanted to I have an inquisitive mind some would say that's a blessing sometimes  it's a curse I wanted to try and demonstrate or show that actually what we were doing actually  worked there's an old Chinese proverb which says the person or the people that say it's  
**0:29:38-0:29:51:**  impossible shouldn't shouldn't get in the way of the people that are already doing the  impossible.  We wanted to you know we had lots of neighbouring farmers saying you know what are you doing  
**0:29:51-0:30:02:**  why are you planting trees you must be mad.  Wow.  We wanted to we wanted to show them actually it is possible and it does work and having  
**0:30:02-0:30:19:**  roughly 50 percent of the farm with agroforestry and 50 percent of the farm without agroforestry  gives us a great opportunity to show the benefits.  So I was just wondering since you do have these two different types of plots with and  
**0:30:19-0:30:35:**  a bit of a possibility to compare were you able to observe any difference in terms of  pest pressure or disease pressure on the crops between the agroforestry plots and the ones  without trees?  
**0:30:35-0:30:52:**  It's interesting in that you know as an organic farmer I don't get very exercised or don't  get very concerned by pests or diseases because we're trying to actively trying to do systems  without without pest or you know trying to minimize the risk of pest diseases in the  
**0:30:52-0:31:04:**  first place.  So we don't have major pest or disease issues.  Having said that the research that we've done with universities shows that there are much  
**0:31:04-0:31:19:**  higher numbers and special distributions of beneficial insects and fewer harmful insects  in the agroforestry.  So I think we're well placed.  
**0:31:19-0:31:32:**  If we were to have a pest issue we're well placed to have lots of beneficials to help  be part of the team to fight the problem.  But we don't see, I don't get exercised by pest and disease problems.  
**0:31:32-0:31:43:**  They're not a problem for us.  No, that's great.  And you know I was thinking you mentioned soil mycorrhizae and the fact that you were  
**0:31:43-0:31:54:**  able to see an increase.  Did you also do other tests to measure kind of soil biology and did you see any differences  as well by introducing trees?  
**0:31:54-0:32:18:**  So we haven't seen any massively significant differences in soil nutrient status.  But what we have been doing is, I trained as a soil biologist so I've been actually  doing some work on soil biology, hence the mycorrhizae.  
**0:32:18-0:32:40:**  And what we found is in the plots or the fields with the trees we've seen a much bigger shift  from arable soils which are predominantly bacterial dominated to a shift towards more  fungal domination in the species.  
**0:32:40-0:32:55:**  So ultimately we need a mixture of both fungi and bacteria in the soils to the engine to  drive the soil microbiome.  But actually most cropping arable soils are too dominated by bacteria and the trees have  
**0:32:55-0:33:17:**  really helped us move it towards a more fungal balance which is giving us more resilience  in terms of drought, it's giving us more access to nutrients and productivity has been increasing.  So to give you some idea, our cropping has changed a little bit.  
**0:33:17-0:33:34:**  Over the last few years we've been growing a lot more oats.  We actually grow, one of the few farms in the UK growing for a certified organic and  certified gluten free market.  
**0:33:34-0:33:59:**  I'm actually celiac myself, so I'm from celiac disease so I have an interest in gluten free  products and we're growing gluten free oats and we're yielding typically 6 to 6.4 tonnes  per hectare of organic oats which is pretty respectable.  
**0:33:59-0:34:13:**  And kind of my last question to wrap up this bit of agronomic section.  I know you already have very high levels of organic matter so has introducing trees increased  that organic matter?  
**0:34:13-0:34:30:**  Is that something that you necessarily want?  So yeah, if you're starting at very low levels of organic matter you can increase them by  cover crops and agronomic processes.  
**0:34:30-0:34:50:**  When you've already got very high levels our objective was not necessarily to increase  organic matter, it was to maintain the organic matter and stop the fields blowing away.  But where parts of the farm are very heavy clay in the distance about 4 kilometres away  
**0:34:50-0:35:07:**  I can see some very tall towers and chimneys and that's the brick factories.  This location was where they mined all the clay to make bricks.  So we're right on the edge of that so part of the fields is very heavy clay and when  
**0:35:07-0:35:22:**  we first moved on to the farm we really struggled to get crops to grow because the soil was  in such bad condition.  Now the germination of the crops there is as good as it is elsewhere on the farm and  
**0:35:22-0:35:34:**  that's partly because of the trees and partly because of the organic system and partly because  of the cover crops etc.  I wouldn't say it was all the agroforestry but the agroforestry definitely contributes  
**0:35:34-0:35:47:**  to that.  Of course and it's true that for the purpose of the podcast we focus a lot on agroforestry  and the trees but yeah, totally understand that the cover crops play a huge role and  
**0:35:47-0:36:09:**  they're only a little part of a bigger transformation on the farm that obviously has been successful.  There's no single silver bullet, lots of little hammers which help you change the system.  And I've kind of tried to force you to separate things and say it's just the trees and I realize  
**0:36:09-0:36:25:**  it's a bit tricky but I think the takeaway is that they were part of a really positive  transformation of the farm and that even if they're not the only ones responsible they  definitely played their part in taking you where you are today.  
**0:36:25-0:36:41:**  The bit that really excites me about the agroforestry now it's established is this mixture of perennials  and annuals but also that we've made the farm bigger.  So we're farming three-dimensionally.  
**0:36:41-0:37:07:**  As farmers too often we always think at the height of a head of wheat or the back of a  all-brat cow we think very two-dimensionally whereas if we can use the farm three-dimensionally  and have components that don't compete in the same space or at the same time then we  
**0:37:07-0:37:26:**  can make the farm much bigger and ultimately what we're trying to do is take sunlight and  water and carbon dioxide and build carbon.  So it's about solar capture and the trees, the crops are growing from winter through  
**0:37:26-0:37:39:**  through the winter through to mid-summer and the trees are growing from late spring through  to late autumn.  So there's an overlap in time and there's also an overlap in space, deep tree roots,  
**0:37:39-0:37:54:**  high canopy, the cereals and the vegetables are shallower roots and lower canopy so they  don't compete with each other.  And the work that has been done on agroforestry productivity shows that the sort of land equivalent  
**0:37:54-0:38:15:**  ratios are typically between sort of 1 and 1.4 i.e. the same level of productivity or  up to 40% more productive from the combination of both components.  The studies that we've done show we're between sort of we were a few years ago at sort of  
**0:38:15-0:38:31:**  1.1 we're now at about 1.25 so it's sort of 25% more productive than the agroforestry  than we are in just the cropping area alone.  Wow, it's great to have this data but you know for the moment we've talked a lot about  
**0:38:31-0:38:49:**  the successes of agroforestry but I'm wondering is there also a flip side to it and especially  in terms of you know implementation and management what kind of challenges have you encountered?  Well we've made loads of mistakes.  
**0:38:49-0:39:04:**  That's part of learning isn't it?  I guess some of the lessons that we've learned, some of the varieties we picked weren't the  best varieties.  
**0:39:04-0:39:15:**  There's a couple of varieties I wouldn't pick again.  I think fruit trees were the right thing.  When we planted the trees a few things happened.  
**0:39:15-0:39:52:**  Initially the trees were planted in 2009 as one year old trees so they're about 1 to 1.2  meters tall as a very thin stem and when we planted them we put a machined round post  and a tie to the tree and a guard and a small bamboo cane stick for support.  
**0:39:52-0:40:14:**  When the tree started to grow the one thing that we hadn't anticipated is that we've created  4,500 perching posts for pigeons and that's fine when one pigeon comes and lands on your  young tree but when two of his friends come to keep him company we found about a thousand  
**0:40:14-0:40:32:**  trees had gotten broken.  Maybe 0.3 of the meter got broken out of the top.  That was a hard lesson so we actually went back and put a sort of 3 meter bamboo stick  
**0:40:32-0:40:42:**  with every tree and that solved the problem because the pigeons would perch on top of  the stick.  Now that's not a problem because the trees are big.  
**0:40:42-0:40:56:**  A hundred pigeons could land and the trees would be fine.  So that was one lesson.  The second lesson is that the machined posts that we planted would be put in with the new  
**0:40:56-0:41:08:**  tree planting.  The quality of the timber was very poor and after three years they'd rotten and I should  have spent more money on a hardwood chestnut post.  
**0:41:08-0:41:25:**  So that was a mistake.  I guess the third thing would be where we are.  I probably should have bought wood chip and put around the base of the tree to help with  
**0:41:25-0:41:44:**  weed control.  The trees were establishing in the first few years but we're in an area where there isn't  a lot of wood chip and wood mulch available and we used a geotextile 1 meter square around  
**0:41:44-0:41:50:**  the trees which worked perfectly.  It worked really well.  It kept the weeds down.  
**0:41:50-0:42:11:**  Ten years on when you try and mow around the trees sometimes you collect the 1 meter geotextile  in the mower which can be a problem.  The bigger problem is that it's an ideal home for voles and mice.  
**0:42:11-0:42:26:**  It's nice and warm and dry and sometimes they eat the root of the tree.  So we've lost a few trees, maybe only 5%, but we lost a few trees from voles.  But potentially the wood chips would have also been a good habitat for them.  
**0:42:26-0:42:51:**  There are some lessons that we've learnt.  The understory that we planted, some of the species didn't survive.  I probably would have planted more Lucerne alfalfa and more Samfoyne because that's done  
**0:42:51-0:43:08:**  really well.  It has a long lifespan so those are some of the things.  The other lesson that we learnt, we're in quite a windy location and in an orchard bees  
**0:43:08-0:43:26:**  are really important for pollination.  In agroforestry bees are really important for pollination but in a really windy exposed  location the bees tend to travel, they tend to roam and pollinate in the more sheltered  
**0:43:26-0:43:43:**  areas and not so much in the most exposed areas, especially if it's wet and cold or  raining.  So we now work with a commercial beekeeper to have 40 hives out on the farm.  
**0:43:43-0:43:59:**  So having more bees earlier in the system I think would have been better because we  found some areas that the fruit production was compromised by lack of pollination.  I just wanted to go back to what you were saying about the wood chips because what would  
**0:43:59-0:44:11:**  you do then?  Because it is a tricky question because we used wood chips planting fruit trees in Greece  on Massey Farm but the volumes are huge and especially if you have humid conditions, which  
**0:44:11-0:44:26:**  wasn't the case in Greece but presumably is the case in England, then you're having to  remulch quite often to keep the weed suppression effect.  So now that you know this, how would you get the wood chips and would you maybe use another  
**0:44:26-0:44:37:**  fabric then?  I looked at it from a practical and cost point of view, it wasn't viable for us because we're  in an area where there isn't, we're in the part of the country where there isn't much  
**0:44:37-0:45:03:**  forestry and which it was really expensive to transport.  So at the time it wasn't an option but I think I'd be looking at other things now, perhaps  compost or perhaps wool, used wool from sheeps, even cardboard.  
**0:45:03-0:45:17:**  Yeah, yeah, that was true, there's interesting things out there.  In terms of management though, you mentioned that you put the tree lines north to south  for the sunshine effect.  
**0:45:17-0:45:30:**  Has it changed a lot the way you work the lands in terms of machinery?  Has it added some extra constraints?  No, in fact one of the things that we wanted to do is make sure that we could use normal  
**0:45:30-0:45:48:**  farm machinery so what it's actually done is opened up an opportunity for us to develop  a controlled traffic farming system.  So we've actually rationalised all our machinery to six metres, so cultivators are six metres,  
**0:45:48-0:46:13:**  the sowing seeder is six metres, we actually run, being an organic farm, we run a six metre  seeder matched to a six metre inter-row hoe, a Garthord Robocrop.  So we sow all our cereals at 22 centimetre spacings in the row and then we use a computer  
**0:46:13-0:46:37:**  and camera guided hoe, the Robocrop six metres matched to the seeder which does an inter-row  weeding between the cereals which works brilliantly and so that's six metres, four passes in the  alley between the trees, six six six six and then our combine is six point two metres so  
**0:46:37-0:47:00:**  everything is now developed into a really well operating controlled traffic farming  system and if we apply permitted trace minerals like manganese or magnesium we can still run  a 24 metre crop sprayer down the middle of the field.  
**0:47:00-0:47:13:**  And how has the extra workload that comes with taking care of the trees, so not only  the harvest and the selling but you know the root pruning, the pruning, how has that kind  of integrated to your previous productions?  
**0:47:13-0:47:28:**  Is it something that's kind of easily spread out through the year or have you had to deal  with some extra?  Yeah it's actually at times of the year when we're not so busy on the farm so the pruning  
**0:47:28-0:47:50:**  for the fruit trees is winter time and there tends to be less cropping and arable and crop  and other work to do on the farm during the winter so that keeps employment on the farm.  As a hundred hectare farm it was always quite difficult to justify employing somebody to  
**0:47:50-0:48:03:**  work on the farm full time but the trees have helped us do that because it provides employment  during the winter months.  The picking of the fruit is after the main harvest, the main cereal harvest and crop  
**0:48:03-0:48:21:**  harvest is during August and the fruit harvest is our second harvest and it's late September  or early October and that's just before we go and then start the autumn sowing and seeding  program for the cereal crops.  
**0:48:21-0:48:32:**  So it all meshes quite well, gives us a nice even profile of labour throughout the year  really.  And it's not too hard to find labour then in the region because I know sometimes that's  
**0:48:32-0:48:52:**  a limitation is that certain things make ecological sense but then you don't necessarily have  the human resources to actually pick fruits or...  Well we're quite mechanised in that we usually employ a team of about six casual staff for  
**0:48:52-0:49:10:**  picking and we are in a part of the country where there is quite a lot of vegetables grown  so the casual labour that's picking vegetables during the summer by the time they've got  to late September or early October a lot of those vegetables have been harvested, the  
**0:49:10-0:49:35:**  salad crops have been harvested so we pick up some of that casual labour in the early  autumn and just use them, just six people for a couple of weeks to pick all the fruit  and then that's picked into 300 kilo bins which are on the back of a low trailer behind  
**0:49:35-0:49:55:**  a 160 horseback tractor and then we use a telescopic JCB to move everything around quite  mechanised so it's just the picking from the trees and putting into the bin which can be  done reasonably quickly and quite efficiently.  
**0:49:55-0:50:11:**  And for the pruning of the trees, how many people do you have?  Well typically we have a rotation so two people will prune half the trees one year and half  the trees the following year.  
**0:50:11-0:50:31:**  That's one, the man that works on the farm full time plus one other and we'll do the  pruning through the winter.  So apparently from a kind of practical perspective the trees have integrated really well into  
**0:50:31-0:50:52:**  your farm operation but in terms of sales how did that happen because you're kind of  bringing in a new product and how did that integration to the business come along?  Yeah so as I said earlier on in the interview we selected apples because we rent the farm  
**0:50:52-0:51:18:**  and we wanted an economic return within the period of our rental agreement of 15 years  and we could also see there was an opportunity to grow organic apples using agroforestry  because most of the orchards that are operated in the UK and throughout Europe are really  
**0:51:18-0:51:37:**  highly intensive so they're not suited to organic production because they're highly  intensive so it's actually quite difficult to grow organic apples so we thought that  there was an opportunity to do it in an agroforestry way.  
**0:51:37-0:52:03:**  So initially when we started harvesting fruit from about year four onwards some of our fruit  was just sold wholesale until three years ago when we went through a year of building  the farm shop and the cafe which my wife runs, she heads that business up and then that allows  
**0:52:03-0:52:20:**  us to sell the fruit directly to consumers but still about 80% of it now is turned into  apple juice.  When we do a mixed blended apple juice and also single priority apple juices which we  
**0:52:20-0:52:35:**  bottled and then we can retail them throughout the year and that works really well and it  adds significant value as well.  Sure and your local market is significant enough to absorb that amount of apples.  
**0:52:35-0:53:03:**  Yeah so we're fortunate, the town Peterborough has 220,000 people that's between I suppose  two and eight kilometres away depending on the farm but the shop will be about eight  kilometres from the city and in a normal year there's good demand and we sell plenty.  
**0:53:03-0:53:22:**  Clearly it's a pretty bumpy ride for retail and hospitality businesses with Covid at the  moment it's quite challenging.  And I'm wondering how many tons does it represent that you collect every year?  
**0:53:22-0:53:52:**  So the trees are say four and a half thousand trees, the strips under the trees on the 52  hectares, the strips are actually four hectares in size so it's about 8% of the land area  has trees and about 92% has cereal crops and the trees are yielding about five tons per  
**0:53:52-0:54:15:**  hectare of fruit so we're around 20-25 tons of fruit per year and 80% of that will get  turned into juice which we sell in seven 50 millilitre or two 50 millilitre bottles.  You probably don't have that figure off the top of your head but you know presumably the  
**0:54:15-0:54:29:**  trees occupy 8% of the land but represent a much higher value proportionally in terms  of your sales.  Yeah so I'll try and do a quick calculation into euros.  
**0:54:29-0:54:49:**  You can say it in pounds it's fine.  Well euro, pound it's about the same.  The output for the cereals is about I suppose about 1300 euros per hectare.  
**0:54:49-0:55:12:**  The fruit is about 1800 euros per hectare in terms of economic output but that's at  a wholesale price.  If we turn that fruit into juice it's worth 4,000 euros a hectare.  
**0:55:12-0:55:27:**  So you can travel its value in turning it into a juice product.  Wow it's great.  One thing comes to mind though is that you mentioned how difficult it is to do organic  
**0:55:27-0:55:45:**  apples and then by diversifying to perennial crops and apples you are taking on a whole  new type of production with a lot of technical challenges.  So the other input being knowledge was it difficult to gain that expertise of producing  
**0:55:45-0:55:58:**  organic apples?  Yeah I'll be perfectly honest we were complete novices in terms of fruit production.  I probably still are.  
**0:55:58-0:56:22:**  I'm a much better cereal farmer than I am fruit farmer and we probably should be fertilizing  and pushing the production harder on the fruit but I'm a better cereal farmer than I am a  fruit farmer and we just had to learn by talking to other people about production and the challenge  
**0:56:22-0:56:34:**  there is that most of the production is very intensive and there's very little organic  fruit production so there are relatively few people you can talk to and you have to make  it up as you go along.  
**0:56:34-0:56:48:**  Yeah but on the other hand of course you could be pushing it more but obviously then if you're  pushing it more it's also more time and resources and inputs that you're investing so if you're  able to have a low input system and still manage to have produce to sell and make a  
**0:56:48-0:57:11:**  profit on it is still very interesting.  Yeah and that's really our farming philosophies is easy care.  It's low input, good output and adding value because not only do we run the farming business,  
**0:57:11-0:57:32:**  we run the retail and the cafe business and the education and also I run a consultancy  business working with other organic farmers and also part-time I'm head of soils for the  Royal Agricultural Society of England so we're busy.  
**0:57:32-0:57:50:**  We can only do so many things, there are only 24 hours in a day and seven days a week.  There's a question in terms of the workload then because we've talked about value, we've  talked about how much of the land it occupies but how do you distribute your time between  
**0:57:50-0:58:10:**  the cereals and the apples and how much additional workload does it represent including those  trees?  So there obviously is some additional work and the system is more complex but the work  
**0:58:10-0:58:38:**  is at different periods of the year so for cereals the seeding is, the cultivations and  seeding is in sort of October into November, the weeding is in the spring and the harvesting  is in August for us whereas the fruit trees, the pruning is in the middle of winter in  
**0:58:38-0:58:56:**  December, January, February and the harvesting is in October so they don't clash.  They're really different periods of the year for the different operations.  The pick for the fruit is after the cereal.  
**0:58:56-0:59:09:**  I drive the combine harvester so we finish the harvest and there's sort of a triumphant  yeah we finished harvest and then you have 10 days or two weeks and then you start harvest  again.  
**0:59:09-0:59:22:**  There's two harvests and we're only really finished harvest by the time we've got all  the fruit harvested.  But it seems you know I've been trying to pick things and find the flow but overall  
**0:59:22-0:59:39:**  it just seems that you're very satisfied with what you've done with including these trees  and it really seems to make sense both in terms of economic sense and practical sense  and also certain enjoyment diversifying your productions.  
**0:59:39-0:59:58:**  Yeah it is, it works and I was determined to make it, set it up to make it work but  it is more complex there are and as you rightly said this you know it's a it's managed complexity  for want of a better word.  
**0:59:58-1:00:17:**  So we've introduced more management requirement because we have two perennials and annuals  and fruit and cereals but it is quite manageable it's just another crop that we've got to learn.  We've had you know the machinery all works we haven't had to go and buy any other than  
**1:00:17-1:00:38:**  some hand pruning equipment and a mower to mow under the trees.  We haven't had to go and buy any specialist equipment so it's doable by any farm and that's  part of what we wanted to do is to do something that other farmers could do as well.  
**1:00:38-1:00:58:**  And I guess one of the real bonuses is that you know we started this interview by saying  that the farm we have is rented on a 15 year agreement on the basis of what we've done  here with the organic production with the agroforestry also with the retail business  
**1:00:58-1:01:17:**  as well but with the agroforestry particularly it allowed us to go to our landowner and say  listen we you know we've invested heavily in the farm we've improved the farm we want  a longer a rental arrangement so at year 10 we surrendered the rental agreement and took  
**1:01:17-1:01:36:**  another 15 years so that gives us 25 years.  I often say that we've made the farm so complicated that they can't let it to anybody else.  That's a good strategy.  
**1:01:36-1:01:55:**  And you know kind of taking this interview to an end because I want to be considerate  with your time as well and the clock is ticking but I'm interested to know a bit as a conclusion  what are the next steps for Whitehall Farm then because you still have you're still renting  
**1:01:55-1:02:06:**  so you know are you thinking of complexifying more if you get longer leases or how do you  imagine the next few years?  Yeah it's an interesting one.  
**1:02:06-1:02:25:**  Yeah we've done a lot probably more than what many farmers would do.  We the agroforestry is working you know I think I think that works well I don't think  I'd change too many things different varieties perhaps.  
**1:02:25-1:02:41:**  I think we may go back into some more vegetable production if market opportunities allow.  I am exploring the possibility of planting more trees but as nursery trees.  OK.  
**1:02:41-1:02:56:**  There's the climate change is a big demand throughout Europe for planting more trees.  Where is all that planting material going to come from?  Perhaps we can use agroforestry and instead of planting one tree in a row we plant two  
**1:02:56-1:03:08:**  and we leave one and we take the other out and sell it.  So now having the tree expertise that we could actually grow some planting material that  is using agroforestry as a nursery production system.  
**1:03:08-1:03:26:**  So that's that's one of the things I'm thinking about.  But we shall continue to do more and more on the retail and farm shop and the cafe and  the education and bringing people to the farm to learn about farming to buy produce and  
**1:03:26-1:03:31:**  add value that way.  So I think that's where our energy is going to go.  Sure.  
**1:03:31-1:03:55:**  And sorry to be honest I spent I spent a lot of time a lot of time talking to government  and policymakers.  You know 10 years ago agroforestry was ignored and to some extent ridiculed.  
**1:03:55-1:04:12:**  Five years ago polite interest.  We're now at a stage where actually because of Brexit we're actually developing our own  domestic agricultural policy and agroforestry is very much in favour by government and it  
**1:04:12-1:04:23:**  will be supported.  So we've actually helped.  I've been pretty central I think in helping government wake up to the benefits of agroforestry  
**1:04:23-1:04:41:**  underpinned by the research that others have done and we've done here.  And so we spent a lot of time and I will continue to spend a lot of time helping shape agricultural  policy here in the UK to make sure agroforestry is part of a land use system.  
**1:04:41-1:05:01:**  In fact you know I was the first vice president of the European Agroforestry Federation.  With Christian Dupras and I and others dreamt up over many bottles of wine late night in  Paris 2011 and 2012.  
**1:05:01-1:05:16:**  That's great.  Hopefully we'll be able to get Christian Dupras and others on the podcast as well because  I mean your whole group has done so much great work on agroforestry and so many helpful resources.  
**1:05:16-1:05:31:**  And to conclude I'm curious to have your opinion because you know we haven't really had the  time but you also to discuss this but you also did this trip and produced a report on  agroforestry in the world that's fascinating that we'll definitely put the link under the  
**1:05:31-1:05:47:**  episode so you have what I mean is that you have experience and have seen things way beyond  just your experience on your farm and from all that knowledge and your experience what  do you think are the kind of key points to focus on to develop agroforestry or the key  
**1:05:47-1:06:01:**  missing pieces of the puzzle?  Yeah as you rightly say I was very fortunate to be well first of all I was very fortunate  to be awarded a Nuffield scholarship to travel globally looking at agroforestry and I went  
**1:06:01-1:06:24:**  to North and South America, I spent time in China, all around Europe.  In fact just before Christmas last year I was awarded another award which was a recognition  of the person who had changed the industry most as a result of that Nuffield scholarship  
**1:06:24-1:06:46:**  which was a great accolade.  But in answer to your question in terms of where things might go what one might do differently  were some of the sort of blockages to agroforestry I think there are a number of things.  
**1:06:46-1:07:04:**  I actually if I had a crystal ball I think nut trees are going to be really important  over the next decade.  I think nut protein is going to be hugely important so I think agroforestry has a role  
**1:07:04-1:07:19:**  to play there.  I also think actually more collaborations you know if we want multifunctional land use  to deliver biodiversity, to deliver productivity, to be resilient against climate change and  
**1:07:19-1:07:33:**  agroforestry is very much multifunctional.  We actually need multi operator, one of the challenges of the Common Agricultural Policy  is that it says one person is in charge of this part of the land.  
**1:07:33-1:07:55:**  You might have multiple occupation and that requires that as a farmer I'm multi skilled,  I'm a biologist, I'm a physicist, I'm a chemist, I'm a plumber, electrician, accountant, you  know many things but as you rightly said I know about grain production I had to learn  
**1:07:55-1:08:09:**  about fruit production but I think there's an opportunity for people to work together  to cooperate so that perhaps one person manages the tree component or one person manages the  crops and another person manages the livestock.  
**1:08:09-1:08:27:**  But the policy structures don't allow that to happen.  They say that one person must be responsible for one parcel of land and that has to change  because if we want to build resilience against climate change we need to use each other's  
**1:08:27-1:08:43:**  knowledge and skills because we don't all know everything or have the skills ready.  What you just said resonates with me so much because my experience these last months traveling  to different farms in France is I've often found that you know we often think that the  
**1:08:43-1:09:01:**  limiting factor is land which is true it is hard to get you know access to land but I  met so many farmers that wanted to diversify, wanted to complexify but just didn't have  the skills, the resources or the time to do so and we're just looking basically for partners  
**1:09:01-1:09:17:**  to be able to do these things together and make the most out of these synergies.  So I think what you said is really key and we're definitely going to need some new collaborations  and you mentioned the legal side let's say the subsidy side the common agricultural policy  
**1:09:17-1:09:33:**  but that also means you know in kind of like the ways we are used to farm and that farmers  also you know connect back with a certain form of collective you know.  Some of the legal challenges are like the common agricultural policy or our own domestic  
**1:09:33-1:09:53:**  agricultural policy here in the UK or indeed land tenure so I rent the farm the rental  agreement doesn't allow me to let any land to anybody else because that would be subletting  but those kind of limitations stifle innovation.  
**1:09:53-1:10:16:**  The common agricultural policy has been good at food security but it's been it's massively  stifled innovation and if we want farming systems that are multifunctional and resilient  to climate change we need to you know have a new thinking to allow us to build systems  
**1:10:16-1:10:29:**  that have that innovation and that resilience.  And that's something I actually forgot to ask you but just quickly maybe could you tell  us how difficult is it to implement an agroforestry system on the land that you don't own because  
**1:10:29-1:10:41:**  then you have to go and ask permission from the landowner?  How does that go?  So you know two years before we established the agroforestry I had those conversations  
**1:10:41-1:10:57:**  with our landowner.  I had to sign a document which basically said if we surrender the farm and we give up the  rental agreement I have to take the trees with me and return it to agricultural land.  
**1:10:57-1:11:15:**  I'm hoping that in you know another 15 years when we eventually if we give up the farm  that the system will be will be so robust and work so well that another the following  occupier will say yeah we'll just keep them and that won't be a problem.  
**1:11:15-1:11:27:**  But I was prepared to take that risk so if nothing else then you know I would have to  start a firewood business.  Yeah I think so.  
**1:11:27-1:11:34:**  In 15 years time.  Wood carving, wood carving enterprise.  It's not the end of the world.  
**1:11:34-1:11:48:**  Listen Stefan thank you so much for all this information.  It's been really a great interview and it's really fascinating to be able to hear all  of your experience and everything that you've witnessed through experience on Whitehall  
**1:11:48-1:12:08:**  Farm so thank you so much.  It's a pleasure and I hope it makes interesting reading to or interesting listening I should  say to your listeners and I just take the opportunity to say you know in these challenging  
**1:12:08-1:12:22:**  times it's great to be in agriculture, great to watch agroforestry developing.  I hope everyone's well and safe.  Well thank you so much for listening we really hope you enjoyed it.  
**1:12:22-1:12:35:**  If you've made it this far we would like to know from you who you would like us to interview  on the podcast.  So please get in touch with us on our website and just let us know if there's anybody that  
**1:12:35-1:13:03:**  you're a fan of and you want us to question and you can even send us some questions so  that we can ask them exactly what you would like to know.  So don't hesitate to get in touch and see you next time.  