---
title: 15 Ducks And Stacking Entreprises On A Small Farm With Josh Heyneke
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

<script src="https://cdn.podlove.org/web-player/embed.js"></script>
    <script>
        document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', function () {
          if (document.readyState === 'interactive' || document.readyState === 'complete') {
            podlovePlayer('#player', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast/15-ducks-and-stacking-entreprises-on-a-small-farm-with-josh-heyneke.json', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast/config.json').then(registerExternalEvents('player'))
          }
        })
  </script>

### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2021-02-07)  

**0:00:00-0:00:23:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:23-0:00:33:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  these challenges.  
**0:00:33-0:00:48:**  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Hi everyone and welcome back to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:00:48-0:01:02:**  I'm your host Etienne.  Today we have the pleasure of talking with Josh Heineke from Park Courag in Wales.  This episode is really interesting because we get to really go in detail on his pastured  
**0:01:02-0:01:13:**  duck egg enterprise.  And this might not be the usual focus mainly on trees and interactions in the system, but  it is very interesting because it gives us a real understanding of the opportunities  
**0:01:13-0:01:24:**  and constraints of integrating dogs with other productions.  And anyone who doesn't know much about that will find it really interesting as we did.  We hope you enjoy the episode.  
**0:01:24-0:01:32:**  Hi Josh, welcome on the podcast.  Hey guys, thanks for having me.  To get started it would be really great if we could have a bit of an introduction to  
**0:01:32-0:01:42:**  your farm and an overview of your story.  Yeah, cool.  Well yeah, thanks again for having me on.  
**0:01:42-0:02:02:**  So as you guys might be able to hear, my accent is slightly strange.  I'm actually South African, born and raised in Cape Town.  And about 10 years ago I moved to the UK to live and work in London with my wife, Abigail,  
**0:02:02-0:02:19:**  who's British.  And yeah, we spent about eight years working in London.  My background is in marketing and sales, specifically in the tech sector.  
**0:02:19-0:02:35:**  So when I arrived in London, I got involved in the world of apps and smartphones very  early on.  And that was like my obsession when I first started my working career.  
**0:02:35-0:02:59:**  I was obsessed with tech and computers and growing trends in the tech space.  But after about eight years living and working in London, Abigail and I sort of reached a  point where we were a little bit sick of it all, to be honest with you.  
**0:02:59-0:03:13:**  We had concerns for the environment.  We had a few of our own sort of health problems.  And we were desperate to just get out of the city.  
**0:03:13-0:03:29:**  And we were desperate to do something with our hands and get outside, to be honest.  I'd been sitting in an office staring out the window at the sky wanting to be outside  and be in the fresh air.  
**0:03:29-0:03:48:**  And we had always joked about one day retiring and buying a farm and having animals and growing  our own food.  And eventually one day we sort of reached a point in London where we had had enough.  
**0:03:48-0:04:08:**  And we started exploring this idea of actually getting a farm and starting to farm.  And we didn't know how we would do it because it's an incredibly expensive thing to do,  especially in the UK where land is really expensive.  
**0:04:08-0:04:29:**  And the long story short is we ended up selling our flat in London and going on a little road  trip around the UK.  And we were lucky enough that we managed to come across 10 acres of pasture in Wales with  
**0:04:29-0:04:53:**  a little derelict Welsh cottage about four minutes up the road from that land.  That was an incredibly cheap buy because the house was in ruin and needed work.  So we came across a really good deal and we managed to be able to afford the land and  
**0:04:53-0:05:13:**  the house.  And yeah, we purchased that in sort of mid 2016 and here we are today.  So we started our farm and business sort of about 2017.  
**0:05:13-0:05:27:**  Farm's name is Parkarig, which in Welsh means stone field.  And that was just the name that was given to the fields by the previous owners.  And we just really liked it.  
**0:05:27-0:05:40:**  We thought Parkarig was quite a cool name.  Unlike most Welsh words, Parkarig is actually pretty easy to pronounce for most people.  So we thought we'd go with that.  
**0:05:40-0:05:59:**  But yeah, Abby and I have no experience in farming.  I mean, we had no experience in farming.  All we had was YouTube and the internet and Google and the various sort of permaculture  
**0:05:59-0:06:11:**  books that are out there.  Early on, we were really inspired by Mark Sheppard and Joel Salatin and Jean Martin  Fortier.  
**0:06:11-0:06:36:**  And yeah, we just became obsessed with permaculture, really inspired by permaculture and really  inspired by the idea of becoming self-sufficient.  And then as time went on and we started learning more and more, we came across this concept  
**0:06:36-0:06:52:**  of regenerative agriculture and we really sort of settled on that framework as the way  we wanted to move forward with our farm, Parkarig.  So yeah, that was in 2016.  
**0:06:52-0:07:09:**  We purchased the land and really things really only got kicked off properly in about 2017.  And are you both working, you and your partner and your wife, sorry, on the farm?  Yeah, so Abby and I are both 100% on the farm.  
**0:07:09-0:07:39:**  We made the decision early on when we quit our jobs in London and sold the flat, we decided  that we made a very definitive decision to go and become farmers as a career.  Even though we knew how difficult it was going to be to actually earn a living farming, we  
**0:07:39-0:08:00:**  thought that unless we actually, through everything we had at it, we'd never achieve anything  with it because there's a term called death ground strategy that I came across in a book,  which is just the concept that if you put your back up against the wall and you've got  
**0:08:00-0:08:21:**  no other, you've got no escape route, you'll fight way harder to survive.  And that's what Abby and I have done since leaving London.  So we took all of our savings and paid ourselves a salary from the very beginning and invested  
**0:08:21-0:08:29:**  all of our money in the land and this little cottage that we live in.  And we've not-  That's very brave.  
**0:08:29-0:08:43:**  Yeah, I mean, it's been incredibly scary and very stressful, especially in the first few  years when we were just like, what the hell are we doing?  We have no idea what we're doing and we don't know where to start.  
**0:08:43-0:09:07:**  And looking at 10 acres of grass, it's like a writer staring at a blank piece of paper  wondering what to put on the page.  It was a pretty scary experience in the beginning, but we were really motivated by the idea of  
**0:09:07-0:09:28:**  wanting to make a living 100% on the land and from farming.  And partly the reason why we wanted to do that is because we wanted to be our own bosses.  We didn't want to work for anyone else any longer and we just wanted to have the total  
**0:09:28-0:09:46:**  freedom of running our own business.  And we decided farming was going to be what we did.  So yeah, to answer your question in a long kind of way, Abby and I have been 100% on  
**0:09:46-0:10:04:**  Park and Rigg from the beginning.  It would be great to know after all of these decisions were made and everything and this  brave move to the countryside was done, what have you put on this blank slate?  
**0:10:04-0:10:17:**  What are you producing at the moment and who are you selling to?  Cool, yeah.  So like I said, we've got 10 acres and that's not a lot of space from a farming point of  
**0:10:17-0:10:38:**  view, especially if you want to try and make it commercially viable.  So our main focus right now is poultry and we have around about just under 400 ducks  at the moment for eggs and that is our primary business.  
**0:10:38-0:11:01:**  But around those ducks, we run about 50 breeding ewes, so we sell lamb, hoggets and mutton  locally.  We also planted about 700 blueberries on Park Rigg, which we actually haven't yet started  
**0:11:01-0:11:11:**  harvesting commercially.  So they've taken quite a while to establish and I can talk a bit more about that later  on.  
**0:11:11-0:11:34:**  So we've got the duck eggs, we've got meat, we've got blueberries and lastly we have annual  crops which change every year and really this is only our, we've only finished our fourth  season actually farming commercially.  
**0:11:34-0:11:51:**  So each year we sort of try a different thing when it comes to the annual cultivation, we  try something different each year.  Last year, the last two years actually we've done cut flowers and I can talk a little bit  
**0:11:51-0:12:11:**  more about that later on as to where that did and didn't work.  Last year, sorry, this year we'll be growing squash, specifically squash and I can talk  a bit more about why we're growing squash this year.  
**0:12:11-0:12:36:**  But yeah, so it's primarily duck eggs, blueberries, meat and then a variety of annual crops.  Okay and to give a bit of context to our listeners, tell us where you're located in Wales and  especially, this is the interesting one, how much rainfall do you have?  
**0:12:36-0:13:02:**  Rainfall in Wales, I should have actually, so we've got a lot of rainfall in Wales, off  the top of my head I can't put it into, I can't quantify it for you but it is a lot.  We are in West Wales, South West Wales in Camardinshire and yeah, it is very wet, incredibly  
**0:13:02-0:13:27:**  wet.  Otherwise in the winter, it doesn't really get colder, any colder than minus five centigrade.  It tends to hang around between one and five degrees centigrade during the winter.  
**0:13:27-0:13:51:**  Although in recent years, I think it's definitely been generally quite warm and wet which, you  know, no one likes.  In summer, it doesn't really tend to get, it doesn't get more than 25C very often.  
**0:13:51-0:14:06:**  There'll be periods where it's sort of between 25 and 30 degrees C but they don't last very  long.  And recently we have had, since we've arrived actually, I think probably three out of the  
**0:14:06-0:14:20:**  four years we've been here, we've probably had the worst droughts in the summer time  that our neighbours have ever seen actually.  And that's, you know, we've not been here long.  
**0:14:20-0:14:37:**  So it's been, it has been very dry in the spring specifically and then it has been incredibly  wet through the winter and autumn months.  Josh, could you tell us a bit more about where you sell your produce?  
**0:14:37-0:14:49:**  Because I don't know much about whales, but I figure it to be fairly remote for most of  it.  And I'm just wondering where you manage to sell duck eggs, if it's difficult or not.  
**0:14:49-0:15:09:**  And same thing for sheep in a region that produces a lot.  Yeah, so West Wales is pretty remote.  I mean, you know, we are quite far away from the majority of the economic activity in the  
**0:15:09-0:15:23:**  UK.  And so this part of the country, there are quite a few retired people who live out here,  but it's very sparsely populated.  
**0:15:23-0:15:40:**  So it can be quite difficult.  It's not as easy to sell your produce directly at a premium price here as it might be in  other parts of the country.  
**0:15:40-0:16:05:**  We however do have two local organic wholesalers, which we sell our duck eggs to.  And we also have a CSA down in Swansea called Kytan, which is really popular actually.  It's a really, really great example of a CSA.  
**0:16:05-0:16:23:**  Probably a good global example actually, but especially in the UK, it's probably one of  the best CSAs in the UK.  So we sell our duck eggs through Kytan in Swansea and they are about an hour and a half's  
**0:16:23-0:16:34:**  drive away from us.  So it's not convenient for us to deliver the eggs there.  For quite a while, we actually used a regular courier to send our eggs to Swansea for that  
**0:16:34-0:16:49:**  CSA.  But over time, it just didn't work out.  There were too many breakages and no matter what we did with the packaging or complaining  
**0:16:49-0:17:01:**  to the courier, nothing helped.  Couriers just throw packages around way too much.  So even if you write eggs everywhere and put fragile tape over it, they still throw the  
**0:17:01-0:17:15:**  thing around.  So eventually we managed to do a deal with our friends up the road who are organic wholesalers  and they just deliver them to Swansea for us for free actually.  
**0:17:15-0:17:29:**  They happen to be going there every week.  So they're just doing us a favor and getting our eggs to Kytan now.  But the logistics around getting our eggs to Kytan has always been a challenge up until  
**0:17:29-0:17:46:**  recently.  But that route to market for us is really great because that's the only channel where  we're selling our eggs at a retail price and it makes a huge difference.  
**0:17:46-0:18:02:**  We only sell about 20 dozen a week to Kytan, but getting that full retail price makes a  huge difference for us.  So we sell to two organic wholesalers in the area who then sell that on to the various  
**0:18:02-0:18:24:**  retailers in the area.  We sell to Kytan, the CSA, and then lastly, as of last year 2020, we managed to get in  with Able and Cole, which is a really great online organic retailer here in the UK.  
**0:18:24-0:18:33:**  And they're one of the largest online organic box schemes.  They're really cool.  You should check them out if you don't know them already.  
**0:18:33-0:18:57:**  So we now, as of last year, we sell our duck eggs through them.  And in terms of the meat, we've tried a variety of different things.  We've sold our meat boxes online by courier actually.  
**0:18:57-0:19:16:**  And so we've sold meat boxes nationally.  We've sold them both frozen and just cold, chilled using an insulated packaging that's  actually made from sheep's wool, believe it or not.  
**0:19:16-0:19:32:**  And that does incredibly well.  So you package it up and you wrap the sheep's wool around the meat, box it up, ship it off  for the courier, and it actually stays cold or frozen for three or four days at a push.  
**0:19:32-0:19:57:**  But we've sent meat nationally by next day courier for the last two years or so.  We also sell our meat locally to people through various retailers that we know.  They've sort of put us in touch with people looking for meat direct from farms.  
**0:19:57-0:20:12:**  So we've tried selling meat both locally and by box.  I actually prefer selling the meat locally.  It's much less stressful.  
**0:20:12-0:20:26:**  You don't have to worry about the courier losing the package or the package getting  delayed or sitting in a warm warehouse somewhere.  So yeah, I do prefer selling that way.  
**0:20:26-0:20:49:**  In regards to other produce, the cut flowers, we started off selling some at a local market  and then decided to go for online sales to sell it through the letterbox.  I'm not sure if you've heard of letterbox flowers before, but...  
**0:20:49-0:21:02:**  No, I haven't.  Yeah, so there's a company in the UK who sell packaging, which is the size of your letterbox,  but it's really long.  
**0:21:02-0:21:17:**  So you can put cut stems in that box and you can then send those cut stems just by post  basically and they can just get slid through the letterbox.  And it works great.  
**0:21:17-0:21:28:**  It works really, really well.  Obviously you want to choose flowers which are going to last better being out of water  and that's fine.  
**0:21:28-0:21:43:**  Abby did quite a lot of testing and came up with a really nice variety of flowers that  work by post.  So that whole concept works great and it's fantastic because we can sell our flowers  
**0:21:43-0:22:04:**  direct to the consumer and we can sell them nationally.  The only problem that we had was last year was going to be our big year for flower sales.  When it came to buying the packaging for the letterboxes, there was absolutely none available  
**0:22:04-0:22:20:**  and it was because of COVID.  I think basically there was something went wrong in the supply chain and the company  that we used to buy the letterboxes just stopped selling them basically.  
**0:22:20-0:22:36:**  And strangely they are literally the only company that make these letterboxes and I  went to a few other companies to see if they could make the same thing for us, but it just  worked out to be prohibitively expensive.  
**0:22:36-0:22:50:**  We just decided to scrap it last year and we didn't do the flowers through the letterbox.  So that would have been how we sell flowers.  That's really interesting, I never heard about that system.  
**0:22:50-0:23:08:**  But I was thinking moving on a bit to more the production aspect, since duck eggs is  the main one for you, could you tell us a bit more about that operation and the different  aspects and steps in raising ducks?  
**0:23:08-0:23:28:**  We keep khaki campbells primarily, but we also have duck campbells and we also have  Welsh harlequins.  Welsh harlequins are actually related to the khaki campbell, but they were a random genetic  
**0:23:28-0:23:49:**  mutation where they threw all sorts of beautiful patterning and they got named the Welsh harlequin.  But as many of your listeners might know, the khaki campbells are the world's best egg-laying  duck breed and they've been around for quite some time and they haven't been subject to  
**0:23:49-0:24:05:**  the same intensive breeding programs that most commercial chickens have.  They're still incredibly healthy birds and they are incredibly good at foraging over  large spaces.  
**0:24:05-0:24:37:**  In about 2018 we actually got our first flock of 100 ducks for Park Harig.  We decided to go for a permanent house, so rather than doing mobile housing which is  really obviously really popular amongst most regenerative farmers, the idea of being able  
**0:24:37-0:25:00:**  to rotate your chickens behind your sheep or your cattle is great, but in our circumstance  we decided to go for a static house for a number of reasons.  One of the reasons is that ducks don't take kindly to change, they really like having  
**0:25:00-0:25:23:**  a very consistent routine and they don't really like to be moved around as much as chickens  might.  Similar to that, you can herd ducks, so we can rotate our ducks around Park Harig but  
**0:25:23-0:25:36:**  then we can always herd them back to their house.  It's not like trying to herd chickens where they just scatter everywhere, ducks herd very  well and it's quite fun to do actually.  
**0:25:36-0:25:57:**  But the primary reason we decided to go for a static house is because as I mentioned earlier  we get a lot of rainfall in Wales and I was really concerned about how we were going to  move any mobile housing around on the fields without completely tearing them up.  
**0:25:57-0:26:15:**  If you're moving a house every few days on our fields 365 days a year, it won't be long  before we just have a mud pit basically.  So we decided that instead of having a mobile house that we moved around the fields with  
**0:26:15-0:26:37:**  a tractor or a car or whatever, we would build a static house.  We would keep the ducks there every night and then in the morning we would herd them  to a different station on the farm and encourage them to forage in that particular area for  
**0:26:37-0:26:59:**  a few days to a week and then move them on after that.  The other thing about ducks is that they really love water and they need water in order to  feed so they have to keep going back to their pools in order to properly wash down their  
**0:26:59-0:27:12:**  food.  We've got mobile paddle pools and IBCs with water in them and we've got the IBCs dotted  around the farm in various locations.  
**0:27:12-0:27:28:**  So we fill up these mobile paddle pools with water, we take the ducks to that area, they  swim and enjoy it and they hang around where the water is mostly.  Then when we want to move them on we just pour the dirty water out into whatever shrubs  
**0:27:28-0:27:49:**  might be nearby and then we fill them up in another location and the ducks move on.  That's how we rotate the ducks around the farm and that's why we decided to go for a  static house.  
**0:27:49-0:28:06:**  I'm curious about the feeding.  How do the ducks, you mentioned foraging but I was curious about the proportion of food  that they get from forage and how much you have to bring in as I could expect maybe grain  
**0:28:06-0:28:24:**  or how does their feeding work?  The feed is, as with most poultry, the number one problem from a regenerative point of view  is that it's our, and from the business side of things, it's our biggest input, it's our  
**0:28:24-0:28:52:**  biggest cost and it's where we make the most environmental impact.  So our ducks actually eat about 130 to 140 grams of feed each per day in the winter and  then in the summer it'll be a fair amount less than that.  
**0:28:52-0:29:14:**  It'll probably be more like 110, 120 grams of feed per duck per day but they do forage  a lot and I think that if we didn't have the forage for them, they would eat a lot more.  Ducks generally do eat more than chickens and that's quite well known.  
**0:29:14-0:29:40:**  They are very hungry birds but they are also incredibly good foragers.  So we do have to feed them and I have looked into many, many different ways as to how we  might be able to reduce that feed consumption and it's very difficult because you are asking  
**0:29:40-0:30:05:**  the bird to do a hell of a lot producing eggs year round and eggs with high quality.  But in terms of foraging, those ducks are on every square inch of the fields.  They go to every corner of our 10 acre fields and we have noticed, I mean when we first  
**0:30:05-0:30:26:**  purchased our fields back in 2016 and we were just sort of walking around on this big blank  set of fields with pretty much nothing other than grass, we had so many slugs.  I can't even describe to you how many slugs we had.  
**0:30:26-0:30:39:**  In fact, for about 3 or 4 months we actually lived on our fields before we had managed  to complete the purchase on our house.  All we had was the fields and we didn't yet have anywhere to live.  
**0:30:39-0:30:57:**  So we had a caravan and we put the caravan on the fields and we lived in the caravan  on the fields for about 3 or 4 months and it was so terrible.  Slugs would just, we would come home to our caravan at night and they would just be crawling  
**0:30:57-0:31:12:**  everywhere all over our shoes and our tent and our caravan everywhere and if you walked  along the fields they would basically be crawling up your legs.  The climate in Wales for slugs is just perfect.  
**0:31:12-0:31:30:**  It's like warm and wet.  And honestly, right now we just, there are still slugs on our fields but the ducks have  completely put them under control.  
**0:31:30-0:31:52:**  And now whenever we grow something that is prone to slug damage, I mean I'll come back  to this later but our annual veg garden or annual garden is directly below the duck house  because of the fact that we produce so much manure in the duck house we wanted a quick  
**0:31:52-0:32:05:**  easy place to go and dump that which is on our annual garden.  And there are no slugs there to worry about.  I mean we can grow, our neighbours, like we can grow crops that our neighbours would be  
**0:32:05-0:32:19:**  terrified about growing because of the slug damage but it doesn't affect us because those  ducks keep it in check.  They absolutely love slugs.  
**0:32:19-0:32:38:**  In terms of pests, the other thing that the ducks actually eat which we learnt sort of  some part way into our journey with ducks, we learnt that they also happen to like eating  voles, specifically baby voles.  
**0:32:38-0:32:59:**  So if they come across a nest of baby voles they will gobble them up and early on we actually  had quite a lot of vol damage to our blueberries where voles would sort of burrow around the  roots of the blueberries and cause damage.  
**0:32:59-0:33:15:**  And I don't see that anymore and I'm pretty sure that the ducks have something to do with  it because they spend a lot of time in the blueberry patch foraging around there and  they've got their beaks in all the little holes and all the mulch and stuff.  
**0:33:15-0:33:28:**  Another reason why there are so many voles in our blueberry patch is because of how much  mulch we use on blueberries.  So using mulch on blueberries is fantastic but it also tends to harbour a lot of pests  
**0:33:28-0:33:45:**  and things like voles.  So combining the ducks with that has been incredibly beneficial.  So that brings you very nicely to one of the big topics that we wanted to work with you.  
**0:33:45-0:34:04:**  Of course we talked about this previously before this interview together but the whole  point of our talk was to really focus on the interactions between the different elements  which you started to introduce there with the gardens and the ducks and also with the  
**0:34:04-0:34:15:**  berries and the ducks.  We have a special interest in understanding your berry system and how the ducks are interacting  with that.  
**0:34:15-0:34:29:**  Of course you mentioned some of the pest issues that have been controlled or that are managed  by the ducks which is fascinating.  But could you also give us a description of how they're rotated in the system?  
**0:34:29-0:34:43:**  How often do you put them in there?  So like I said we planted about 700 blueberries and there's more to talk about in terms of  what else we planted around those blueberries and underneath the blueberries.  
**0:34:43-0:35:02:**  But just to start off with the ducks, so they spend quite a lot of time in the blueberry  patch.  We don't have, with our ducks we don't have a rotation, we don't have a super quick rotation  
**0:35:02-0:35:16:**  on our farm so we don't rotate every sort of three days or even every week.  We tend to spend a couple of weeks in one spot and then a couple of weeks in another  spot and then a couple of weeks in another spot.  
**0:35:16-0:35:31:**  Within each of those spots there are rotations so because ducks can create mud when they  dabble in the fields they can, if there's any standing water and they dabble there they  will create mud.  
**0:35:31-0:35:54:**  So we have sort of, you could divide our 10 acres up into sort of four quadrants and they'd  spend a few weeks in each of those quadrants.  And within each of those quadrants they'd probably spend four days on a different spot.  
**0:35:54-0:36:09:**  So there'd be a few IBCs there filled with water and we'd rotate them around inside that  quadrant so that they don't create any negative impact on the soil in that one spot.  Without fencing right?  
**0:36:09-0:36:22:**  You just move the IBC and the ducks follow.  Yeah without fencing.  So we do have fencing between the four quadrants that I mentioned that there is fencing there  
**0:36:22-0:36:34:**  that isn't perfect.  I'll say it's not.  That fencing is mainly for sheep and it broadly sort of keeps the ducks in that general area.  
**0:36:34-0:36:50:**  But the ducks are basically in our hedges, they pop through the sheep fences, they love  to run up and down the hedges and forage deep within the hedges where we've just got no  chance of getting them if they go in there.  
**0:36:50-0:37:13:**  But yeah so the general quadrants that I mentioned we have some fencing between that but generally  speaking we don't try and fence the ducks in, we just move their water and they spend  the vast majority of time at those water stations and then they do like little sort of missions  
**0:37:13-0:37:26:**  where they go off and they scatter out and they go and forage and then they come back  to their water and then they drink and they hang out and they swim and then they do another  little excursion out and they forage.  
**0:37:26-0:37:43:**  So you're making them seem like such fun animals.  We can imagine a group of mates having some fun.  They are, they're incredibly busy little things and they're constantly active.  
**0:37:43-0:38:06:**  There is a time during the day where they'll just chill out and have a sleep but most of  the time they're like running around, they're like running to the next slug.  But yeah so the reason we didn't like with the fencing side of things and with the rotations  
**0:38:06-0:38:20:**  like I can see with chickens how it might be a bit different.  The way they scratch the ground creates a lot more impact than ducks generally do.  Like ducks have flat feet and they don't scratch the ground.  
**0:38:20-0:38:37:**  They do dabble in it with their beaks but they create a lot less impact like that on  the soil than chickens do unless there's standing water.  If there's standing water, ducks will just dive in and take advantage and you've got  
**0:38:37-0:38:48:**  a problem very quickly.  So managing like water on our farm is the number one challenge and the most important  thing to do especially in Wales.  
**0:38:48-0:39:07:**  But generally speaking ducks cause a lot less impact than chickens do and when we looked  at our farm system and how we were going to manage ducks like trying to fence them in  and rotate them was just going to be so complicated and time consuming that we just sort of let  
**0:39:07-0:39:24:**  it happen and we just sort of went with the flow.  Like we gently guide them with water around the farm but we don't try and force them to  stay in any particular spot because a we don't really see any negative consequences and b  
**0:39:24-0:39:40:**  I think it would just cause us too much hassle, too much cost in both time and fencing to  practically do.  And in terms of predators do you get any issues due to that lack of fencing?  
**0:39:40-0:40:03:**  Yeah we do have issues but what we've got so the predators are generally seasonal so  well first of all our main problem is foxes.  We do every now and then get other little guys coming along but it's mainly foxes that  
**0:40:03-0:40:31:**  are the problem and foxes they only really strike at night except during the spring when  they are feeding their young when they've had a litter and they're trying to feed their  young or when young foxes, young new foxes come into the territory and they don't and  
**0:40:31-0:40:45:**  they don't no one's given them the memo on the fact that they're not meant to hunt during  the day.  So either juvenile foxes or hungry mothers that are trying to feed their babies those  
**0:40:45-0:41:03:**  are the two times when it's risky during the spring and so the only time they really come  out during the daytime is in the spring.  So most of the year the ducks are fine because they're in very secure night housing and we've  
**0:41:03-0:41:26:**  got a lot of electric that we keep very hot set up and that keeps them safe.  But during the springtime we have had we have we did go through a year where we had quite  a few daytime kills and so what we've done is we've actually gone and we've created a  
**0:41:26-0:41:42:**  really big safe zone.  So we put we put some fox proof electric fencing in a big ring around the blueberry patch and  around our annual garden and around the duck house.  
**0:41:42-0:41:58:**  And during the springtime when there's danger of daytime kills we leave the ducks in that  center ring and it's a really big space so they've still got lots of room to forage but  they're protected from the foxes.  
**0:41:58-0:42:13:**  So that's how we've gotten around that so far.  Now that we've like really covered the you know the basics of of of duck you know we've  done duck 101 duck production which is which is I personally didn't know much about it  
**0:42:13-0:42:25:**  at all.  Let's recenter a bit to ducks and berries.  So how are the ducks interacting with the berries and you know more broadly speaking why did  
**0:42:25-0:42:52:**  you integrate the ducks in the berry patch and how successful has it been?  Yeah so it just seemed like such a good combination ducks and blueberries because primarily at  the moment it's I'd say it's it does it's been more beneficial for the ducks than it has for the blueberries at this point.  
**0:42:52-0:43:08:**  But I wouldn't say that it's been negative it's been negative for the blueberries.  There are pros and cons.  So ducks will eat blueberries that's the first point to make.  
**0:43:08-0:43:23:**  They don't preference them over a slug should I say that if there was a slug and a blueberry  next to each other they'd go for the slug.  But ducks are also very short and they don't have a very high reach.  
**0:43:23-0:43:41:**  So we we are really looking at this as more the blueberries is more of a long term investment.  So as those blue blueberry bushes typically get pretty big.  I mean I'd say probably around two meters high.  
**0:43:41-0:44:00:**  So in the years to come the berries will not be around the base of the bush.  The vast majority of them will be well out of reach of the ducks.  So from commercial point of view on the berries we we look at them as more of a long term  
**0:44:00-0:44:11:**  investment.  The ducks don't do any of the damage to the blueberry bushes apart from picking the berries  that they can reach.  
**0:44:11-0:44:26:**  They don't strip the bark or do anything like that.  They also don't scratch around the base of the blueberries like a chicken would.  And that's part that was actually one of the early reasons why we decided to go for ducks  
**0:44:26-0:44:42:**  over chickens is because we were mulching our blueberries with a lot of wood chip at  the time.  And we were concerned that if we had chickens in there they would just literally scratch  
**0:44:42-0:44:53:**  all the wood chip away from underneath the blueberries.  Also blueberries have a really fine root system like almost like hairs that run along the  surface of the soil.  
**0:44:53-0:45:08:**  So they're very shallow, very fine root system.  And we weren't too comfortable with having chickens scratching that root system too.  In practice I don't know if it would have harmed them but we just weren't comfortable  
**0:45:08-0:45:22:**  with that.  So ducks were ducks work quite well with blueberries in that sense that you know they're flat footed.  They dabble a bit with their beaks but they won't rip up the roots and they won't spread  
**0:45:22-0:45:41:**  the mulch around.  So yeah I think the ducks and the blueberries play well nicely.  Obviously the blueberries provide shade and shelter for the ducks and they really love  
**0:45:41-0:45:58:**  that.  They'll go and like nest underneath the blueberry bush in the hot sun.  And because we've put so much mulch down underneath the blueberries and we've also planted an  
**0:45:58-0:46:26:**  array of beneficial plants underneath the blueberries, there's a lot of habitat there.  So when we set up the blueberry patch our goal was always to create as much habitat  as we can that would collaborate or live alongside the blueberries as best as possible.  
**0:46:26-0:46:48:**  And that habitat which provides lots of space for insects and voles actually provides a  lot of forage for the ducks at the same time.  So as much as possible we wanted to try and build an ecosystem within the blueberry patch.  
**0:46:48-0:47:14:**  We didn't want to use plastic sheet mulching, permanent plastic to keep the weeds away.  Obviously we weren't going to spray any pesticides or whatever to keep the weeds away.  We also decided pretty early on that it just wasn't because of the size of our blueberry  
**0:47:14-0:47:37:**  patch and because of the fact that we're not using any sort of mechanized weeding systems,  we decided that weeding the blueberry patch by hand was pretty much unfeasible.  I mean it's huge and like we tried for the first few years weeding it and we got lots  
**0:47:37-0:47:51:**  of help.  But it was just like a never-ending impossible task.  So we decided instead of trying to fight the weeds we would essentially encourage growth  
**0:47:51-0:48:04:**  of all sorts of different plants.  We'd sow and plant as many different things as we could that we thought might be beneficial  to the ecosystem in general and that might fight off the grass somewhat.  
**0:48:04-0:48:24:**  So as a result we've got something of an ecosystem establishing in there and an understory underneath  the blueberries which is establishing and which the ducks like quite a lot.  And just to recap, to understand where the idea of integrating both came from, it was  
**0:48:24-0:48:39:**  really starting from like a slug control perspective or more from a weeding perspective.  What was really the initial idea?  So the blueberry patch, so when we bought our fields and looked at that blank slate  
**0:48:39-0:48:55:**  and tried to figure out what on earth we were going to do, we knew we wanted a combination  of things because we weren't going to set up a monoculture.  But we didn't know exactly what that combination was going to be.  
**0:48:55-0:49:11:**  So we started by implementing the blueberry patch purely because we knew that it was going  to take five years before they started being really productive anyway.  So we thought, well, we may as well get this process kickstarted.  
**0:49:11-0:49:21:**  We knew we wanted blueberries.  We knew we had the right soil for it.  We knew that they would grow okay in the area because we'd seen someone locally growing  
**0:49:21-0:49:35:**  them and we knew they were a high value crop and we liked eating blueberries ourselves.  So we decided, okay, we're going to go for blueberries.  And we went ahead and we just planted 700 blueberries.  
**0:49:35-0:49:46:**  And then we sort of moved on to the next stage, which was how are we going to manage the grass  and the hedges?  And we decided we'd use sheep for that.  
**0:49:46-0:50:03:**  And I can talk more about the tree rows that we've got separately.  But it was only after getting, we just decided to go and get a handful of, we got like seven  ducks from a friend up the road just because we were interested in them.  
**0:50:03-0:50:18:**  And we just fell in love with ducks, to be honest with you.  It was only a little bit later that we decided to do ducks commercially and that they would  work well with the blueberry patch.  
**0:50:18-0:50:30:**  There was never any requirement to reduce pests.  Like blueberries don't tend to really suffer that much from, they don't suffer from slug  damage.  
**0:50:30-0:50:44:**  For example, slugs don't really impact blueberries.  Vols do impact blueberries.  We didn't actually know we'd had, we would have a vol problem until it popped up.  
**0:50:44-0:51:01:**  But then we found out that the ducks were helping with the vols in the end.  So that was sort of by accident.  But generally the reason we, I'd say when we decided to go for ducks commercially, one  
**0:51:01-0:51:16:**  of the reasons was that we knew that they would have less negative impact on the beds  underneath the blueberries.  And so, and that we wouldn't have to manage them too carefully under the blueberries.  
**0:51:16-0:51:31:**  So I'd say it was initially, it was mostly because we thought the ducks would do less  harm than chickens would do.  And we just really wanted to get ducks because we thought they were really cool for a number  
**0:51:31-0:51:43:**  of reasons.  Initially you integrated them more out of like a constraint in terms of space and to  be able to stack enterprises and make your like 10 acres as productive as possible rather  
**0:51:43-0:51:58:**  than really out of like kind of mutual beneficial interaction between two elements.  Yeah, that's correct.  So stacking enterprises on Parc Carig was something we knew we had to do from the beginning  
**0:51:58-0:52:16:**  because 10 acres was never going to be enough for a monoculture and we didn't want to do  a monoculture.  So we knew that having a perennial crop, some ruminants, some poultry, some trees, some  
**0:52:16-0:52:34:**  annual cultivation, we knew that just having all of those things in combination on the  fields would increase biodiversity and would improve the soil and if managed correctly  would be beneficial generally from an ecological point of view.  
**0:52:34-0:52:55:**  So we knew that just having multiple different elements to our business and multiple different  enterprises would be beneficial not only commercially but also ecologically.  But we didn't at that point have, I think that we started off thinking, well, the ducks  
**0:52:55-0:53:09:**  are not going to do any damage to the blueberries.  So that was our first, I think, point of decision making.  We did also think, well, the ducks are at the very least going to fertilize the blueberries  
**0:53:09-0:53:22:**  through their manure by foraging in there.  And we did quite early on realize that there would be a lot of habitat in the blueberry  patch which the ducks could forage on.  
**0:53:22-0:53:44:**  So I think from the beginning it was probably more a case of realizing that the ducks would  not cause any harm to the blueberries but also that the blueberries would probably provide  some forage to the ducks.  
**0:53:44-0:53:55:**  That makes sense.  It's kind of hard to, thinking back now, it's kind of hard to remember in which order we  made those decisions but it all kind of unfolded quite well.  
**0:53:55-0:54:13:**  I'm curious about the weeding in the blueberry patch.  How effective are the ducks at removing or taking care of the weeding operation?  Because of course, I imagine you're not getting rid of all the grass.  
**0:54:13-0:54:23:**  You've probably got rows with some grass in between as well.  But how much do you intervene by hand and how much do you just let the ducks do the  work?  
**0:54:23-0:54:33:**  Yeah, so actually to be honest with you, the ducks did a terrible job at weeding.  I mean, they don't really, like I said earlier, they don't scratch around with their feet  like chickens do.  
**0:54:33-0:54:48:**  So chickens would actually do a better job weeding but they would have to be managed  a lot more carefully to concentrate that weeding.  And also they'd probably cause more damage to the blueberries root systems than good.  
**0:54:48-0:55:03:**  But the ducks don't really weed because they've got those flat feet and they dabble with their  beaks around the base of the blueberries and in between the bushes looking for insects.  They really are more carnivorous than they are.  
**0:55:03-0:55:21:**  They much prefer eating more insects than they do herbage compared to chicken.  So yeah, the ducks don't really...  I should have phrased it in a different way.  
**0:55:21-0:55:33:**  I wasn't clear enough.  Maybe I meant about how effective they are at suppressing the grasses.  For example, if you manage to get them in the patch and to really give a big hit on  
**0:55:33-0:55:47:**  the grass for a quite significant amount of time, it will really reduce the pressure of  the grasses on the berries, for example.  And I'm curious to what extent you can use the ducks to really control the grass and  
**0:55:47-0:55:57:**  keep it suppressed.  So you've been at strategic times so that you're benefiting the growth and limiting  of the berries and you're limiting the competition from the grass.  
**0:55:57-0:56:16:**  Yeah, what the ducks tend to do with the grass is they flatten it.  And the impact that ducks have on grass is mostly literally just foot traffic, like lots  of little flat feet busily running around.  
**0:56:16-0:56:29:**  And so it is a bit like...  It's not quite like hoof impact from ruminants, but they do a little bit of nibbling of the  grass, but they don't do much grass eating.  
**0:56:29-0:56:43:**  Okay, I had the understanding that they did quite a bit of foraging.  Yeah, so when I say foraging, I mean, I'm actually purely talking about insects, to  be honest with you.  
**0:56:43-0:56:54:**  Okay, okay, nice.  Okay, that's good clarification.  Yeah, that's probably something I should have highlighted earlier, more so is that another...  
**0:56:54-0:57:10:**  I mean, when I told you about all the slugs that we had on our fields, I mean, that was  another huge motivation for us to get ducks because it's something that you'll see commonly  a lot on the internet about ducks is how much they'll eat slugs and how much they'll forage  
**0:57:10-0:57:22:**  for insects, more so than chickens.  I mean, I've seen ducks neck down like huge slugs that they nearly choked on, to be honest  with you.  
**0:57:22-0:57:34:**  Like, you can see them literally gobble it down and go down their throats.  And it's like this big lump that sort of like goes on the throat, they absolutely love it.  But ducks are much more carnivorous than chickens.  
**0:57:34-0:57:52:**  And yeah, when I mean forage, I mostly mean insects, although something really interesting  happened recently, which is that we found out that our ducks had been eating a lot and  I mean a lot of acorns.  
**0:57:52-0:58:10:**  Like we had a good year for acorns this year.  The oaks just dropped loads and we discovered that the ducks had been completely gobbling  up all the acorns.  
**0:58:10-0:58:24:**  And they were eating so much, in fact, that it was actually affecting the color of their  yolks.  And I found this because I was really worried, like we started getting these like strange  
**0:58:24-0:58:35:**  green yolks on our eggs.  Like a sort of a, it's hard to describe, but a sort of a almost like, yeah, basically just  olive green yolks.  
**0:58:35-0:58:56:**  And usually they're like, you know, really deep, rich orange colored.  And I ended up finding a study that was done in like the 1940s where they actually did  an experiment and they showed that specifically ducks, although chickens also do it, but ducks  
**0:58:56-0:59:08:**  particularly love acorns.  If you feed acorns to ducks, it takes about three or four days before their yolks start  going green.  
**0:59:08-0:59:25:**  And it's because of the tannins that are in the husk of acorns.  So the shell on the outside has lots of tannins in it and that actually turns the yolks green.  So I must have been scary at the beginning, like what's happening?  
**0:59:25-0:59:35:**  Because it's not very reassuring in terms of green.  We often associate with in food as a color that's, well, I mean, in the terms of eggs,  it would be something not reassuring, but in this case it's different.  
**0:59:35-0:59:44:**  And I wonder the influence that it would have on the taste as well.  Yeah.  So we were really nervous about it because we were like, oh man, why are we getting loads  
**0:59:44-0:59:53:**  of rotten eggs or something?  Like what's happening?  And then a few customers actually got in touch with us and said like, hey, just so you know,  
**0:59:53-1:00:04:**  like I've got this green egg popping up.  And yeah, we were really perturbed by it.  We were kind of like, what's going on here?  
**1:00:04-1:00:15:**  And yeah, we initially avoided eating them and then did some research on it.  And I was initially like, nah, really?  Is this true?  
**1:00:15-1:00:25:**  And I did more like scratching around and Googling and then actually came across the  study and I was like, no, this is legit.  They are actually eating acorns.  
**1:00:25-1:00:43:**  And then I remembered that I had seen like absolutely tons of acorns on the field.  And they had pretty much all disappeared since I'd seen them drop earlier this year, earlier  last year.  
**1:00:43-1:01:00:**  And then we realized that actually we were running two separate flocks.  So one of the flocks was in an area where the acorns had been dropping and the other  flock was in the central ring in the blueberry patch where there were no acorn trees, like  
**1:01:00-1:01:10:**  no oaks.  So there were no acorns in pasture.  And we realized that we were getting no, there were no green eggs coming out of the one flock  
**1:01:10-1:01:25:**  and all the green eggs were coming out of the other flock, which had access to acorns.  So we were pretty convinced that it had to be the acorns.  And we obviously ate the eggs and didn't die.  
**1:01:25-1:01:35:**  And we were happy with that.  The taste was slightly different.  Like it was, you'd really have to be looking for it to notice a difference in taste, but  
**1:01:35-1:01:54:**  yeah, slightly different.  Talking about the acorns and the trees around, you mentioned, well, I'd like to move on to  talking about hedges and that aspect of the farm, which you've planted a lot of.  
**1:01:54-1:02:08:**  So could you maybe explain to us what species you planted around the berries to start off  with and why?  Because you made a comment about it earlier on and I'm sure many of us are curious to  
**1:02:08-1:02:19:**  understand more about this.  Yeah, cool.  So actually when we were plowing the blueberry patch and when we had come to the realization  
**1:02:19-1:02:38:**  that we just weren't going to weed this thing by hand, I mean, like it was just unfeasible.  We started, instead of trying to fight the undergrowth, we started looking at what we  could sort of plant there that would compete with the grass.  
**1:02:38-1:02:55:**  And we noticed that you actually get in Wales, you get wild blueberries obviously tend to  be more of a North American crop and plant.  But in Wales, you do get something called the bilberry and they are like much smaller  
**1:02:55-1:03:05:**  versions of blueberries.  And we actually noticed that you get them growing in the hedges around the countryside  here.  
**1:03:05-1:03:32:**  And we thought, well, okay, why don't we try and mimic the hedges to some extent and plant  similar wild plants that you would see in the hedges alongside these cultivated blueberries.  And so we went down a path of sort of seeding and planting a bunch of different things in  
**1:03:32-1:03:46:**  the blueberry patch underneath the blueberries.  I mean, we planted a lot, like a lot of different stuff and a lot of it's disappeared and some  of it survived and then we've also had volunteers come up of other things.  
**1:03:46-1:04:00:**  But we planted things like cow parsley and yarrow, aquilegia.  We planted various bulbs, various alliums and daffodils, which you get in the hedges  here.  
**1:04:00-1:04:19:**  You get a lot of wild garlic in the hedges here, which I don't know if you guys have  come across, but it's like, it's this really awesome, just like leaf sort of succulent  leafy green that you get in the hedges, which if you crush it, it just stinks like garlic.  
**1:04:19-1:04:34:**  So in the spring you just get, you walk down the hedges and you just smell garlic everywhere.  So we planted little bulbs of wild garlic in the blueberry patch.  You also get wild strawberries in the hedges here.  
**1:04:34-1:04:51:**  So we planted cultivated strawberries in the blueberry patch.  And that's been, actually we spent quite a bit of time doing that and it's quite a large  part of our strategy in the blueberry patch, which is that because strawberries spread  
**1:04:51-1:05:10:**  so quickly and so easily and they compete incredibly well with the grass, we just figured,  we'll just plant as many strawberry runners as we can underneath the blueberries and let  them run wild basically.  
**1:05:10-1:05:19:**  And we'll harvest the strawberries for ourselves and if they do particularly well, we'll sell  them.  And we've done that and it's actually worked incredibly well.  
**1:05:19-1:05:31:**  Like the strawberries have spread a lot underneath the blueberries and it's difficult to tell  whether they're competing.  That was my concern.  
**1:05:31-1:05:44:**  Right now I was thinking, I was about to ask you, how is that dealing with competition  because standard procedure would have, you know, like let's say wood chip underneath  and just keeping it at that, especially in the establishment phase.  
**1:05:44-1:05:59:**  Yeah, so we do actually mulch.  So we're using a combination of mulch and understory.  So we do actually mulch directly underneath the blueberry.  
**1:05:59-1:06:16:**  And we started off using wood chip, but wood chip became for various reasons impractical  because of the fact that it's actually becoming kind of expensive to get people.  It used to be a waste product and now it's become really popular and getting hold of  
**1:06:16-1:06:29:**  wood chip is quite difficult for the right price.  And when you're doing it on that kind of scale, it gets quite expensive.  It's also quite a heavy and bulky thing to move around.  
**1:06:29-1:06:46:**  And I was getting silage trailers, like tractor loads of silage trailers coming onto the field.  I mean, we had, in one year we put eight silage trailers of wood chip on the blueberry patch  and we did that all by hand by wheelbarrow.  
**1:06:46-1:07:02:**  And it was just, it was immense.  It was so much work and it literally rotted away within kind of 18 to 24 months.  I mean, yeah, pretty much 18 months and the weeds were coming back up through it.  
**1:07:02-1:07:23:**  So we've now moved over to using sheep's wool actually.  So when we shear the sheep in the springtime, we use their wool underneath the blueberries  and we also get wool from some of our neighbors and we use that underneath the blueberries.  
**1:07:23-1:07:37:**  Wool's like an incredible mulch.  It's amazing.  It takes years and years for it to rot down and it creates this really dense mat.  
**1:07:37-1:07:55:**  Once it gets wet and it's sort of partially rots down, it just creates this sort of really  dense carpet around the base of the blueberries.  So we're using wool at the moment directly under the blueberries and then in between  
**1:07:55-1:08:06:**  the spaces of the blueberries, because the beds are quite big and there's quite a lot  of space between the blueberries because they're still young.  That's where we're planting and focusing our efforts on the strawberries and the various  
**1:08:06-1:08:22:**  other things that we've put in there.  So yeah, and then as time goes by, we expect the blueberries to get much bigger and start  shading out underneath themselves and in between themselves.  
**1:08:22-1:08:47:**  So we don't expect too much competition and problem in the next sort of five years' time.  But whilst they're all still small, we use wool underneath them.  It's interesting you mention that because woodchips was a strategy, let's say, which  
**1:08:47-1:08:57:**  would limit the weeds more or maybe limit the competition more for a certain period  of time.  But it's so much effort and energy that you can compromise by doing the strategy that  
**1:08:57-1:09:13:**  you've been trying out over there and doing with the strawberries, for example, which  may bring some more competition, which may increase the time at which you'll harvest  berries, but it's going to be much less energy and labor intensive.  
**1:09:13-1:09:25:**  So there's a compromise there to choose, I can expect, in your case.  Yeah, indeed.  I mean, it's similar to the ducks and the fencing and the rotations.  
**1:09:25-1:09:35:**  The cost and benefit just didn't really weigh up for us.  Woodchip is amazing.  I love woodchip.  
**1:09:35-1:09:56:**  I've used a lot of it in various parts of the field.  If I was managing a much smaller space with perennials, I'd choose woodchip every time.  But on that kind of scale, by hand, by wheelbarrow, it just wasn't worth it.  
**1:09:56-1:10:13:**  So yeah, the wool works well.  And also, just on the strawberries, I mean, it's difficult to tell how much competition  there is between the strawberries and the blueberries, but I know that strawberries  
**1:10:13-1:10:33:**  tend to want a lot more fertilizer.  They're heavier feeders, whereas blueberries, they fruit better when there's less nitrogen.  So the more nitrogen you give a blueberry, the more leafy green it gets and the less  
**1:10:33-1:10:46:**  of a heavy crop you'll tend to get.  They tend to put more energy into growing new shoots.  Certainly in the establishment phase, you could argue that your blueberries will enjoy  
**1:10:46-1:11:06:**  all that nitrogen and they'll put on lots of bushy growth and then you can get your  berries further down the line.  But yeah, I think the blueberry patch for us has really been quite an experiment and  
**1:11:06-1:11:28:**  we see it very much as a long-term endeavor and a long-term investment.  I'm more interested in what it's going to do after a decade of being planted because  our cash crops are really the duck eggs primarily and then our annual cultivation and our sheep.  
**1:11:28-1:11:48:**  Those quickly turn around cash for us.  But with the blueberries, I kind of look at them as a sort of a 10-year investment and  I know that there are blueberry plantations in Poland, I think, and in North America that  
**1:11:48-1:12:06:**  are nearly 100 years old.  So they've got a lot of life in them and it's more of a long game.  But if we were going to plant blueberries commercially and really make the best of them,  
**1:12:06-1:12:29:**  actually just putting them in straight rows with plastic mulch and fertilizer and all  that stuff would do loads better.  We're actually one of, I think we're one of two, maybe three organic blueberry growers  
**1:12:29-1:12:51:**  in the whole of the UK.  The rest of the blueberry growers in the UK all grow them in pots in polytunnels with  loads of specific sort of acid-loving compost and fertilizers specifically suited to blueberries.  
**1:12:51-1:13:13:**  And that's the commercial blueberries grown in the UK.  I think that growing organic blueberries outdoors in the UK is very niche and very experimental.  And to really make it work commercially, I think is in the short term is not really possible.  
**1:13:13-1:13:30:**  It's much more of a long game than a quick turnaround.  So yeah, when it comes to planting an understory underneath the blueberries, I'm not too bothered  about short term competition.  
**1:13:30-1:13:53:**  And I'm kind of, when you think about sort of Mark Shepherd's approach, his stun approach,  sheer total out of neglect, I am a little bit, I am warm to the idea of actually going,  all right, we've planted 700 blueberries in this patch.  
**1:13:53-1:14:17:**  We've given them a little bit of a hard time compared to most commercial plantations.  Maybe only 400 of them actually make it through the first five years and turn into big bushes.  But at least then we'll have 400 really strong genetic examples in the patch.  
**1:14:17-1:14:39:**  And we're prepared to wait because basically we've got all the other businesses, the enterprises  on Park Carrigg helping us get along in the beginning cash wise.  Josh, sorry to interrupt, but I'm seeing the clock is ticking and I did want to ask a bit  
**1:14:39-1:14:56:**  about the other trees you've planted beyond the blueberry patch and understand a bit more  about the hedges and the trees you might have planted.  Yeah, so, as I said earlier, the sheep do a fantastic job for us in terms of managing  
**1:14:56-1:15:16:**  the grass and trimming the hedges back.  So they keep the hedges in shape and the grass and the edges under control.  We manage our hedges by hand, which is a hell of a task and one which, to be honest with  
**1:15:16-1:15:26:**  you, we're a little bit behind on.  But what we've primarily been doing at this point is growth that's growing sideways into  the field.  
**1:15:26-1:15:45:**  We've been trimming off and feeding to the sheep in the summer.  So it provides really nice tree fodder for the sheep.  And there are various sort of benefits for parasites and whatnot for the sheep.  
**1:15:45-1:16:02:**  And then we're trimming, we're sort of training the trees and hedges to be more suited for  coppicing.  So in the future, we would like to coppice the hedges and lay the hedges as well.  
**1:16:02-1:16:23:**  So there'll be areas where we'll use them for coppicing for firewood, and then there'll  be areas where we'll lay them to create sort of a living fence.  So that's how we're approaching the perimeter hedges.  
**1:16:23-1:16:36:**  It's how it would have been done back in the day.  But obviously these days, they flail them with tractors and they don't manage them by  hand anymore.  
**1:16:36-1:17:00:**  In the fields we've gone for, we've also planted tree rows.  So we've divided our fields up into several blocks, into quite a few blocks actually.  And we've used trees to split the fields up and to create smaller paddocks for our grazing  
**1:17:00-1:17:15:**  and our rotations.  So we rotate our sheep from block to block or paddock to paddock every three to four  days, depending on the season, depending on how quickly the grass is growing, depending  
**1:17:15-1:17:28:**  on what the parasites are doing at that time of year, depending on how warm and wet it  is.  We might speed up or slow down our rotations.  
**1:17:28-1:17:52:**  And the tree rows that we've planted, the purpose of them is for coppicing and is for  firewood for our home, as well as fodder for the sheep.  What species did you plant in these specific tree rows?  
**1:17:52-1:18:13:**  We've planted willow, biomass willow, Salix verminalis.  We've planted poplar, biomass poplar, which we've planted a few different hybrids.  Again these are all species that are suited for short rotation coppicing.  
**1:18:13-1:18:25:**  Another one that we've planted is gray alder.  If you know that, I don't know if you guys have that one with you.  Yeah, we have them in wet places.  
**1:18:25-1:18:39:**  Yeah, exactly.  So they've actually, the alder has done like incredibly well in our fields.  I'd say they're probably the best out of any, which sort of gives you an idea of how wet  
**1:18:39-1:18:55:**  it is where we are.  We've also planted hazels, sycamores, and we did try field maple, although field maple  didn't do too well.  
**1:18:55-1:19:10:**  A lot of people are like, why are you planting sycamores in your fields?  Because sycamores are generally considered a weed tree in the UK.  But we love them because the sheep love them.  
**1:19:10-1:19:29:**  They have really sweet leaves for the sheep and they grow like stink and they're really  hardy.  And they also drop loads of little saplings, little seedlings into the pasture, which if  
**1:19:29-1:19:50:**  they sprout are just nice little snacks for the sheep.  So yeah, sycamore is one which we've only recently put in the ground, but we've had  a few in the hedges that we've, some of them in the hedges we've allowed the sheep like  
**1:19:50-1:20:03:**  really frequent access to.  And we've just been amazed at how much the sheep can hammer back the sycamores and they  just keep coming back and they just don't look bothered by it at all.  
**1:20:03-1:20:19:**  They just, the regrowth on them is so quick and the sheep seem to love them so much.  So yeah, we've planted a row of sycamore.  We've got hazels, we've got alder, as I said, poplar and willow.  
**1:20:19-1:20:34:**  The alder is amazing in the sense that, so it's not really got much value as fodder for  the sheep.  Although they nibble on it, they really don't like it.  
**1:20:34-1:20:56:**  So much so that actually we've got one particular row of alder where we haven't yet put up our  permanent fencing around us.  And so I just decided last year, because we were so busy last year, I just decided, ah  
**1:20:56-1:21:08:**  screw this, I'm not going to bother fencing around it every time because it was just too  much hassle.  So I just decided to, they were already quite well established and I just decided to let  
**1:21:08-1:21:22:**  the sheep have full access to them so that they could graze underneath them as well as  around them.  And I did that for the whole of last year and they're absolutely fine.  
**1:21:22-1:21:41:**  The sheep have rubbed on some of them, cracked one or two, nibbled on a little bit of bark,  but pretty much the damage is hardly any.  And for the time and energy involved in fencing around it, I'm very happy.  
**1:21:41-1:21:52:**  I wouldn't bother fencing around it again, to be honest with you.  Having said that, if they were really young, like newly planted, I think that would be  a problem.  
**1:21:52-1:22:08:**  It would set them back quite a lot, but these ones were already sort of two years old by  the time I did this.  Josh, could you just to step out and to go into, to look at the bigger picture, could  
**1:22:08-1:22:20:**  you give us a bit of an idea of what were the objectives that you were looking for when  you planted out the hedge?  I imagine there's various, it would be good to just give us a brief overview as to why  
**1:22:20-1:22:35:**  did you put these fences out?  Sorry, these hedges, I used the wrong word, the hedges.  Yeah, so I actually call them tree rows only because they look very different to our hedges.  
**1:22:35-1:22:51:**  You know, they're single, we're planting them in single varieties.  So we're just planting like a block of willow, a block of poplar, a block of hazel, a block  of alder, a block of sycamore.  
**1:22:51-1:23:04:**  And we've done them like that to make harvesting for firewood more practical.  So we were harvesting one type of wood at the same time that's grown roughly the same  rate.  
**1:23:04-1:23:24:**  But to step back a little bit, we put tree rows in in pasture for a number of reasons.  And I mean, when most of the local farmers look at what we've done, they think it's crazy  because we've taken some perfectly neat square blank fields of grass and we've gone and planted  
**1:23:24-1:23:44:**  trees in the middle of them and they think that that's absolute sacrilege and crazy.  But we've done it because it breaks up the fields into smaller paddocks.  It helps us with our rotations with the sheep around the field.  
**1:23:44-1:23:58:**  It provides shade and shelter for the sheep.  It provides fodder for the sheep.  When we trim the trees, we chop and drop the trees and the sheep love it.  
**1:23:58-1:24:14:**  It provides habitat for insects and birds.  It helps with heavy rainfall on the fields.  It helps with water infiltration to slow down runoff on the fields.  
**1:24:14-1:24:28:**  I mean, yeah, I'm not sure if I've covered all the benefits of having trees there, but  it's brilliant.  And I mean, visually, it just looks so much more beautiful to have rows of trees in a  
**1:24:28-1:24:43:**  field, I think, than to have a big blank field.  Yeah, Josh, I'm wondering, you know, kind of taking the interview to an end, but there  is a big question.  
**1:24:43-1:24:59:**  We've talked a lot about diversity, about stacking productions, and clearly there's  a lot of benefits to that in terms of productivity and using the space that you have well.  But what kind of, what are the main challenges that it sets out for you?  
**1:24:59-1:25:08:**  Because I'm sure it's not all simple to have that many different things going on at the  same time and interacting together.  Yeah, absolutely.  
**1:25:08-1:25:26:**  Like when we started on Park Harek, we were quite naive in the sense that we thought we  were going to be able to have essentially four, five, six different businesses and we  were going to be able to manage them all at the same time.  
**1:25:26-1:25:46:**  And trying to juggle all these different things together is really difficult.  You know, managing the sheep, especially when you've got the ducks, you've got the collecting  of eggs, you're managing the ducks during droughts when there's no water and you're  
**1:25:46-1:25:57:**  lambing at the same time and, you know, trying to rotate the sheep at the same time.  And then you've got to weed the blueberries because in the spring, the weeds just go crazy  in the spring.  
**1:25:57-1:26:10:**  And although, as I've said, we're not weeding them anymore.  And then, yeah, there's just so much to try and stay on top of.  And I think that it is a massive challenge.  
**1:26:10-1:26:31:**  And what we've had to do over the last couple of years is to really become a lot more brutal  when it comes to making decisions about what gets done on the farm.  We have to make sure that we can earn a living and that we are doing we are looking after  
**1:26:31-1:26:46:**  the livestock and keeping them healthy.  We can't get stressed out about weeds and the blueberry patch, for example.  Like there's no point in fighting that with the sheep, for example, we don't pamper them  
**1:26:46-1:26:55:**  like we just we can't afford to in both time and money.  We manage them.  We rotate them.  
**1:26:55-1:27:17:**  We give them habitat and good fodder and forage.  But like we can't pamper them in terms of regular warming and regular vaccination.  So we we prefer to select sheep that are less labor intensive, that are naturally more healthy  
**1:27:17-1:27:28:**  and ones that don't thrive.  We let them go.  We you know, we don't we don't put too much effort into trying to keep everything alive.  
**1:27:28-1:27:44:**  Because if we just let nature take its course most of the time, we save ourselves a lot  of time.  Having said that, Park Harrig still needs a lot of management to to keep the cogs turning  
**1:27:44-1:28:03:**  and to keep the business running and to keep things running smoothly.  So I guess just finding a balance between, you know, taking a sort of a stun approach,  as Mark Shepherd would call it, and a really intensively managed approach, finding some  
**1:28:03-1:28:25:**  sort of balance between those two ends of the spectrum is really important when it comes  to your time and and, you know, money expenditure on the farm.  Josh, did you do you wish you had started with less diversity on the farm?  
**1:28:25-1:28:44:**  Or are you comfortable with with how much you've done?  And are you planning even to put more to integrate even more into the operation?  I absolutely don't regret planting all the trees and the shrubs that we have.  
**1:28:44-1:29:04:**  And we have plans to put in a lot more because as far as we see it, you know, especially  for the duck enterprise, the more trees and shrubs that we have on Park Harrig, as well  as pasture, the better for the ducks and also for the sheeps, to be honest, the for the  
**1:29:04-1:29:18:**  sheep.  They really enjoy having a tree or a shrub to to sit underneath.  So we're going to be planting a lot more over the years.  
**1:29:18-1:29:29:**  We we have slowed down planting new things in the last few years, just because as the  business has scaled up, we've gotten more and more busy trying to keep the business  running.  
**1:29:29-1:29:39:**  So we have slowed down.  But I don't regret any of the early.  Any of the early plantings that we did.  
**1:29:39-1:29:57:**  I'm very happy with the selection of things that we've got going on in the fields.  If I was going to go back, I might change a few things purely logistical things like  slight, you know, I'd make changes to the layout and exactly how we've laid things up.  
**1:29:57-1:30:11:**  But it's very difficult to see those things up front until such time as you've actually  worked with with them over over a few years.  And especially when you've got no experience farming at all.  
**1:30:11-1:30:21:**  You know, knowing knowing exactly where you want to put your track and your water pipes  and your tree rows and all the stuff.  It's kind of impossible if you've got no experience.  
**1:30:21-1:30:36:**  To be honest, it's very incredible what you've achieved in four years with so little farming  experience.  And I would really advise all of the listeners that have made it this far to go on the Insta  
**1:30:36-1:30:46:**  gram of Park Courag and check out lots of videos about ducks hanging out in lines running  around.  It's amazing.  
**1:30:46-1:31:00:**  And lots of the systems that have been set up there.  So it's very I spent quite a lot of time on your Instagram looking at the pictures.  You've done a really good job at showing the work you've done there and describing the  
**1:31:00-1:31:14:**  systems there.  The pictures are really good and the descriptions are really good.  But Josh, it's been an hour and a half now and we will need to take this interview to  
**1:31:14-1:31:28:**  an end for all of our health and well-being.  We need to go to sleep.  But thank you so much for your time and for describing your farm so well and explaining  
**1:31:28-1:31:33:**  to us all of your decision process.  It was really interesting.  It was really, really interesting.  
**1:31:33-1:31:41:**  Hey, thanks so much, guys.  I really appreciate you having me on.  It's been great to chat with you.  
**1:31:41-1:31:48:**  Thanks for making it this far and we really hope you enjoyed the episode as much as we  did.  Please feel free to get in touch.  
**1:31:48-1:32:06:**  You know how through our website, social media or email and you'll find all the useful links  just below in the description as usual.  