<script src="https://cdn.podlove.org/web-player/embed.js"></script>
    <script>
        document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', function () {
          if (document.readyState === 'interactive' || document.readyState === 'complete') {
            podlovePlayer('#player', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast/16-feedback-from-40-years-of-pecan-intercropping-with-dan-shepherd.json', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast/config.json').then(registerExternalEvents('player'))
          }
        })
  </script>---
title: 16 Feedback From 40 Years Of Pecan Intercropping With Dan Shepherd
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2021-02-21)  

**0:00:00-0:00:23:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:23-0:00:33:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  these challenges.  
**0:00:33-0:00:48:**  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Hello and welcome to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:00:48-0:01:04:**  I'm your host Dimitri and today we're going to be interviewing Dan Sheppard, owner of  a 300 acre pecan farm where he's been intercropping a variety of crops in between the tree lines.  This is a very special interview because we don't often speak to somebody that's done  
**0:01:04-0:01:12:**  this work on such scale.  So this was fascinating and I really hope you enjoy it.  Hi Dan, welcome on the podcast.  
**0:01:12-0:01:23:**  Well thank you Dimitri.  To start off with it would be really good to have an understanding of you and your farm  and what you're producing at the moment.  
**0:01:23-0:01:39:**  Well first we're going to be talking about Sheppard Farms.  My family got into farming business in about 1969.  We bought a fairly decent sized farm and my father always wanted to raise pecans so actually  
**0:01:39-0:01:56:**  he bought 20 acres to begin with to plant some pecan trees on and then a farm right  next to it I remember climbing up on the levee to look out over this farm we own now also  that I, after my dad was showing me the 20 acres he bought I said gee pop you ought to  
**0:01:56-0:02:12:**  buy this place you could plant a lot of pecan trees and he said well it is for sale and  sure enough ended up a year or two later we end up buying the larger farm and per se we  never planted pecan trees on that little 20 acres there but we do now have about 300 acres  
**0:02:12-0:02:25:**  in pecan orchards.  Out of that there's about 200 of them acres of it that are in production.  Currently the farm has about 4,000 acres which means there's about 3,000 acres of row crop  
**0:02:25-0:02:41:**  which is mainly corn and soybean production and the problem with it is that I do not do  the 3,000 acre production on the farm of corn and soybeans.  It's a situation where I feel that I am too small to be a big farmer, too big to be a  
**0:02:41-0:02:54:**  small farmer so we have a share crop basis with another large farmer that takes care  of the other farming ground for us on that.  Mainly we are on the river bottoms here in northern Missouri.  
**0:02:54-0:03:11:**  It gets hot in the summertime and cold in the winter.  I don't really know what latitude and stuff we are at but we would be about the same as  northern France, northern Germany that sort of type of weather probably but we have a  
**0:03:11-0:03:20:**  little bit hotter summers than what you all have out there.  So that's a little bit about the farm.  Currently my main business is the pecan business.  
**0:03:20-0:03:31:**  It takes up about 80% of our time.  The rest of the 10-20% is taken up on care and maintenance of buildings, levees, yards,  roads.  
**0:03:31-0:03:43:**  A fairly good sized levee system that protects our row crop and pecan orchards from river  flooding.  My job is, I'm 65 years old, I'm the manager.  
**0:03:43-0:03:57:**  I have two full time employees plus my wife.  We have a small retail store on the farm.  We're open three months out of the year where we process and sell the pecans that we raise  
**0:03:57-0:04:08:**  so we're pretty well vertically integrated I guess you might say.  So it makes a good way where we can add value to our product and stuff and we can go into  that a little later if you want to.  
**0:04:08-0:04:16:**  Yeah, that would be great Tim.  And that's about it for the farm.  Right now we're in the process of pruning trees.  
**0:04:16-0:04:24:**  We're about to get that done.  The young trees we prune those every year.  Our older orchards, some of them are up to 40 years old now.  
**0:04:24-0:04:36:**  We try and prune those about once every 10 years to get rid of lower hanging limbs and  stuff to keep them out of the equipment and that sort of thing.  And also doing some thinning in the orchards, we're always thinning trees out.  
**0:04:36-0:04:50:**  Right now that's pretty what we're doing.  We just finished processing all the pecans that we raise plus we do a little custom processing  for a few other growers around, small growers that want to retail their pecans out also  
**0:04:50-0:05:08:**  but we go ahead and process them for them this time of year and we just finish that  up so as the weather turns bad and the snow comes and stuff, we'll start working on equipment,  tractors, mowers, all other equipment stuff plus all the process equipment will be pulled  
**0:05:08-0:05:17:**  in and worse painted, cleaned and all that sort of stuff.  That's about what we're doing right now.  Nice.  
**0:05:17-0:05:31:**  And could you tell me a bit more about how old your pecan orchards are?  Well, our main orchard we have was planted, the nuts in 81 so it's right at 40 years old  now.  
**0:05:31-0:05:43:**  We have an experimental orchard that was about 20 acres and that was planted in 71.  With us being just about as far north as you can raise a pecan, you really can't raise  it much farther north.  
**0:05:43-0:05:54:**  We don't have the heat units or the daylight time and stuff and so we're right there on  the very edge so the trees and the varieties that we have and we graft to are not the big  southern varieties like they have in the south.  
**0:05:54-0:06:11:**  So we have, my dad started an experimental orchard of known varieties and varieties of  native varieties around here that tend to be fairly well and from there we kind of decided  on what we wanted to put our other orchard into and graft it to.  
**0:06:11-0:06:22:**  Because all our trees are grafted, that way we know what our trees are going to produce.  So that was it.  The other orchard was planted in 81.  
**0:06:22-0:06:37:**  We planted the nuts where we wanted a tree.  In the process we've been thinning out and thinning, we've probably taken three-fourths  of the trees out that we've planted and probably within another 10 or 15 years we'll take half  
**0:06:37-0:06:47:**  those trees with another half of the orchard out.  So it works better.  You're thinning them because they're getting too big now and they're starting to, the crowns  
**0:06:47-0:06:54:**  are starting to touch or what's the reason?  That's true.  We have a rule we never want a pecan tree to touch another pecan tree.  
**0:06:54-0:07:09:**  Then we get plenty of lights, sunlight around the tree.  We also get a nice air movement and stuff where the trees tend to dry out in the mornings  after heavy dews and it helps hold down the fungus problems we have like scab and other  
**0:07:09-0:07:16:**  things.  Luckily we're not as bad as they are in the southeast like in Georgia and Florida where  they have a tremendous amount of trouble with what we call scab.  
**0:07:16-0:07:27:**  It's a fungus disease.  It gets on the leaves and the nuts and stuff and if you keep them thinned out and where  you get air movement it lessens your scab problems and stuff.  
**0:07:27-0:07:38:**  And I can tell people as you take half your orchard out you'll double your production  just because trees aren't fighting for sunlight and trees aren't fighting for water and nutrients  and that sort of stuff.  
**0:07:38-0:07:50:**  Pretty nice.  And just to give us a bit of a visual idea, how tall and how wide are your 40-year-old  trees that you planted in 81?  
**0:07:50-0:08:04:**  Our main rows and stuff, and I'm sorry I'm probably going to have to put this in feet  and stuff because I never really grew up with a metric system so you have to bear with me  on that.  
**0:08:04-0:08:16:**  We pretty well planted all our trees in 40-foot rows and the reason for that was because of  fertilizer.  We fertilized our trees fairly heavy for production reasons and stuff and also taking stuff off  
**0:08:16-0:08:30:**  and we were also farmed between them.  But that's what a fertilizer spreads is it was 40 feet.  Now fertilizer spreads 50 feet to 80 feet, whatever.  
**0:08:30-0:08:46:**  So spacing was not quite as critical now as maybe what it was back then because that's  just about what we could, fertility-wise, to spread the fertilizer on.  They couldn't really be much farther than 40 feet apart.  
**0:08:46-0:08:59:**  The orchards we do plant are also when the trees were 40 feet apart down the row, especially  all the new orchards we planted.  We planted where they're checked where we could farm east and west or north and south  
**0:08:59-0:09:11:**  or diagonal.  So the trees were spaced that way in the newer orchards.  The older orchards were just 40 feet apart and the trees were just stepped off down the  
**0:09:11-0:09:26:**  row of anywhere from 15 to 18 feet.  We planted some nuts in there so that's kind of an odd spacing but if I was doing it over  now on an agroforestry I'd probably go 60 feet and we could maybe get into some reasons  
**0:09:26-0:09:37:**  later on about that.  Niko Thelenovitch Okay, so when you started planting them in  the old orchards they were about 15 to 18 feet between the trees on the line.  
**0:09:37-0:09:47:**  What are they now?  What's the spacing now after having thinned three quarters?  Paul Most of them are at least probably 40 and  
**0:09:47-0:09:59:**  some of them are 60 or 80 feet apart.  Mainly 60, I'd probably say close to 60 feet is about average on them now.  Down the rows and the trees are 40 feet apart in the rows.  
**0:09:59-0:10:07:**  Niko Out of curiosity, how tall are they?  Paul Some of those trees are probably getting  up to 60 feet tall.  
**0:10:07-0:10:19:**  Niko Oh wow, nice.  That must be so beautiful.  Paul Yeah, it's kind of fooling people how tall  
**0:10:19-0:10:32:**  those trees really get but when you cut one down and lay him down, he's 50 or 60 feet  tall, it takes a while.  You want to knock him down or cut him when we're thinning on those trees.  
**0:10:32-0:10:50:**  We'll kind of be careful where you place it because it'll get in the trees pretty easy.  Niko And to kind of finish off the context of your  farm, the brief context of your farm I should say, what kind of fertilization and irrigation  
**0:10:50-0:11:02:**  do you do in your orchard?  Paul Okay, fertilizer and stuff, pecans tend to  be a fairly big user of nitrogen and it depends on what we're doing with the orchard.  
**0:11:02-0:11:24:**  If we're cutting hay off of it, we would probably go 100, about 100 units of nitrogen, about  30 units of potassium and about 50 use of phosphorus and stuff.  That's pretty well normal what we use.  
**0:11:24-0:11:37:**  Maybe that if we're cutting hay, we'll double up on the P and K but we still tend to put  about 120 to 140 units of nitrogen on.  That seems to be a lot.  
**0:11:37-0:11:52:**  As far as irrigation, in our part of the country, we have no irrigation water.  Number one is that we have no groundwater that we can irrigate with.  So that's the deal.  
**0:11:52-0:12:08:**  We could irrigate out of the river but normally when it gets really dry, the river quits running  so that really doesn't work very well.  We're in a situation where we normally get enough rainfall to raise our crop.  
**0:12:08-0:12:17:**  Mainly we'll have more trouble with too much water than not enough water.  So luckily we don't have the irrigations and all the work with the irrigation systems on  it.  
**0:12:17-0:12:26:**  Dario Interesting.  Is your soil quite deep?  Do the trees have access to groundwater throughout the season?  
**0:12:26-0:12:38:**  Or is it quite...  Tom It varies.  We can get some dry weather and stuff and ground gets fairly dry and stuff.  
**0:12:38-0:12:51:**  The main thing is that the pecan tree reefs are normally only about 12 to 18 inches below  the surface of the soil.  We do have like being in bottomland soil, the better the soil, the better the trees  
**0:12:51-0:13:06:**  does, the better the water holding capacity of it is.  In some spots in the orchard we have a fairly high clay content.  You can really tell the difference in the soil in a larger orchard where you have multiple  
**0:13:06-0:13:19:**  types of soil types out there.  The soils that are not quite as good, definitely the trees aren't quite as big, tall and production  is down compared to some of the soil that may be some of the very best in the orchard.  
**0:13:19-0:13:32:**  Those trees tend to do a lot, lot better.  Ben That makes a lot of sense.  Basically today what I wanted to do is build on with some of the interviews that you've  
**0:13:32-0:13:50:**  already given, especially with the Savannah Institute which I advise all our listeners  to go check out to have an in-depth understanding of what pecan production is like.  You talk a lot about the pecan tree, about the nut, how it's processed and etc.  
**0:13:50-0:14:06:**  What I wanted to try and do today is to really go into the agroforestry bits and by that  talking more detail about your experience with intercropping.  But also talking about the strategy of the farm because that's something that I think  
**0:14:06-0:14:20:**  would be really interesting to delve into with you.  Leading on from that, one of the first questions that I wanted to ask you is when you look  at your previous talks, you talk about a lot of different types of productions.  
**0:14:20-0:14:40:**  You're talking about you had buffalo at some point, you had the road crops of course at  the moment, 3,000 acres of that, you had cattle, you were also producing a type of grass seed.  So I'd love to know a bit more about why did you decide to diversify the farm so much?  
**0:14:40-0:14:54:**  Well, you know, I guess it comes back to my father, we always had a saying is that you  can make a little money doing what everybody else does, but you stand to make a lot more  doing what nobody else is doing.  
**0:14:54-0:15:09:**  We also liked the idea that we could set a price for our product where we could somewhat  pretty well guarantee us a profit instead of taking what somebody was to give us for  it.  
**0:15:09-0:15:26:**  You know, when you have livestock cattle, you know, or hogs or chickens or corn or soybeans,  you know, it depends on what somebody you know, on the market is what they're going  to give you for it.  
**0:15:26-0:15:42:**  Farming is completely backwards than any other business that I know of.  And so we tried to take that farm deal where we could, you know, sell our products on the  farm, whether it be Eastern gamma grass seed, we raised the seed, we were pretty well the  
**0:15:42-0:15:53:**  main growers of it in the nation.  Definitely the largest we could set our price exactly, you know, where we could do, we could  make a, you know, a nice, decent profit off of it.  
**0:15:53-0:16:00:**  The same way with the bison business of the American Buffalo.  We had store on a farm here.  We sold breeding stock.  
**0:16:00-0:16:08:**  We also sold meat and stuff.  That way we could, you know, set the price where we could prove a guarantee as a profit  on that sort of stuff.  
**0:16:08-0:16:25:**  The pecans worked out the same way with us retailing.  Our pecan crop, we can set a price on it where we can guarantee us a profit on it and a profit  profits a lot better than losses.  
**0:16:25-0:16:33:**  I agree with that.  It let you buy new equipment, new toys, new buildings, new concrete, whatever else you  want to buy.  
**0:16:33-0:16:49:**  So it makes it instead of having to struggle all the time and try to come up with, you  know, the funds to run the farm.  But if you're talking about, you know, setting the price, that means that what you are producing  
**0:16:49-0:16:57:**  and what you are producing, you're clearly not selling it on the wholesale commodity  markets, right?  That's correct.  
**0:16:57-0:17:15:**  You know, all the years we've been in the pecan business, a year ago we sold, we had  a tremendous crop year on pecans and, you know, we had to sell quite a bit of our pecan  crop to what we call shellers or accumulators that, you know, buy millions and millions  
**0:17:15-0:17:28:**  of pounds of pecans a year and they shell them and then make those through the, you  know, through the commercial markets and stuff.  Whereas my market is, is I sell directly to the consumer, to the little old lady that,  
**0:17:28-0:17:39:**  you know, make some of the best cookies in the world for our grandkids and stuff.  And she comes out and buys 20 or $30 worth of pecans from me and, and, and that sort  of thing, that sort of people.  
**0:17:39-0:17:50:**  And that, uh, that helps out a lot.  I also sell some to bulk food stores, you know, small independent grocery store sort  of things where they can reset them to there.  
**0:17:50-0:18:00:**  They get them a little cheaper price, but I move, uh, move quite a bit of product that  way, but it's not like selling just the whole pecans.  They're already processed pretty well for those sort of deals.  
**0:18:00-0:18:17:**  So we do the processing here, which in terms of, you know, we can add added value to it.  And that makes a lot of sense when you have so many different types of production.  Um, clearly it's, it seems at least that there would be, um, some challenges as well in terms  
**0:18:17-0:18:28:**  of, um, you know, the practicality of managing so many different enterprises at the same  time.  And, um, also, you know, on the workload, but also on knowledge, you know, having the  
**0:18:28-0:18:38:**  knowledge to be able to manage all of that.  And so I'm curious to know, you know, in time, in the history of the, throughout the history  of the farm and until now, how did you manage those, those challenges that we often see  
**0:18:38-0:18:51:**  with diversified operations?  Really it was really, it was really easy to, to do that for the well, because.  Yeah, the three main items we had, which was, was the American biflow with the, the, the  
**0:18:51-0:18:58:**  bison business, uh, the Eastern gamma grass seed, which is the native warm season grass  seed.  And then of course the pecans.  
**0:18:58-0:19:14:**  Um, the thing about it was, is, is that, uh, they all pretty well interacted well, and  it was a good way to keep my employees busy year round.  Uh, right now I'm a little, be a little over on, on employees, but, uh, since we're just  
**0:19:14-0:19:23:**  in the pecan businesses or the sort of it, but, uh, it worked out better because in the  summertime, there wasn't a whole lot to do to peak up with the bison business, Buffalo  business.  
**0:19:23-0:19:31:**  We put hay up for a couple of months.  Uh, then after that, we'd start, uh, rest of the summer moment, pastures, mowing orchards,  getting ready for that.  
**0:19:31-0:19:43:**  Then come fall, we would harvest pecans process.  Then the Buffalo pretty well took, uh, not a lot of care.  The gamma grass seed business came off in the middle of summer and it pretty well sat  
**0:19:43-0:19:58:**  down until about, uh, about this time of year, we started, uh, doing the seed business and  doing seed, which worked out real well for that, uh, pretty well that, and then ship  seed out normally to about the middle of June.  
**0:19:58-0:20:07:**  So it, a lot of different things going on, but it worked real well to keep the employees  busy year round.  Uh, we really never had a slack time, which was kind of nice.  
**0:20:07-0:20:15:**  Um, it was, uh, a situation I got out of the grass seed business.  We had a terrible flood.  I lost most of my seed fields.  
**0:20:15-0:20:30:**  Um, and I'll be truthfully, I was probably spending about 80% of my time with the grass  seed business, but it was a high profit part of the farm.  Uh, after spending about 20 years with a headset on sitting in a desk about 80% of my time,  
**0:20:30-0:20:39:**  uh, sewing and marketing the grass seed business, uh, uh, flood put me out.  I was really kind of burned out.  It was kind of glad to see that go.  
**0:20:39-0:20:52:**  We had another little situation about a couple of years later with the bison business and  the store business with the meat sales on something where we were under a federal meat  inspection, and then they changed the rules to state meat inspection, which really didn't  
**0:20:52-0:21:01:**  fit with our operation.  And uh, I'll be truthfully.  The, uh, you know, the livestock end of it, uh, was good.  
**0:21:01-0:21:09:**  The American buys was good, but, uh, I was going to have to spend a lot of money on,  on a new corral system and stuff.  And I started heck, just get out of it.  
**0:21:09-0:21:19:**  Then the pecans were really starting to kick on and really taking a lot more of our time  and stuff.  So we district, we just started doing pecans as far as the corn and soybeans at 3000 acres  
**0:21:19-0:21:29:**  of that.  I really don't have a lot to do with that.  So management part of that is not, not really, I have to do, um, like I'm 65 now.  
**0:21:29-0:21:43:**  Uh, I've slowed up a little bit to come out what I might call almost semi retired almost,  but not quite, uh, come to work every day.  And, and, and this, that and the other, but, uh, uh, not quite hitting as hard as I did  
**0:21:43-0:21:55:**  when I was 25.  Yeah.  Um, it's interesting to see how, as your pecans, um, have evolved and have grown into a significant  
**0:21:55-0:22:10:**  production line on your farm, you've been able to ease off the others.  I find that really interesting to see how there's also been, you know, as, as the trees  have gone through some kind of natural growth and succession, so has your business.  
**0:22:10-0:22:15:**  That's true.  And, and it's all been good.  I mean, we've had our good years and our bad years and stuff.  
**0:22:15-0:22:30:**  And I can remember, uh, you know, back 40 years ago, we're getting everything going  and, and, you know, uh, agriculture prices were, were really terrible.  Uh, interest rates were extremely high and it was some pretty tough years in there.  
**0:22:30-0:22:43:**  I mean, uh, uh, we kind of knew, uh, you know, well, if we can wait another couple of days,  we can get 30 day float on the feed or on the, on the fuel stuff on that, you know,  on that sort of deal.  
**0:22:43-0:22:56:**  So we didn't have to pay the interest that high interest rate on it.  So, you know, the things have changed a lot over the years and stuff like say that, you  know, uh, the farms out of debt, which is really nice, uh, and has been for a number  
**0:22:56-0:23:06:**  of years.  I don't know if I can say anything and say, once you get out of debt, uh, you know, there  seems to be all kinds of, of, of extra money around and profit around a lot better than  
**0:23:06-0:23:16:**  having to pay a lot of, a lot of debt off.  And, uh, that's kind of nice to say is that, that we are out of debt on the farm and it  makes life a lot easier.  
**0:23:16-0:23:27:**  Um, how did you manage, um, on a knowledge level to have all these different enterprises?  Well, mainly I grew up with it.  Uh, you know, we were in the Buffalo business for 42 years.  
**0:23:27-0:23:44:**  I, you know, we started Eastern Gama grass really in 1980 and, uh, you know, we're in  it for 30 years and, you know, my dad was, uh, you know, forward thinker, uh, kind of  figured out on, on, on what maybe we could do.  
**0:23:44-0:23:55:**  I took management of the farm in 78, uh, when I got out of college and between he and I  saw stuff, it kind of learned the hard way.  Most of that stuff out, there was nothing out there.  
**0:23:55-0:24:04:**  You could really learn.  Nobody really knew how to race pecans this far North of Missouri.  And as far as varieties and stuff to graft and stuff, and we made plenty of mistakes  
**0:24:04-0:24:17:**  and you learn by that.  And as far as in the Buffalo business, uh, livestock businesses, somewhat livestock business,  but somewhat it's, it's a little different too, but mainly is, is being a salesman.  
**0:24:17-0:24:30:**  I, uh, I really want to say is that, uh, you know, to be successful in life, you need to  be a salesman.  And my, my father was a salesman kind of taught me, uh, uh, you know, how to maybe to be a  
**0:24:30-0:24:42:**  salesman also, but, uh, uh, some of the most, uh, you know, the most successful people in  the world, I feel are salesmen.  You know, you talk about Bill Gates, maybe, you know, with Microsoft, I don't think he  
**0:24:42-0:24:52:**  had the best operating system, but he was able to sell IBM on his, uh, his operating  system.  And that became Microsoft and, uh, kind of how it worked.  
**0:24:52-0:25:07:**  And I thought a lot of people is if you're a successful, you're a salesman.  And that's my opinion, but, uh, but, but able to talk to people and, and to, uh, to, uh,  maybe move your product to sell your product, uh, sell your ideas is, is very important.  
**0:25:07-0:25:22:**  I think to be successful.  When you're talking about sales now, I'm, I'm still kind of, there's still a gap in  my understanding of how you manage to, to sell retail 300 or mostly retail, um, with  
**0:25:22-0:25:34:**  some shops, as you mentioned, 300 acres of pecan nuts.  I mean, that's, that's a, that's a lot of production, isn't it?  It is, you know, well, about 200, you know, and you know, we're on a major highway here  
**0:25:34-0:25:56:**  and, uh, we have a large sign up on the highway, uh, that, uh, down here, uh, do advertising  and that sort of thing also, but also we have a superior product and if you have a superior  product and you sell it for a reasonable price, um, you know, that, that makes a lot better  
**0:25:56-0:26:05:**  as far as I'm concerned.  And, uh, and, and we move a lot of becomes like that, but these are, we completely, we  shut them completely out where we're district. We saw in the nut meets, what we've done a  
**0:26:05-0:26:15:**  lot of is what we call a blown pecan is where we run these pecans through air crackers and  then through an air separator, which blows most of the shells out.  And then we bag them.  
**0:26:15-0:26:26:**  Whereas, uh, normally there may be five pounds of whole nuts, but time we get done with them,  there's only three pounds of product there.  So we've taken about two pounds of the shell and stuff out of them.  
**0:26:26-0:26:37:**  And so it leaves less than a half a pound of shell in the product or, or the stuff.  Some people just really end up just sorting them out and do a little hand labor and sort  them out instead of us doing it.  
**0:26:37-0:26:48:**  Uh, that's mainly how we sell.  Like I said, we sell a lot to, to other peddlers that people sell, you know, people come in  by, you know, two or 300 bags or whatever the product, and then they go and sell them,  
**0:26:48-0:27:02:**  you know, 40, 50, a hundred miles away.  Uh, we also do quite a bit of like bulk food stores and some grocery stores that, uh, they'll  come in and take, you know, two or, you know, a thousand, 2000 bags at a time.  
**0:27:02-0:27:12:**  And, uh, so, you know, we move a lot of product that way.  So then, you know, we go ahead and shells quite a bit too.  And we sell out of the store here stuff, not meats.  
**0:27:12-0:27:21:**  We also sell, you know, the blown pecans and stuff.  And like I said, we can do that and we sell at a reasonable price.  We don't get really expensive and stuff.  
**0:27:21-0:27:28:**  Uh, uh, but, uh, that's how we move the product to make it work.  You know, we used to sell sweet corn.  We used to raise sweet corn out here.  
**0:27:28-0:27:38:**  We had the Buffalo meat stuff.  The farm store was open 12 months out of the year, summertime with a pecan and equipment.  We had to listen really good ground and sprayers and stuff.  
**0:27:38-0:27:50:**  And the planters stuff, we raised sweet corn and we'd raise, uh, you know, 10 hectares  of sweet corn a year.  And, but we'd only have it like three different days a year.  
**0:27:50-0:28:04:**  And people would maybe, you know, sell sweet corn alongside the road and they may sell  a pickup load, which would maybe be a couple of thousand years.  Well, you know, for me, a sweet corn day sale is 40,000 years of sweet corn.  
**0:28:04-0:28:18:**  Um, people are selling it to maybe a $3 a dozen.  I was selling it for $2 a dozen people come in and buy one or two dozen from those people.  They come in and buy 20 or 30 or 40 dozen for me, you know, to put up and free.  
**0:28:18-0:28:24:**  So, you know, we made it on volume and that sort of thing.  And that worked out real well.  I've got people at the store.  
**0:28:24-0:28:37:**  I sold, get peaches shipped in from Southern part of the state and we'd sell peaches and  we had our Buffalo and pecans and that sort of thing.  Uh, you know, just to get people out and, and, and we kind of make it on volume a lot  
**0:28:37-0:28:47:**  better than sometimes in just a very high price specialty market, which you're dealing  with a very few people.  So it worked out better for us on how to market our pecans and other products and stuff we  
**0:28:47-0:28:55:**  sold here on the farm.  Matter of fact, yeah.  Like one other thing I'll tell you real quick is that, you know, pumpkins, uh, you know,  
**0:28:55-0:29:04:**  we used to raise pumpkins and stuff and I tried to sell pumpkins and you could always  sell a few pumpkins, but if you've ever raised pumpkins, either it's a pumpkin year, it's  not a pumpkin year.  
**0:29:04-0:29:13:**  Either you raise a lot of pumpkins or you don't raise hardly any at all.  And when everybody, when it's a pumpkin on year, everybody has pumpkins and you can't  hardly sell them.  
**0:29:13-0:29:22:**  So we advertise, give pumpkins away.  Everybody come to the farm, got a free pumpkin.  I made more giving a pumpkin away than I ever could have made by selling it because people  
**0:29:22-0:29:33:**  come to the store and they get a free pumpkin and they'd buy some meat and some pecans and  some jams and jellies and mixed nuts and that sort of stuff.  So, you know, just to, you know, draw stuff, uh, pumpkins pretty cheap to raise.  
**0:29:33-0:29:39:**  And like I say, it's, uh, we made more money giving pumpkins away than we ever could by  selling them.  Yeah.  
**0:29:39-0:29:45:**  Yeah.  It's a clearly not such a little thing apparently, but, uh, you're, you're bringing up a lot  of things I'd like to delve into.  
**0:29:45-0:29:58:**  Um, and, um, the first one is how does the quality of your pecans, um, differ from, from  others on the market?  You said you sell a higher quality product in what way is it in, is it in the processing  
**0:29:58-0:30:09:**  and the way it's presented as you mentioned, or is it in the actual quality of the nut?  Uh, a little bit of all, um, in our part of the country over here, there are, um, normally  about 20 miles West of me.  
**0:30:09-0:30:19:**  Uh, there's some, uh, quite a bit of a native pecan trees that, uh, the squirrels and nature  planted and stuff, and they are not grafted.  They tend to be quite a bit smaller.  
**0:30:19-0:30:27:**  They have a great flavored stuff, but they're fairly small and they're, they're hard to  pick out and stuff.  Um, all our trees are grafted.  
**0:30:27-0:30:38:**  So, uh, uh, we, uh, we know what each tree is going to produce or each rows, cause each  rows, uh, the same variety.  And there's a lot of difference there because we can go in and when we harvest, we harvest  
**0:30:38-0:30:52:**  by variety today, we're gonna, you know, we're gonna harvest this variety and when we get  done with it, then we'll start on a different variety, but we keep all those separate.  So when you go to process and clean, we can, you know, we can set our machines up for that  
**0:30:52-0:30:57:**  size nut, because some of them are bigger.  Some of them are smaller.  Some of them have real thin outside shells.  
**0:30:57-0:31:07:**  Some have real thick outside shells.  So all that's taken advantage.  And when you set a machine to, to take that, to crack that shell, if you have the, your  
**0:31:07-0:31:21:**  machine set to crack a, but kind of has a thick shell when it gets a pecan in that has  a thin shell, it tends to smash it to pieces and vice versa.  We can have the machine shut to set to, uh, maybe crack what I want to say, a real thin  
**0:31:21-0:31:30:**  shell and you put a hard shell in there and the machine won't crack it.  So that way we can get a good process on our pecan for most, all the pecans are cracked  and, and they shell out.  
**0:31:30-0:31:44:**  Well, uh, we've invested in a lot of equipment of expensive air crackers and stuff where  most everybody else is still kind of going along with the old style crackers.  Um, these new crackers really don't tend to work well with a really small thick shell  
**0:31:44-0:31:51:**  natives.  So that sort of thing.  And, and, and the graphic varieties are tend to be quite a bit larger and they look a lot  
**0:31:51-0:31:58:**  nicer.  They have the same flavor and stuff.  So that, uh, I say blowing the other shells and stuff out, uh, the normal procedure in  
**0:31:58-0:32:13:**  this part of the country is to put five pounds in a paper bag and staple it shut.  Uh, people can't see what they're buying, uh, and mine they're in a plastic bag, but  it, you know, that, uh, can, they can see pretty well the whole product in the bag.  
**0:32:13-0:32:22:**  It does have our labels and names and stuff all over and that sort of thing.  But you can also see what you exactly what you're buying.  So, and people like that, you know, they like to see what they're going to be buying.  
**0:32:22-0:32:31:**  Uh, you know, it's kind of like, uh, you know, selling like your apples and put them in a  brown bag and staple it shut.  It's a lot better to set them on the shelf.  
**0:32:31-0:32:47:**  So people can actually see what they're getting, uh, through the packaging or however.  So that that's, that's made a lot of difference in, in, in our part of marketing sort of situation  is also with being so far north of people come in instead of if they're going on to  
**0:32:47-0:32:54:**  the south to get the cons, we're kind of the first ones on the market on coming from the  north and also from the east.  So we catch a lot more people that way.  
**0:32:54-0:33:05:**  And I say, you know, we've people know our becomes now they know they're going to get  a quality pecan, uh, you know, that's been kept, it's not rancid, it's fresh.  You know, uh, cracked, right.  
**0:33:05-0:33:13:**  It's not going to mold on them, that sort of thing.  Uh, drive to the, you know, to the perfection that needs to be.  And I guess that all comes with, with work.  
**0:33:13-0:33:24:**  Uh, you know, I, pecan season and I love it because, uh, I always have to taste test and  quality check the pecans.  And so I get to eat a lot of pecans during the fall.  
**0:33:24-0:33:31:**  It seems like so, uh, which is not all bad at either.  So works out well.  And maybe that's just to check the moisture and stuff on them.  
**0:33:31-0:33:42:**  So whatever.  And there's something else that you're, you're bringing up.  It's um, how, um, you're managing also to produce a certain volume, which is clearly,  
**0:33:42-0:33:53:**  and it's the same thing for the, for what you were talking about them, um, about the  corn, uh, the sweet corn.  Um, you know, somehow you've got to have the mechanization as well.  
**0:33:53-0:34:05:**  And that's clearly something that you're investing in, if I understand correctly, um, in order  to, um, be able to sell at that quality, but also at that scale, right.  To be able to have a reasonable price or even undercut the price.  
**0:34:05-0:34:09:**  Is that, is that correct?  Is that something that you're focused on as well?  That's correct.  
**0:34:09-0:34:25:**  Um, you know, uh, it's, you know, raising it, uh, pecans is, is sort of a thing of scale.  And I see this so much with a lot of people in the pecan business and men, you know, they  go out and they're going to plant 10 acres of pecan orchards and which sounds like an  
**0:34:25-0:34:42:**  awful lot and it is, and it's kind of a hobby for them and they get them started.  But all of a sudden it takes, it's more than a hobby and it's more than you can do by hand  as far as, you know, harvesting or whatever, or, you know, uh, handling the disease problems  
**0:34:42-0:34:52:**  and insect problems with sprayers and store.  You know, you need a certain size orchard to afford to have the equipment to take care  of it.  
**0:34:52-0:35:08:**  If not, you've got a tremendous amount of hand labor and, uh, we don't have that labor  available in this part of the country to do that sort of thing very well.  And I'll be too few machines can harvest pecans a lot better than people can by picking up,  
**0:35:08-0:35:20:**  uh, that harvester out there, that pecan machine harvester picks up 98%, 99% of the pecans.  And probably some of the best people they can pick up by hand and maybe get 60 or 70%  of them.  
**0:35:20-0:35:29:**  So, you know, they're leaving a lot on the ground out there.  They just, you know, just can't find.  So it works better for us to use, uh, you know, be big enough that we can afford the  
**0:35:29-0:35:37:**  harvesters.  We can afford the cleaners, we can afford the crackers, uh, you know, and the processing  equipment, storage equipment stuff.  
**0:35:37-0:35:52:**  You know, I've got a large freezer here that we can store, you know, like 80,000 pounds  of whole nuts in, uh, the problem is, is that, uh, in the pecan business, we, uh, you know,  store, everybody wants pecans starting the first October.  
**0:35:52-0:36:01:**  And we have to supply that market.  The problem with is pecans don't start falling to the, about the first of November.  So we have a large freezer stuff and, you know, by this time of year, they would already  
**0:36:01-0:36:14:**  be, they're already in, in there and, and, uh, and freeze them, take them right on down  to zero and keep them there.  All rest of winter, spring, summer, and then in the, maybe in September, we start pulling  
**0:36:14-0:36:30:**  them out, uh, start processing them, uh, by the first October, then we're able to fill  a lot of our custom orders, our grocery store orders, our bulk food store orders, that sort  of stuff, and kind of get them taken up on that sort of pecan then run those through  
**0:36:30-0:36:37:**  till October.  Then we get busy in November, start harvesting.  That's normally about the time that we, uh, you know, we're pretty well emptied of the  
**0:36:37-0:36:51:**  year before pecans, and then we're able to start on, on, on, on that year's production  and start to, you know, processing those and moving those through the market.  That's a busy time of the year, you know, October and November are really super busy  
**0:36:51-0:37:02:**  for us because that's harvest season and we're processing and also on everything.  So we do hire a little extra help to, to help on that.  Maybe to run harvesters or to work back here where we're processed, we'll hire a couple  
**0:37:02-0:37:09:**  extra hands, uh, people, part-timers.  So it works out, works out well for everybody.  Yeah.  
**0:37:09-0:37:21:**  Yeah.  And so when you say that you're too big to be a small farmer and too small to be a big  farmer, that doesn't apply to your, um, that doesn't apply to the pecan orchard of 300  
**0:37:21-0:37:31:**  acres that applies to the whole farm or to the row crop, the corn and soybeans part of  it.  That's what that means.  
**0:37:31-0:37:45:**  Yeah, you know, and, and, you know, yeah, I mean, uh, I've got a cleaning plan here  on the farm that's really, it's pretty well made for a 600 acre orchard.  Um, I've got 300 acres, um, you know, I'm a little oversized on that, but you know,  
**0:37:45-0:37:49:**  I, that's the smallest they built.  Wow.  It's huge.  
**0:37:49-0:38:02:**  I just, it's just difficult to imagine.  And there's a separate building out there that's got all that equipment in, you know,  that we bring them in out of the fields and stuff with, with, uh, you know, dump trailers  
**0:38:02-0:38:09:**  and stuff and empty those.  And from there, they go up there and they, you know, it takes any of the holes and stuff  and takes those out.  
**0:38:09-0:38:22:**  It takes it as in the sticks out and any dirt clods and stuff out in the stick types out.  Uh, let me run through an aspirator sucks.  Anything that pecan maybe doesn't have not filled well, it takes those out.  
**0:38:22-0:38:33:**  And then from there, they go through a, you know, an I-Corps sorter sort of thing that,  you know, takes a picture of every nut that comes through there.  And you know, it'll do about 5,000 pounds of nuts an hour.  
**0:38:33-0:38:45:**  So you know, 70 nuts to the pound, you can, you know, 350,000 nuts an hour going through  there is taking a picture.  Every one of them decides whether it's a right color, the right texture and the right size.  
**0:38:45-0:38:56:**  And it a little shot of air blows that out.  And then they come down on a, on another table and stuff, a belt and stuff and a couple people  there that case it meets something out because those harvesters pick everything up out there.  
**0:38:56-0:39:10:**  That's the same size and weight as a pecan, whether it be a, you know, a rock or a, you  know, a dirt clod or a piece of stick or a, you know, maybe a shotgun hole or, or, or,  you know, a bone of some kind, who knows whatever's out there.  
**0:39:10-0:39:19:**  So all it has to be sorted out.  So, you know, and then they're put into thousand pound bulk bins that we can move around with  a forklift and dump and stack and store and stuff.  
**0:39:19-0:39:27:**  So that's how we handle those sorts of things.  So it works out well for us.  And I can say we're a little, maybe over mechanized, but labor's expensive in this part of the  
**0:39:27-0:39:40:**  country and it's hard to find.  And so the more we can do by, by machine, a lot better off we are.  So you've got room to expand your orchard in terms of, you know, the fixed costs would,  
**0:39:40-0:39:48:**  would be able to, to hold some more, some more production, right?  You could increase the size of your orchard if you, if you wanted to.  Correct.  
**0:39:48-0:39:59:**  You know, and I've thought about that for the past three or four years.  And I thought, well, you know, I, you know, I could, I could, you know, I got 40 acres  down here, man, it's definitely really raised some really nice pecans and it's a good place  
**0:39:59-0:40:10:**  to enter out and do that.  I think, you know, I'm 65 years old and it's going to take 15 years to get them in production  and you know, really full production, you know, I'm going to be 85 years old and do  
**0:40:10-0:40:21:**  I really want to, you know, you know, do that till then, I guess maybe I might, but I have  a commitment, pulled a trigger.  I mean, the last orchard we planted was about eight years ago.  
**0:40:21-0:40:38:**  So I'm about another 18 acres over there, but kind of in a nice spot.  But you know, as far as that, I'm, I'm pretty well maxed out.  I think as far as, you know, orchard I'd plant, I think.  
**0:40:38-0:40:52:**  Are you really going to think about planting?  I said, yeah, but nah, probably won't, you know, of course there's always an old saying,  you know, only old men plant trees.  
**0:40:52-0:41:04:**  And you know, I used to laugh about that.  And there's my dad wanted to plant trees all the time and stuff.  And he was an old man because I came along fairly late in life and, and, and that was  
**0:41:04-0:41:11:**  in his life.  And he, you know, wanted to plant pecan orchards and stuff.  So that was fine.  
**0:41:11-0:41:19:**  The thing about it is, is, you know, those saying old men plant trees.  It's not necessarily true because I planted an awful lot of tree when I was a kid, but  I had an old man out there making me plant them.  
**0:41:19-0:41:29:**  So I'm kind of glad he did.  I mean, it's a, it's kind of a nice business to have.  When I go to bed at night, you know, that tree is right there.  
**0:41:29-0:41:38:**  And when I get up in the morning, it's exactly where it was the night before, you know, and  I couldn't say the same thing with the beef cow.  Yeah.  
**0:41:38-0:41:50:**  I've never, I've never thought about it in that way when I was planting trees.  I don't have to build a fence around them to keep them in.  Well, we were in Greece, we had to build a fence to keep other things out.  
**0:41:50-0:41:58:**  So we still had to build a fence even if the trees weren't going to run away.  Yeah.  But we were farming on, it was 12 acres in this case.  
**0:41:58-0:42:13:**  So another kind of scale.  So probably our listeners right now are thinking to themselves, when are you going to start  talking about agroforestry and so I think it's, I'd love to know a bit about you know,  
**0:42:13-0:42:25:**  tell us a bit about the first or the why you started planting grains in between your row  of trees.  How did that decision go about?  
**0:42:25-0:42:32:**  Why did you decide to start doing this?  Tell us a bit about the history behind that part of your system.  Okay.  
**0:42:32-0:42:47:**  In 1981, we planted the, the, the, the larger orchard over there, about 200 acres in it,  180.  And it was in a bottom that, and that was a wheat field and it was all planted in wheat.  
**0:42:47-0:43:01:**  And then in the late winter, early spring, we went down there and set 12,000 flags on  that.  They were in 40 foot rows, about 15, 18 foot step down the road.  
**0:43:01-0:43:12:**  The rows were straight as in there, we set them off with a level, took about 10 days  to do that.  And to distill this day, it was called the flag farm because it was just a massive flag  
**0:43:12-0:43:24:**  farm and they were white flags on that pretty green wheat down there.  And so we put them there.  We went ahead and sprayed right down the row there to kill the wheat out and then planted  
**0:43:24-0:43:35:**  nuts in there.  And that was the kind of the start of their agroforestry.  We went ahead and combined the wheat that summer off that the next year, I think we  
**0:43:35-0:43:49:**  planted corn or soybeans and rotated a wheat, corn, soybean crop to there.  We did the wheat.  I had a neighbor that would farm and come in and farm between the rows.  
**0:43:49-0:44:02:**  Now you got to remember that's back in the, in the early eighties, mid eighties and early  nineties and farming was quite a bit different then.  Our equipment was quite a bit smaller.  
**0:44:02-0:44:19:**  Now my renter has a 65 foot field cultivator and his planters are 50, 80, 50, 60 feet wide.  But back then everybody was still planted with four and six row planters.  So we weren't very wide and we could get in there and plant and worked real well.  
**0:44:19-0:44:28:**  And we didn't call it agroforestry back then.  We just called it farming between the pecan trees.  Then they came up with this fancy name called agroforestry, which was fine.  
**0:44:28-0:44:42:**  And the whole idea was that we had all that room between the trees, between the rows at  40 feet that we weren't using, there was probably 30 feet there that wasn't being used.  So we cropped that and we cropped that in corn, beans, soybean for probably about 16  
**0:44:42-0:44:52:**  or 17 years, if I remember right.  And at least for 15.  And then as then we kept getting slow, we were planting 12 rows, then 10 rows, then  
**0:44:52-0:44:59:**  eight rows.  And then we finally got down to six rows.  And by the time the trees get to a certain size, the root system starts coming out and  
**0:44:59-0:45:07:**  really starts taking away from the crop out there.  So we got where it wasn't feasible to farm anymore as far as row crop.  So we seeded it down to grass.  
**0:45:07-0:45:18:**  And then in our part of the country, our orchards are all seeded down to grass.  And so we started cutting hay between it and that worked out well.  We put up a quite a bit of what we call baleage, which is where we go in there and mow the  
**0:45:18-0:45:29:**  hay and the grass in the morning and let it lay for two or three hours and rake it and  bale it into a small bale and then wrap it where it turns into hay litter or silage sort  of stuff.  
**0:45:29-0:45:41:**  And that worked out real well because of that, because the trees were getting big enough  it was starting to shade some, we could still get our hay put up without any problem.  You know, still have enough sunlight to get it dry as dry hay, or we could go with the  
**0:45:41-0:45:49:**  silage hay.  With us being in the American bison business or the Buffalo business, you know, we had  we could haul that and use that to feed our livestock and stuff.  
**0:45:49-0:46:01:**  And you know, when you got three or 400 head of Buffalo on the farm, it takes quite a bit  of hay in the wintertime and stuff.  And also we were in the cattle business, we, you know, buying cattle and stuff and we were  
**0:46:01-0:46:19:**  buying what I want to say, older cows that maybe mismanaged in the summer, they were  pretty thin come this time of year or fall, you know, December, January, we'd buy them,  order buyers out and buy them and buy them for, you know, a 750 pound cow for, you know,  
**0:46:19-0:46:35:**  $250 and, and, you know, 30 cents a pound, whatever.  We'd bring her home feed her this excellent hay of baleage or grass hay and start putting  weight on them, you know, then, you know, pasture them clear up to maybe about the middle  
**0:46:35-0:46:46:**  of June or first of June and then the hamburger market was going pretty good and we'd ship  them off off the market then.  Normally we could put about 500 pounds on them, almost double their size and then also  
**0:46:46-0:46:55:**  double the amount of money we got for him.  So that worked out pretty good payment too.  So we utilizing that grass between the trees in that situation.  
**0:46:55-0:47:07:**  When I got out of the Buffalo business and the livestock business, it was kind of nice.  As far as moving hay, I mean, I did sell the hay.  I had a friend that needed hay a lot.  
**0:47:07-0:47:20:**  He would come in and mow the orchard early in the spring or early part of the summer,  as soon as you could get in there, mow the hay off of it.  And then he would pay me for the amount of fertilizer, which was fairly easy to figure  
**0:47:20-0:47:29:**  out how many tons of hay he took off.  And he'd pay me to put the extra fertilizer back down on the orchard.  And that way it saved us a mowing of the orchard one morning, and then also keeping that dead  
**0:47:29-0:47:38:**  grass and stuff around.  That's the question is pretty well dropped now.  So we just go and keep mowing the orchard, the bigger orchard over there, and just keep  
**0:47:38-0:47:49:**  putting the grass clippings right back down to build up the organic matter of the soil  and probably help the pecans a little better.  My younger orchards, we're still mowing hay between them.  
**0:47:49-0:48:03:**  There's not a lot of money to be made selling hay, but I have a large barn we could stack  almost a thousand big round bales in.  So you're looking at probably 750 ton of hay I can hold in that barn.  
**0:48:03-0:48:14:**  And we just keep going, don't have a lot of hay, but we keep filling it up.  About every five years it's full.  And then that's about the time we have a drought and hay gets to be expensive and I sell it  
**0:48:14-0:48:26:**  then.  And I've built up a pretty good reputation of having some of the best hay in the country  and that if you want the very best, you come see Dan.  
**0:48:26-0:48:38:**  It's going to cost a lot of money, but you're going to get some of the best hay in the country.  You can feed your horses or you can feed your very best cows or whatever you want.  So that's kind of how we worked that and we built up a nice market of reputation, that  
**0:48:38-0:48:49:**  sort of thing.  And reputation is this, I have one rule, if I wouldn't eat it, I'm not going to sell it.  And if I don't like it, you're not going to like it.  
**0:48:49-0:49:00:**  And if you're not going to like it, you're going to tell 20 people you don't like it.  If you like it, you're only going to tell one person you like it.  So be real careful not to sell anything that's not up to par or up to snuff.  
**0:49:00-0:49:11:**  So that's been kind of one of our main deals.  I have one strict rule on the farm, come June 15th, if the hay is not put up, if we've had  bad weather, we don't put it up that year.  
**0:49:11-0:49:21:**  I mean, it just anytime I bale hay after the 15th of June, the quality goes way down on  it and I don't want to sell any bad quality hay.  I always want to sell the best.  
**0:49:21-0:49:36:**  Do you think that the trees have something to do with the quality of the hay as well?  I'm talking about the trees being there and maybe having an effect on the organic matter  of the soil or the shade also cooling down in the, I don't know, have you perceived something  
**0:49:36-0:49:40:**  like this?  I mean, I really noticed something.  I'm not saying it can happen.  
**0:49:40-0:49:50:**  The only thing about it is the tree gets bigger and if it gets maybe a little later into May,  the trees leaf out and it makes it hard to get the hay dry enough to bale.  And that's a problem.  
**0:49:50-0:50:01:**  When we were going with a bay which sort of thing, that worked out pretty well.  The only problem is it's hard to sell that you have to use that stuff up.  It's really not a saleable product like dry hay is.  
**0:50:01-0:50:08:**  So it's expensive to haul.  It's heavy.  It's got a lot of water in it, but it's excellent feed too.  
**0:50:08-0:50:17:**  So you weren't doing dry hay in your pecan orchard when it had roots?  I was doing both.  If I could put it up dry, I'd put it up dry.  
**0:50:17-0:50:26:**  If I could, I'd go ahead and bale it up as baleage.  So it depended on the climatic conditions at the time of dry hay?  The corn and beans worked out real well.  
**0:50:26-0:50:41:**  But like I say, finally it got to a situation that just wasn't working.  The problem with it now is that the chemicals that we used for weed control back in the  eighties was a lot different than the weed control we use now for soybeans and corn.  
**0:50:41-0:50:57:**  And the pretty well the same chemicals we use for weed control around the pecans was  the same thing we're using for corn and soybeans.  Well, like I say, now that's not the truth because Roundup and dicamba and all this other  
**0:50:57-0:51:04:**  kind of stuff is really detrimental to pecans.  They're real susceptible to it.  So it kind of limits you on what you can use as far as spray, unless you want to go back  
**0:51:04-0:51:17:**  to the old time stuff where we're cultivating and all that.  And mainly that's just not really very easy to do and to have equipment small enough to  get in there to do it.  
**0:51:17-0:51:32:**  Right now, the spray rigs and stuff that take care of weeds and they're spraying 80 foot  wide booms and it's kind of hard when you've got trees 40 feet apart.  You can't spray 80 feet wide.  
**0:51:32-0:51:43:**  Luckily though, the fertilizer I have that custom put on now and they do spread 80 feet,  but it's dry fertilizer.  So it slings past the trees and they drive down every other road to fertilize that way.  
**0:51:43-0:51:51:**  And that's one of the things I can work on pretty good.  They have got that where they can sling fertilizer stuff out 80 feet now.  So it helps out to the, to the just a 40.  
**0:51:51-0:52:02:**  Um, well, I'd say farm has changed a lot.  Um, you know, on a small Oregon, a small operation, you know, well, I could raise sweet corn or  I could raise some pumpkins in there and do things a little different, or, you know, maybe  
**0:52:02-0:52:14:**  some other kinds of small crops and stuff, but to do it on any kind of scale to have,  you know, a decent size pecan orchard, you know, you know, what are you gonna do with  200 acres of sweet corn?  
**0:52:14-0:52:21:**  That's a lot of sweet corn.  Yeah.  No, I can't move that much or, you know, or 200 acres of pumpkins or, or vice versa.  
**0:52:21-0:52:31:**  That's the problem I get into.  So, um, you know, for me, uh, I need scale to, to, to make it pencil out.  Yeah.  
**0:52:31-0:52:42:**  And that makes sense then to put the row crops in between your pecan orchard and back in  the days when you were doing it yourself, do it yourself.  But, um, nowadays the problem is that you've got to get other people to do it and they  
**0:52:42-0:52:48:**  have machinery that's not adapted.  And so that kind of creates some trouble, right?  That's right.  
**0:52:48-0:52:57:**  That's right.  And like I said, the whole, the whole farming thing has changed in the past 40 years.  You know, we're really, as far as I'm certain, it's not that conducive to, to, you know,  
**0:52:57-0:53:07:**  to agroforestry row cropping, but you know, per se between the trees and stuff.  Yeah, no, I was going to just keep going on, on, on what you were talking about with the  pesticides.  
**0:53:07-0:53:19:**  And that's one of the questions that I had.  And one of the things that in agroforestry we're trying to understand, it's the, you  know, the, the management issues, um, and you know, coordinating different management  
**0:53:19-0:53:29:**  regimes, different management needs.  When you have a row crop, for example, that needs to be weeded somehow.  And when you have, for example, a tree crop there, um, that suffers from the pesticides,  
**0:53:29-0:53:41:**  are there any other kind of big management problems that you were facing in the 16 years  that you were, you were into cropping?  I'm talking about, for example, past passing with, with machinery, compaction and damage  
**0:53:41-0:53:48:**  to potential damage to the roots of the trees.  Are there any things that you were, you were worried about, uh, with the interaction of  these two crops?  
**0:53:48-0:54:00:**  Well, I guess the main thing was, is that a lot of times, if you had crop down there  stuff in the early years, when we really needed to be down there working with the trees, there  was no way to get down there because, uh, the corn was growing in the fields and, you  
**0:54:00-0:54:07:**  know, how do you, you know, how do you get equipment down through there without knocking  all the corn stuff down?  So that was a kind of the problem too.  
**0:54:07-0:54:20:**  We found out and as the trees got bigger, you know, we kept getting a wider space and  then we wouldn't plant the in rows so we could go down and take care of our trees because  we were needed to spray them for, you know, for some sort of, you know, like folder or  
**0:54:20-0:54:34:**  bugs that would, you know, defoliate the trees and stuff, which was not good and that sort  of thing.  And, and then when they got to, you know, in, uh, into a production, you know, we definitely  
**0:54:34-0:54:45:**  have to drive down through there and stuff.  And if we had hay and there, you know, you kind of knocked all that down.  So it was kind of hard to figure around and stuff to, to when we had to spray or fertilizer  
**0:54:45-0:54:58:**  or do other stuff for work or grab those pecans when we spent a lot of time down in those  young trees.  So it was a, it was a little different situation on, on, on that as far as, you know, the width  
**0:54:58-0:55:12:**  and stuff on those trees as they got older, just a lot of different management.  Of course now, you know, we're, you know, we're in the orchard, uh, uh, mowing it.  We spray a little weed control right around the base of all the trees.  
**0:55:12-0:55:20:**  Trees are big enough.  We really don't need it, but mainly it keeps vines and stuff from wanting to grow up on  the trees, poison Ivy vines and, and, and Virginia creeper and trumpet vibes and stuff.  
**0:55:20-0:55:32:**  So it kind of keeps holds that stuff down.  Uh, being keeper orchards really main looked up like a park.  Uh, most people don't, uh, they maybe mow it once or twice, right before the year right  
**0:55:32-0:55:37:**  at the harvest.  That's it.  It's easier for us to keep the weeds and stuff and the grass down in search and deal and  
**0:55:37-0:55:45:**  keeps it up looking.  I'm right on a major highway.  My orchards are on a major highway and, and, uh, they have the, you know, the orchard looking  
**0:55:45-0:55:57:**  nice people think that, you know, if your orchard looks successful, they think you're  successful and then they want to buy your product.  And the same way, you know, we, uh, you know, we have a lot of highway right away.  
**0:55:57-0:56:06:**  We keep it all mowed up, looking real nice and everything else and looks on a farm, you  know, that really doesn't people don't think it pays, but it pays a tremendous amount in  the long run.  
**0:56:06-0:56:19:**  If the farm's neat and picked up and cleaned and not a lot of brush growing everywhere  and weeds and stuff, you know, people are more interested in buying from somebody.  I think he says successful than somebody that's kind of, Oh, you know, place maybe looks a  
**0:56:19-0:56:30:**  little trashy or something like that.  So, you know, it's part of the sales.  Matter of fact, one time, you know, we had some, uh, you know, we had a, uh, an Easter  
**0:56:30-0:56:42:**  freeze and, uh, we did not raise a pecan that year, not one pecan.  And we didn't even open the store that year.  It was a pretty, pretty sour deal.  
**0:56:42-0:56:52:**  And, uh, well, excuse me, we did open for, we had other stuff going, but we didn't raise  any because of our own stuff.  And I said, well, we don't have to harvest any pecans this year.  
**0:56:52-0:56:59:**  So we don't have to keep the orchard all mowed up.  And so we didn't do the last couple of moments and it got all, you know, got pretty tall  and stuff.  
**0:56:59-0:57:07:**  And people coming in the farm to buy some Buffalo meat or some champs and jellies and  other nuts and stuff is, Oh, you're, you're not in the book.  You're out of the pecan business now.  
**0:57:07-0:57:10:**  Huh?  And it's a rule.  No, we're selling pecan business.  
**0:57:10-0:57:14:**  Well, your orchards not all mowed up.  I thought y'all quit.  You know, we're out of the pecan business.  
**0:57:14-0:57:27:**  No, just no because there's no need to, to mow it, to pick the harvest of pecans.  And after, you know, the fourth or fifth person came in when a week's time, uh, told me that  that thought we were out of the pecan business.  
**0:57:27-0:57:34:**  The employees came in Monday morning.  I said, all right, guys, we took the mowers off, go back there and hook them on.  And you know, y'all going to go down and mow the orchard this week.  
**0:57:34-0:57:45:**  I said, at least definitely mow the part of it where they can see from the highway.  So everybody thinks we're still in the pecan business.  You know, it costs some money, but you know, it's part of the stuff you just had to do,  
**0:57:45-0:57:56:**  you know, to still stay in business.  I wonder what do, what did people say when they saw you, um, intercropping?  Well, I mean, it must've been, it's quite an uncommon, uncommon thing, especially back  
**0:57:56-0:58:01:**  in the days.  What did people think about that?  They thought we were crazier than heck.  
**0:58:01-0:58:04:**  Yeah.  Yeah.  Yeah.  
**0:58:04-0:58:10:**  Yeah.  It was kind of funny.  You, you walk into the, you know, to the restaurant, you know, for maybe breakfast in the morning  
**0:58:10-0:58:19:**  or something, and there's a community table sitting around there and, you know, eight  or 10 people.  And all of a sudden you walk in and man, all of a sudden the table just shuts up and stuff.  
**0:58:19-0:58:26:**  And I had an old gentleman with me and I said, I think they were talking about me.  What'd he said?  Dan, they talk about you every morning pretty well.  
**0:58:26-0:58:31:**  But he said, maybe this way, if they're not talking about you, you're not doing a damn  thing.  So, you know, let them talk.  
**0:58:31-0:58:40:**  That's good.  You know, if they're not talking about you, you're not doing anything.  So it was the thing you just do something different.  
**0:58:40-0:58:49:**  I mean, the same reason, you know, you make a little bit doing what everybody else doing,  but you stand to make a lot more doing what everybody else is not.  So do something different.  
**0:58:49-0:58:52:**  Yeah.  Do something different.  Be a trendsetter.  
**0:58:52-0:59:01:**  You know, some things haven't worked.  You know, we, we tried stuff that hadn't worked and, and, uh, you know, kind of got, you know,  we had heart nuts and stuff and they didn't work.  
**0:59:01-0:59:14:**  Dad planted a bunch of filberts and they don't work here in this part of the country.  We were in the Wiesen business, which is a European bison.  You know, we were at the largest privately owned herd of reasons in the world one time.  
**0:59:14-0:59:21:**  And that just never did work out.  So we got rid of them.  You know, we thought about getting in the deer business, the final deer business, raising  
**0:59:21-0:59:30:**  deer for meat and stuff.  And we decided either we had to get real big or get out.  So we got out of that, but, you know, I mean, there's a lot of things we've tried that haven't  
**0:59:30-0:59:39:**  worked and, and that'll, we've tried some things that have worked and, and you just  keep working through them.  Probably one of the main things I've seen as a lot of people as they try something and  
**0:59:39-0:59:51:**  they don't see it through, through the end.  And we found out that if you're going to try something normally, it takes about eight years  before you really come proficient and professional and economically successful with it.  
**0:59:51-1:00:02:**  And I've seen so many people start stuff in three or four years and they quit whether  they're almost there, but they quit and don't stick through it.  And, you know, agroforestry is a sort of seal.  
**1:00:02-1:00:08:**  It's a long-term deal.  I mean, it's, you know, if you're going to plant it, you need to figure out that you're  probably going to be there the rest of your life to mess with it.  
**1:00:08-1:00:17:**  So, you know, it's, that's something you're going to start and, you know, two or three  years probably move on.  If not, you know, you're not going to be in that business.  
**1:00:17-1:00:26:**  It's a long-term deal.  Like I say, every morning, you know, I get up, they're still there.  They haven't, I haven't had to build a fence around them.  
**1:00:26-1:00:35:**  I wanted to go back a bit to the intercropping kind of the details that we were delving into.  I had a few questions still about that.  Okay.  
**1:00:35-1:00:45:**  Just to understand, you stopped intercropping about when the trees started entering production,  right?  Then you started, then there started to be some logistical issues with, you know, crops  
**1:00:45-1:00:56:**  underneath and, or was it more that you had to change crops?  Did you start putting more winter wheat, for example, during, how did it work out at that  level?  
**1:00:56-1:01:06:**  Well, it worked out better for us.  I say we went corn and beans for about 15 years.  You know, we, the trees really kind of got maybe production about 20, but the, there  
**1:01:06-1:01:16:**  are five years there that we were in a hay business between them and we were cutting  hay off of them every year.  So that was still an agroforestry intercropping deal as far as I'm concerned.  
**1:01:16-1:01:25:**  After that, you know, the trees got in production.  You know, we still kept some hay between them and stuff, but you know, I forgot a lifestyle  business better off just to not mess with it.  
**1:01:25-1:01:36:**  And then we could go down and do, you know, take care of the orchard, you know, year round  all year long, especially anytime in the summer, you know, we didn't have to worry about any  other crop there.  
**1:01:36-1:01:44:**  We're strictly focusing on the McConnell, the nut crop.  And that's what we were really, you know, that's where the money was and that's what  we're after.  
**1:01:44-1:01:54:**  Uh, you know, the agroforestry deal worked out good, you know, did we make a lot of money  off doing it?  No, but it, it, it made enough money to pay for the land costs and the input costs and  
**1:01:54-1:02:03:**  everything else.  So that was real important for those establishment years, especially in the early Sam, because  we were getting a lot of row crop off of it.  
**1:02:03-1:02:11:**  And as we got down, we got narrow and narrow ones and less than left.  And then it got to a situation that really wasn't profitable farm anymore.  So when one probable farmer, then we had to go to his dirt, some third of the thing.  
**1:02:11-1:02:24:**  So we went to the grass situation and now we're still in the grass too.  So, uh, you know, but, uh, you know, anymore now we're just on the orchards and strictly  keeping them mowed down and, and then harvest the nuts in the fall.  
**1:02:24-1:02:40:**  But the time we're fertilizing twice a year, we're normally spraying about three times,  four times a year, uh, you know, Moen, you know, four times a year, you know, just, uh,  you know, or in the process of printing trees in a bigger orchard, we'll do that about every  
**1:02:40-1:02:49:**  10 years, the young orchards, the other a hundred acres over here, you know, we print  those every year.  We're still in the process of grafting some of them, uh, that sort of thing.  
**1:02:49-1:02:57:**  So, you know, it's a, it's a on and on and long, you know, there's always something to  do.  And that's the nice thing about it.  
**1:02:57-1:03:09:**  For sure.  Um, just, um, about, you just mentioned something now that brings up this question.  Um, you weren't able to, to spray the trees then very easily in the early stages when  
**1:03:09-1:03:12:**  there was a crop there, right?  I mean, you weren't able to pass.  Yeah.  
**1:03:12-1:03:21:**  So you hadn't kind of had to compromise there a bit if the trees needed some, but at some  point they were starting to have fungal infection, they needed some intervention, um, especially  when they're young.  
**1:03:21-1:03:26:**  I mean, they were getting established.  They can be quite weak.  Um, how would you manage, how were you managing that?  
**1:03:26-1:03:37:**  Well that, you know, sort of the big orchard spurs we've got now and stuff, we had a, you  know, sprayer on a small tractor, you know, hand sprayer and, you know, and going with  some, uh, malathion or some seven or whatever.  
**1:03:37-1:03:47:**  And mainly, you know, walnut caterpillars and that sort of thing.  That was a problem and stuff.  They could defoliate those young trees pretty fast and, and see on top of it took a long  
**1:03:47-1:03:57:**  time to do it, you know, with that, you know, because, uh, you know, earlier we were just  spraying them around with a, you know, with a small four-wheeler or three-wheeler and,  uh, uh, a small one.  
**1:03:57-1:04:08:**  Then we went to a smaller tractor and, you know, and to do that, but still, it took a  lot of time to do that.  And then was there when we finally got rid of the row crop part of it, then it was easier.  
**1:04:08-1:04:21:**  Then we could go with our, you know, purchase our regular orchard sprayers and stuff.  And now, you know, a couple of, three years ago, I put her to a very large orchard sprayer  because my trees were getting really big and tall or I needed that because.  
**1:04:21-1:04:29:**  You know, I don't like to spray.  I do the most of the spring.  We spray, let's spray most of the time at night.  
**1:04:29-1:04:37:**  And you know, when you go out at, to go to work at 10 o'clock at night and one till five  or six in the morning, you know, and then try to do something the next day.  And then the next night you got to do it.  
**1:04:37-1:04:51:**  It kind of makes for a long day and stuff and the in between there and it really messes  your sleep cycle up and stuff, but that's a good time to get those done.  I don't like to spray anymore than a half to it's expensive, but if we don't spray,  
**1:04:51-1:05:02:**  you know, we'll lose probably 80, 90% of our crop.  And I kind of tell people, I said, you know, and if you have one pecan tree in your yard,  you know, you probably don't have a lot of fungal disease.  
**1:05:02-1:05:17:**  You get a lot of air movement around it, you know, um, I don't get a whole lot of, you  know, uh, insect damage to speak of whatever, but it's kinda like a, you know, when these,  when you, but when you put thousands of these trees together, then it's a magnet for diseases  
**1:05:17-1:05:35:**  and insects and everything else, and, you know, uh, for, uh, you know, right now that  my main, uh, predator on pecans is, or crows and, and, you know, uh, a murderer crows can  come in and take a, they can take seven, 800,000 pounds and that's a day off of unit, you know,  
**1:05:35-1:05:46:**  two or $3 a pound that adds up pretty fast over, you know, a few weeks time.  So we're always, you know, trying to get rid of pests of some kind because everything loves  a pecan because they're good eating.  
**1:05:46-1:05:54:**  So, and these graft ones are really nice because they've got a thinner shed on them and these  animals can break them up and get them or insects and get in them a lot easier, you  know?  
**1:05:54-1:06:03:**  So, uh, you know, we have a spray program and this works pretty well.  We keep up with it so we don't get a heavy load of insects and stuff load that we have  to take care of.  
**1:06:03-1:06:11:**  And, you know, people don't want to, you know, buy a pecan and look in there and it's got  a worm in there, you know, just, you know, it's just not good.  Yeah.  
**1:06:11-1:06:20:**  It's not good for sales.  Um, what about, um, the fertility?  Because at some point you're also fertilizing the row crops.  
**1:06:20-1:06:37:**  Row crops may have, um, different needs, probably have different needs to the pecans.  Um, and so when you were fertilizing, um, at the beginning, um, at these early stages,  um, what did you see some kind of, were there some kind of decisions that needed to be made,  
**1:06:37-1:06:43:**  some compromises in terms of either you go for the row crop health, uh, or you go for  the tree health?  How did you manage that?  
**1:06:43-1:06:55:**  Normally when we were fertilizing for row crops, um, they were the pecan trees were  also benefiting from that.  So that, you know, and, and being a young tree, you know, I mean, uh, we were close  
**1:06:55-1:07:10:**  enough to be getting enough, you know, the fertility wasn't that important that, you  know, that precise that, you know, cause we're not just growing a tree and it was getting  plenty of fertilizer from also, you know, especially corn cause you've been a lot of  
**1:07:10-1:07:15:**  nitrogen down on corn.  And that was late, you know, it was getting in the root system of the young trees.  Now I'm not saying they're very young trees.  
**1:07:15-1:07:27:**  When they're real young, we went and fertilized them by hand for life to each one by hand,  because they weren't big enough to go out to get that.  But as they got larger stuff, uh, the row crop fertilizer took care of the pecan fertilization,  
**1:07:27-1:07:34:**  tree fertilization.  We went to grass, of course, you know, we went and started fertilizing the orchard and  the whole deal.  
**1:07:34-1:07:45:**  And Chris, the rat, the reach was pretty well going pretty well all the way across the rows.  So we're fertilizing the whole, the whole orchard out there, plus the hay crop we were  doing, which was taking care of that.  
**1:07:45-1:07:55:**  Uh, now we're, you know, where we're not, you know, we're strictly targeting the trees  and stuff.  Matter of fact, uh, they, uh, they did soil samples on all the orchards here this past  
**1:07:55-1:08:03:**  week.  She'd be getting results back here in a week or so.  And we'd like to do that about once every 10 years or so it's five, 10 years been on  
**1:08:03-1:08:10:**  what we're at.  Just kind of seeing where we are on our fertility of our soil and what trees might need to take  and stuff.  
**1:08:10-1:08:24:**  Um, so, uh, okay.  That's, uh, it would have been good to interview you in a week's time to have the results,  but I guess we'll just have to do another short five minute episode on the results.  
**1:08:24-1:08:31:**  Yeah.  So, you know, here probably next year we'll do a leaf sample, you know, and set that stuff  off and do that.  
**1:08:31-1:08:41:**  Um, you know, yeah, we're, you know, always cause fertility fertilizer is expensive, you  know, lime's expensive and stuff and keep everything up and then keep the pecan trees  going to the max.  
**1:08:41-1:08:57:**  You know, it's best to kind of keep seeing every once in a while where we're at and stuff.  So it makes sense for us.  And one of the big things in agroforestry is, is worry about competition, um, between  
**1:08:57-1:09:14:**  the row crop, um, including the hay here as well.  Considering this is obviously a part of an agroforestry practice, um, and, and the pecans.  Um, so, um, did you, did you see any big problems in terms of water competition?  
**1:09:14-1:09:29:**  I know that we can sometimes find observations where, um, you know, the, the, the, the, uh,  crops that are close to the trees are performing less well, or sometimes more well if the trees  has reduced stressed, um, because, you know, there's been some shading in hot summers and  
**1:09:29-1:09:42:**  et cetera in your 16 years or more, um, um, of experience with intercropping.  Have you noticed in terms of light and shades and water, any, any things that you maybe  like to share with us?  
**1:09:42-1:09:49:**  You bet.  Main thing is, you know, we get a dry season stuff.  You can, you can see exactly where the roots go and you know, you can see the perfect circle  
**1:09:49-1:10:01:**  around the trees that the roots have taken all the moisture out, you know, and the grass  is dead or not dead, but brown stuff and really show drought.  And we saw the same thing in, in, in, in corn and soybean production around each one of  
**1:10:01-1:10:11:**  the trees, especially after I got about 10, 12 years old through system, we're starting  to move out quite a ways and stuff.  And, uh, you know, definitely a reduction in yield on corn and soybeans.  
**1:10:11-1:10:24:**  Uh, and that's what kinda after that, you know, after about 15 years, it, it really,  the trees were taken so much from the crop.  It wasn't really, you know, profitable to keep farming between them.  
**1:10:24-1:10:36:**  Cause the tree just taken too much moisture away from them.  And I'm sure shading was somewhat of a problem too, because you know, when you got, you know,  crops growing right next to trees and mainly, I think it's mainly because the roots are  
**1:10:36-1:10:45:**  fighting for moisture and nutrients and also some shade too.  But like I say, after about 15 years, it pretty well decided that we were not going to be  in the row crop business anymore.  
**1:10:45-1:10:57:**  We were going to have to go to a hay business or something like that.  So it worked out better.  If you were planting soy and corn, how are you managing the interline and the soil in  
**1:10:57-1:11:02:**  the winter?  Were you leaving it bare or were you leaving it tilled up?  Were you planting cover crops?  
**1:11:02-1:11:11:**  How are you managing that?  Uh, normally with corn stalks or something like that, we'd come in in the fall and maybe  a light desk just to knock the stalks down.  
**1:11:11-1:11:25:**  Uh, you know, to give a ground cover and also, you know, where those, uh, corn roots and,  and, and corn stalks would maybe tend to start rotting.  Some come in in spring, you know, we did a lot of no till, uh, you know, back then, uh,  
**1:11:25-1:11:39:**  worked out pretty well.  Uh, um, you know, but mainly, mainly we probably was, was more conventional tillage because,  you know, you really can't spray a lot of Roundup down there, uh, on a, on a big situation.  
**1:11:39-1:11:54:**  So, uh, no till, you know, probably wasn't, was not, if I remember right, it was not a  big deal and it wasn't that big of a deal back then when we were doing that.  Um, like I say, uh, cover crops, uh, you know, we'd go beans and then get the beans off.  
**1:11:54-1:12:04:**  We had time, we'd go ahead and plant a crop of wheat in there.  So yeah, the wheat was a cover crop for the winter.  Uh, but, uh, mainly it was just pretty well, mainly farming practices.  
**1:12:04-1:12:13:**  Uh, it was in a situation, the bottom grounds, we weren't on Hill ground where we had to  worry about erosion and that sort of thing.  So, uh, we were pretty open on what we could do.  
**1:12:13-1:12:27:**  We never tried to raise, you know, corn after corn, but corn in, we could go beans for a  couple of three years, maybe a crop of wheat, then come back in with corn.  Uh, corn seemed to, to, uh, early years worked out pretty well, but as we got longer, the  
**1:12:27-1:12:41:**  trees tend to really, you know, start the corn in anywhere next to a tree.  So, uh, and corn was fairly expensive to put in also.  Um, did you notice a difference between the performance in the latest stages when the  
**1:12:41-1:12:53:**  trees had already established, you know, a strong canopy and a root system, et cetera.  Did you notice that the wheat was performing differently from the corn and the soy?  Um, you know, wheat was not, uh, you know, this didn't seem to really make a lot of difference  
**1:12:53-1:12:58:**  on the wheat.  Um, yeah, that's what we expected.  Yeah.  
**1:12:58-1:13:08:**  The wheat pretty well do, you know, and like I say, a lot of it's growing gets done before  the trees get leafed out.  And, and we did real well, the only problem is that the wheat was never a very profitable,  
**1:13:08-1:13:22:**  you know, it wasn't a lot of profit in wheat, you know, some years are, but a lot of years  is mainly just kind of a breakeven deal.  So, uh, you know, we raised some wheat to break stuff up or we could get it in and then  
**1:13:22-1:13:33:**  maybe we can double crop some beans in there.  But you know, uh, a lot of times it was trying to get the crop out in time to get the wheat  planted in the fall to, to do that because, uh, my renter, that was kind of the deal.  
**1:13:33-1:13:48:**  He was kind of a little different than hard to get in there and kind of the last thing  he farmed because, you know, I mean, you're running theoretically over, you know, 200  acres or, and you're only farming about 140 of it.  
**1:13:48-1:13:59:**  So there's a difference between the rows and stuff.  So it's a little different out there as far as, you know, you're still running up and  down the rows, but you're not farming the whole thing, but you're still, you're still  
**1:13:59-1:14:09:**  running up over it.  So we, you know, and it costs more to farm that way.  It costs more because of your fuel and planning and all that kind of stuff.  
**1:14:09-1:14:21:**  So it, uh, it was not quite as profitable.  Still a nice way to make a, you know, some extra money and help pay to establish the  pecan trees and paid the land payments and stuff off on that ground.  
**1:14:21-1:14:33:**  As far as putting a lot of money in our pockets, it really never did.  But like I said, it didn't cost us money.  That was the main thing because the, um, the management or the, the cultivation of the  
**1:14:33-1:14:43:**  wheat and of the soy and corn that also helped with, you know, managing the tree crops.  Right.  It helped with, you know, keeping the area clean, uh, managing for competition and et  
**1:14:43-1:14:46:**  cetera.  Right.  It was, there was an overlap in management costs.  
**1:14:46-1:14:52:**  Right.  Well, it's true.  You know, I say, you know, we have land cost every, you know, so much year for taxes and  
**1:14:52-1:15:05:**  for, you know, we were still paying the farm off and stuff.  We had loans on that ground.  So the corn and soybeans, we, they were helping, they were paying the taxes.  
**1:15:05-1:15:15:**  They were paying, you know, the expenses of putting the crop in and harvesting it.  And it was also paying the land cost off and sometimes put a little money in our extra  money in our pocket board.  
**1:15:15-1:15:26:**  Sometimes it was a break even and maybe a time or two, it would maybe a loss, but not  too bad, but what it did, it got us land use using that land, where we're getting the pecan  trees in production.  
**1:15:26-1:15:42:**  And as far as I'm concerned now, the pecan trees are the main crop, the main production  and, and, and to go after that, because, you know, when I can raise a thousand pounds and  that's the acre off there and me, you know, wholesale price out of, you know, after I  
**1:15:42-1:15:52:**  get that theory, I'm getting $2 a pound for my production.  And this year, you know, if I sold them to a shelter, I'd probably get 90 cents or 80  or 90 cents a pound.  
**1:15:52-1:16:04:**  So I'm making way more than twice as much what I normally would sell into a shelter  or something like that.  So it's very for me now just to, to say, yeah, I'm in agroforestry that orchard over there  
**1:16:04-1:16:13:**  is what I almost consider as a matured, you know, that 180 acres, 200 acres is a matured  agroforestry.  The other hundred I have are young trees and stuff.  
**1:16:13-1:16:26:**  We're cutting hay off of those instead of farming, but I'm being able to sell the hay  and storing it and selling it when I can finally make a decent, decent profit on it.  And you know, as far as I'm concerned, those still orchards are still under the agroforestry  
**1:16:26-1:16:37:**  sort of deal, you know, cause we're taking a double crop off, you know, some of these  orchards this year, next year, we'll be taking some nuts off of them.  So we'll be getting double duty out of them, but I see in probably another 10 years or  
**1:16:37-1:16:48:**  so those orchards will not be, you know, we'll probably stop paying them and we'll just strictly  be keeping them mowed and those trees will be in full production.  And, you know, we'll be rocking and rolling with those things.  
**1:16:48-1:17:03:**  So those are all different, you know, those are different to grafting to different varieties,  which are a lot better, a lot more, a lot better nut than what we, we grafted with,  you know, 30 years ago.  
**1:17:03-1:17:14:**  So right.  You obviously have a lot of constraints as well with your type of crops peaking, because  for example, the peaking, they drop on the floor and you have it in front of the floor.  
**1:17:14-1:17:23:**  You can't get animals involved.  You can't put animals around that are going to be, you know, spreading their manure around  the trees and that then going to get mixed up with the nuts.  
**1:17:23-1:17:26:**  Right.  That's a challenge for you.  That's true.  
**1:17:26-1:17:35:**  And for us, you know, a lot of people go ahead and, you know, pasture some of their native  orchards and stuff and that's fine.  But you know, in my situation down in that bottom, it's wet, you know, the livestock  
**1:17:35-1:17:42:**  and pop the soil and, you know, footprint in the mud and, you know, and that falls in  or I can't pick it up out of there.  So I'll lose a lot of that.  
**1:17:42-1:17:55:**  I can't fight the manure cause you know, there's enough probably manure down there anyway,  from the deer and the coyotes and the coons and the raccoons and the skunks and possums  and all the birds flying around and stuff.  
**1:17:55-1:18:05:**  Anyway, we go ahead and sanitize these pecans and stuff when we process them.  But any more than that, you know, I don't want livestock when they're in there plus  fencing and stuff.  
**1:18:05-1:18:16:**  Probably to have that 200 acres in there under there, I'd probably have to cross fence and  stuff.  But when I'm spraying at night, I don't want to get out of that tractor and open 25 gates,  
**1:18:16-1:18:29:**  you know, all night long, you know, and down through there, you know, especially on young  trees that livestock could be hard on them.  They love eating on the leaves and limbs and stuff and unrubbing on the trees and that  
**1:18:29-1:18:37:**  sort of thing.  So, you know, it really had to be a mature orchard before I could even pasture it anyway,  that it had to fence all the rows of the trees off.  
**1:18:37-1:18:52:**  And then, you know, you get a situation where you're, you know, just fenced everywhere and,  you know, no, it's better off just to run row, crop or cut hay than it is to put livestock  in there, as far as I'm concerned.  
**1:18:52-1:19:00:**  I don't know a whole lot of people, especially on young orchards that are running livestock  in there at all.  If they are, that's a really small orchard and they'd probably do that.  
**1:19:00-1:19:12:**  But on a large scale, it would be pretty tough to do.  And like I say, and to get the livestock to evenly graze it unless you, you know, you  cross fence it and make it into paddocks sort of deals where you could rotate your animals  
**1:19:12-1:19:25:**  every two or three days and stuff through there.  Easier and cheaper for me just to keep it mowed or, you know, bale for hay off of it  or whatever, than it is to try and run livestock.  
**1:19:25-1:19:41:**  You know, I get sheep, you know, but in our part of the country, we're too damp and sheep  tend to die.  It's not sheep country, you know, between the coyotes and the dogs and the, you know,  
**1:19:41-1:19:46:**  this is just not sheep country.  So it doesn't work very well.  Okay.  
**1:19:46-1:20:08:**  One of the other aspects that I think would be good to just get into a bit is, you know,  the management of the row, of the pecan row during the early stages of establishments.  I mean, during the stages in which you did agroforestry, how did you manage that row?  
**1:20:08-1:20:21:**  Were you using kind of, because I imagine the row was quite thin, it was difficult to  get into, and you're working at such scale that you've got to mechanize this.  How did you kind of, you know, get rid of the weeds on the row, do the minimum passage  
**1:20:21-1:20:28:**  of getting to the trees when needed?  How did you do that?  Well, we'd come in there, you know, when we first planted stuff, we'd come in and spray  
**1:20:28-1:20:39:**  that row over the top of the trees because the trees weren't, you know, we planted the  nuts and you planted a nut.  If you get a tree that grows six, eight inches the first year, you know, above ground growth,  
**1:20:39-1:20:52:**  of course, he's probably got five foot of below ground growth and probably 95% of his  growth is below ground and 5% is above ground.  For about three years or so, we went right over the top of those trees early, you know,  
**1:20:52-1:21:01:**  with some herbicide that kept the weeds down and stuff.  Then we'd come along in the late summer again and probably respray with some other stuff  to keep the weeds down.  
**1:21:01-1:21:11:**  You know, weed control was probably one of the most important things on young pecan or  establishment.  And if you control the weeds, you get the graft, the growth is about two or three times  
**1:21:11-1:21:20:**  as much growth as you do, unless you have, if you have a lot of weed pressure on it.  So it was really important to keep those down.  Then when it got to be about four years old, it was tall enough.  
**1:21:20-1:21:32:**  We couldn't spray over the top of many more.  So we would go around, uh, you know, in the early spring and spray around each tree, uh,  with a, you know, with a tractor and a hand sprayer.  
**1:21:32-1:21:43:**  And a lot of times we, you know, do two rows at once and just walk down through there and  just, just, you know, hand spray around and dry the tractor with a pump and everything  else, but with two hoses on them and do two rows at once.  
**1:21:43-1:21:51:**  It was a three man job, but, uh, that was before you implemented the crop.  Yeah.  Before the crops were planted and stuff, we do that and that would take care of the weed  
**1:21:51-1:21:59:**  control for that.  And then like I say, but then we'd start grafting and, you know, so we had to get it shortened  up enough where we could get a four-wheelers and stuff down.  
**1:21:59-1:22:13:**  So, you know, the, the row within was probably, you know, a good 10, 12 feet wide.  So we were taking up 12 feet of a, of a 40, 40 foot.  So we're down to 28 foot of row crop in there.  
**1:22:13-1:22:24:**  And, you know, we did that 20 foot of row crop for quite a while.  But then, you know, the tree started getting bigger and, you know, after about 10 years,  we were down to probably, you know, 24 foot.  
**1:22:24-1:22:35:**  And then at the end of 15 years, we were down to 20 foot, just farm a 20 foot of the 40,  just half the ground and not cat in the in rows.  And then after that, it was just going to have to go down and, you know, you just couldn't  
**1:22:35-1:22:47:**  get any equipment, any smaller than that, that would work.  And so, uh, it was a situation where you got down about 20 feet.  Then we had to switch to grass or to hay, but a lot of stuff in between are young, you  
**1:22:47-1:22:58:**  know, tying graphs up and, and pruning graphs and pruning trees because young trees need  a lot of pruning to keep them growing straight.  And especially when you graph mature wood onto them, because then they start wanting  
**1:22:58-1:23:09:**  to grow every which way.  And we always try to prune for a central leader to keep the tree growing straight.  So it was quite a bit of, quite a bit of labor and stuff on that sort of deal back then.  
**1:23:09-1:23:16:**  So we had, we had to have room to get down through there with the still there, the crops  growing.  For sure.  
**1:23:16-1:23:24:**  And then, uh, well again, during the pruning, you know, you had room to pass, you had room  to, to, to pass with the, with the, with the vehicle I imagine.  And it was the winter anyways.  
**1:23:24-1:23:30:**  Right.  So in the winter, you didn't have a crop there most times because you were planting corn  and soy.  
**1:23:30-1:23:37:**  And so there was easy passage, easy intervention.  Is that correct?  Some of it, you know, in the pruning stuff, yeah, we didn't have the crop in there, but  
**1:23:37-1:23:48:**  in the summertime of grafting and stuff, the crops are to grow and, and, you know, I'll  be truthfully here as we went later.  We didn't raise any corn because you're going to be down to orchard all day working and  
**1:23:48-1:23:56:**  you know, and you're in that corn right next to that corn.  You don't get much of a breeze blowing through there and they get pretty dang hot here in  the summertime.  
**1:23:56-1:24:04:**  The trees aren't giving any shade and you're not getting any breeze from that corn because  the corn standing there.  Uh, so, uh, you know, it, it tend to get a little hot in there.  
**1:24:04-1:24:12:**  So, you know, soybeans worked a lot better as far as if you were going to spend as much  time in the orchard back then taking care of those young trees when you had row crops  growing in there.  
**1:24:12-1:24:24:**  Okay, nice.  Well, listen, I'm not going to, um, go too much deeper into, into some of these interactions.  We've covered so much already.  
**1:24:24-1:24:37:**  It's been fascinating.  Uh, but one of the last questions that I had is, you know, and just looking at the agroforestry,  so zooming into those systems, um, that you had, uh, implemented for so long and that  
**1:24:37-1:24:47:**  you're still implementing in your younger orchards.  Um, what are some of the biggest mistakes that you did?  Um, and you know, if you were to redo it or when you did redo it with the younger orchards,  
**1:24:47-1:24:56:**  what did you change?  What did you learn that you could share with, with, um, people, listeners that are, that  are looking to implement similar systems?  
**1:24:56-1:25:11:**  Probably the main thing, you know, we've done since we planted the big orchard in is we've,  is when I say on it, we checked our fields where, you know, we're 40 foot this way, you  know, and the trees are 40 feet apart and every way you look, they're in line and stuff  
**1:25:11-1:25:20:**  that is really important.  And one of the probably most important things is, you know, it's not that hard to do.  It's fairly easy to do once you figure out how to do it.  
**1:25:20-1:25:30:**  And uh, you know, it's to check them.  And the reason for that, if you're going to be farming, when you farm in the same direction,  that same field, the same spot for 15 years in a row, you really mess the drainage up  
**1:25:30-1:25:39:**  and those farms, especially in the bottoms where drainage is so important to get the  surface water away from those trees, kind of mess that up.  And it's really kind of hard to straighten up after that.  
**1:25:39-1:25:51:**  If we were had, if we had checked that field, we get a farm to East and West this time and  North South the next time and stuff and, and done it.  And then we would have, you know, saved our, our, our, our land use drainage and stuff  
**1:25:51-1:26:01:**  and been a lot better.  So that's one thing I would mainly say, you know, number two thing, we were probably taking  the care, a little better care of our trees when we were younger than what we thought.  
**1:26:01-1:26:08:**  Back then we were busy with grass seed, we were busy with Buffalo and all that kind of  stuff.  And you know, the pecan trees kind of took a side set to that.  
**1:26:08-1:26:19:**  If any more, I would have probably done a lot more because you know, this, these pecans  are a, you know, once you haven't planted and graft and taken care of them, you know,  they're, they're pretty nice profit potential out there.  
**1:26:19-1:26:33:**  Um, you know, I wish we would have grafted different varieties, but back then we didn't  know what varieties to graft to and some of the varieties we put on just didn't work out.  So we're in a process of taking those trees out and, and regrafting those sort of things.  
**1:26:33-1:26:46:**  Um, probably the thing, main thing is, is not planting them any sooner.  I mean, uh, you know, the sooner you plant them, the, you know, the better off you are  and uh, he was, well, I'll do it next year.  
**1:26:46-1:26:54:**  Well, no, you should have done it the year before.  And yeah, that's probably the main thing is if you're thinking about it, just go ahead  and do it.  
**1:26:54-1:27:03:**  As far as orchard layout stuff, they've got some different orchard layouts and stuff where  they put them on 60 foot centers, which makes it a lot easier farming and stuff between  them.  
**1:27:03-1:27:13:**  Um, so, you know, I might look at a little different situation on that.  Probably put pecan trees on the very best ground that I have, you know, some grounds  better for pecans than others.  
**1:27:13-1:27:24:**  And I wish I'd been a little, I've got some pecans on some ground that's probably not  the best suited for pecan trees.  But uh, you know, that, uh, that's probably some of the other, other things that would  
**1:27:24-1:27:39:**  have done a little different.  Um, that's about it.  Uh, you know, as far as, as any other thing, uh, I don't know, pretty well about said it  
**1:27:39-1:27:45:**  all on that, I think.  That's already a lot involved.  The main thing is do it in scale.  
**1:27:45-1:27:58:**  And that's something, you know, I mean, you know, I've got 300 acres.  I got 200 acres in production and, and, you know, I could probably get by with a hundred  acres and still be profitable, but block into any less than a hundred acres.  
**1:27:58-1:28:09:**  And really, I really need 200 that really afford the big equipment and the harvesters  and the cleaners and all that kind of stuff.  And then also have enough production to sell, to make it profitable here, to keep the store  
**1:28:09-1:28:17:**  and stuff open.  And uh, you know, you know, everybody's the way I can have just a little orchard or I  can have a little thing and sell a few pecans off.  
**1:28:17-1:28:27:**  Well, you can, but you're really not going to make any money off doing that stuff.  And you're going to do a lot of hand labor and stuff.  And, you know, I know some guys that are pretty handy and they make some of their own equipment  
**1:28:27-1:28:41:**  stuff, but it's better off to go ahead and buy equipment.  I found that from companies that make equipment to do what you need to do, and, uh, you might  be able to save a little money, but I think on the long haul, you know, bought equipment  
**1:28:41-1:28:47:**  is a little better than a lot of homemade stuff.  Seems to do a better job.  Nice.  
**1:28:47-1:28:57:**  Nice.  Very interesting.  Would you, if you were to start again now plant another 200, 300 acres of with thousands  
**1:28:57-1:29:16:**  and thousands of white flags of, um, of pecan, would you intercrop with corn and soy again?  Probably not.  I had to think hard on that.  
**1:29:16-1:29:36:**  Um, like I say, the, the herbicides and stuff to use in the, in the weed pressure we have  now on, on, on corn and soybeans, you know, if I had to, to make the living, I probably  would, but if I didn't have to, to make a living off of it, I definitely wouldn't.  
**1:29:36-1:29:43:**  Okay.  Would you use other crops?  Would you replace corn and soy by, for example, like you're doing now, uh, just, uh, I'd use  
**1:29:43-1:29:50:**  graphs and then, then market that grass through some sort of an animal.  Okay.  That's what, very interesting.  
**1:29:50-1:30:05:**  Yeah.  I had to think long and hard on that Dimitri because, uh, yeah, I could farm, you know,  I could go ahead and farm small and, you know, I'd have to do the farming myself and, you  
**1:30:05-1:30:21:**  know, but you know, that, okay, I'm going to have to have my own sprayer and that's  just to farm 200 acres, which theoretically is only going to be 150 acres.  You know, even, you know, a planner, a small planner, a six row planner, eight row planner,  
**1:30:21-1:30:32:**  I'm going to have to have, you know, which is going to cost $80,000, you know, to farm  140 acres.  You see what I'm saying?  
**1:30:32-1:30:39:**  It gets to be a situation.  You know, you're going to have to think long and hard about it.  If that's all you're going to farm.  
**1:30:39-1:30:45:**  Goes back to what you were saying about, you know, the scale question that we talked about  a lot in this interview.  Yeah.  
**1:30:45-1:30:57:**  How big are you for it to make sense?  How much grain can you harvest from the inter crop for it to be a valuable and efficient  business?  
**1:30:57-1:31:11:**  Hey, you know, this 40 acres and a meal is just, you know, you know, may have worked  back in the, you know, the turn of the century, back in 1800, 19, early 1900s and stuff.  But you know, it doesn't it that this doesn't seem to work in 2021.  
**1:31:11-1:31:24:**  Super.  Well, listen, this is very, very interesting.  And there's not many people that are doing that have done at such scale, integrating  
**1:31:24-1:31:36:**  different crops with with nuts crop like you've done.  So thank you so much for taking the time now to share with us your your experience.  Well, Dimitri, it's been fun.  
**1:31:36-1:31:46:**  I have enjoyed the talk today and stuff.  Maybe I've maybe I've inspired some people.  Maybe I haven't.  
**1:31:46-1:31:51:**  I don't know.  Well, I guess they can decide that on their own.  Definitely.  
**1:31:51-1:31:58:**  I don't know everything for sure.  And maybe I look at things a little different than than a lot of people look at this sort  of thing.  
**1:31:58-1:32:09:**  But I'll be true if you know, I was I got in the farming business or in farming business  for doing it for a living.  And if I can't make any money, I can't make a living doing it.  
**1:32:09-1:32:25:**  So I have to figure out something to scale to make it, you know, to make a living out  of this sort of deal, but to, you know, to afford the toys that I like to have and do  some travel that I like to travel.  
**1:32:25-1:32:41:**  Thank you so much for making it this far in the episode.  And we really hope that you enjoyed it and that you learned as much as we did.  As always, you can find all of the links and all of the information below in the description.  
**1:32:41-1:32:58:**  And we look forward to seeing you next time.  