---
title: #17 Insights from research on agroforestry with Sally Westaway and Jo Smith
---
### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2021-03-07)  

**0:00:00-0:00:16:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:23-0:00:27:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  these challenges.  
**0:00:33-0:00:38:**  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Hi everyone and welcome to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:00:47-0:00:49:**  I'm your host Etienne.  Today we have the pleasure of sharing with you an interview with Sally Westerway and  Joe Smith.  
**0:00:53-0:00:57:**  Both of them worked until recently at the Organic Research Centre in the UK and have  done research on two farms that we have already featured on the podcast, Wakelands and Tolhurst  Organics.  
**0:01:03-0:01:07:**  It's great to get a slightly different perspective on agroforestry and understand what scientific  research on the topic looks like.  Sally and Joe do a great job at bringing some nuance to the conversation on topics such  
**0:01:13-0:01:19:**  as productivity or diversity of agroforestry systems and they do so in very practical terms.  Enjoy the episode.  Hi Sally, hi Joe, welcome to the podcast.  
**0:01:22-0:01:24:**  Hi Etienne, nice to be here.  I was thinking we could start with a brief introduction of who you are, a bit about how  you got interested in agroforestry.  
**0:01:33-0:01:34:**  Maybe Sally you want to start?  Yeah sure.  So I'm Sally Westerway.  
**0:01:37-0:01:43:**  I worked at the Organic Research Centre for about seven years in total as an agroforestry  researcher and I came from a bit of a diverse background, sort of a bit of plant ecology  and a bit of organic horticulture, so growing vegetables organically.  
**0:01:54-0:01:59:**  And they sort of came together really in agroforestry, the woodland ecology that I was working on  and the organic horticulture.  And my first project was looking at hedges and how to incorporate hedges into a farming  
**0:02:06-0:02:11:**  system and then I moved on from there to work on various different aspects of agroforestry.  I've now actually left the Organic Research Centre and I'm back in horticulture.  Hi everyone, yeah so I'm Joe Smith.  
**0:02:18-0:02:23:**  I also worked at the Organic Research Centre, worked closely with Sally and I was there  for 10 years coming from a PhD investigating agroenvironment scheme options and their effects  on earthworms and other soil organisms.  
**0:02:33-0:02:39:**  I always had an interest in organic farming and organic systems and agroforestry just  seemed kind of like the pinnacle of agroecological methods because it could kind of deliver productivity  whilst at the same time kind of helping with protection of the environment.  
**0:02:49-0:02:55:**  So I was there for 10 years with Sally we built up the Agroforestry Research Program  and worked closely with farmers who were kind of pioneering in terms of developing agroforestry  in the UK.  
**0:03:05-0:03:12:**  Well yeah it actually, we decided to interview you as well as a kind of following up on the  episodes we did with Ian Tallhurst and David from Wakelands Farm and it was really interesting  we got their kind of practical farm manager take on things and we thought it would be  
**0:03:25-0:03:32:**  great to have a bit more about the scientific data because both of them actually mentioned  their collaboration with the Organic Research Centre.  Maybe you want to give us a bit of an overview of your work on both of these farms?  
**0:03:41-0:03:48:**  Sure, yeah so well from the very start of my time at ORC I worked very closely with  Martin Wolf who set up Wakelands Agroforestry over 25 years ago now and he also worked at  the Organic Research Centre as a scientific advisor.  
**0:04:02-0:04:08:**  So we did several projects up there, it's a really great system, it's probably unique  in terms of diversity and also maturity, there's not many agroforestry systems in the UK to  work with to choose from.  
**0:04:18-0:04:23:**  In terms of working with Tolly, well the Organic Research Centre had worked with Tolly on various  projects for a long time, he's a key figure in at the Organic Research Centre but he was  also very interested in wood, he loves timber, he built a timber boat and he was very keen  
**0:04:37-0:04:44:**  to have trees within his vegetable growing system and so we worked with him and also  with Woodland Trust to set up an agroforestry system there integrating the vegetable growing  with trees.  
**0:04:51-0:04:57:**  Yeah and I sort of dovetailed I guess a bit on some of the work that Joe was involved  in which was more in the planted agroforestry systems and looking at the management of the  existing trees on the farms and the hedges and trying to find ways to make those economic  
**0:05:08-0:05:14:**  for the farmer and bring them back into the farming system and we did some work on that  at both Wakelands and at Tolhurst as well as other different farms and I think Tolly  has probably mentioned in his podcast a bit about the woodchip work that we did there  
**0:05:22-0:05:24:**  as well, looking at the Ramia woodchip.  Yeah he did actually and that gives us so much to talk about today.  One of the first themes I wanted to kind of discuss with you today is the one of interactions  
**0:05:37-0:05:42:**  between crops in the agroforestry systems.  As we integrate different crops, you know, many farmers have concerns of maybe competition  between your main crop and the trees that you're going to plant but also on the other  
**0:05:51-0:05:58:**  side often you know agroforestry is promoted for its ecosystem services and helping the  production of the main crop so I was thinking that maybe through your research maybe you  had come across this theme and researched it and you know obviously here the aim isn't  
**0:06:09-0:06:17:**  to go for massive generalizations about agroforestry but I was just curious to see if you had done  some in-depth research on some of these interactions.  Yeah we've had several projects looking at this because obviously it is of real importance  
**0:06:26-0:06:33:**  to farmers and you know the classic edge effect is you see that around most fields whereby  yields are lower at the edge and it can be for a whole number of reasons including shade  and you know kind of rabbits coming out and nibbling the crops and so it's quite hard  
**0:06:43-0:06:46:**  to disentangle all of those effects.  But we did some nice work in my early years working with Martin and it was in the mixed  timber and apple tree system so it's a system whereby there's seven different species of  
**0:06:57-0:07:04:**  trees and also apple trees and they're all mixed in together and the trees are managed  for timber so they're big trees, tall trees and Martin had noticed that the crops adjacent  to the Italian older seem to be taller than kind of adjacent to the other trees and he  
**0:07:18-0:07:23:**  was wondering whether that translated into any differences in crop yields and so one  summer we went out with the plot combine and harvested five meter length strips of the  cereals adjacent to the different tree species and measured crop yields and we were looking  
**0:07:35-0:07:41:**  at spring wheat, winter wheat and oats.  We didn't find any effective tree species on crop yields but what we found was at the  edge of the alleys, the crop alleys which are about 10 to 12 meter wide, we saw a decline  
**0:07:54-0:07:59:**  in crop yield which we kind of expected compared to the centre of the alleys.  What was quite interesting was that for the two wheats, the spring wheat and winter wheats,  the yields at the edge of the alley were about half what they were in the centre but for  
**0:08:08-0:08:15:**  the oats that decline in yield was only 25% so it just seems that oats is a kind of more  competitive species compared to the wheats and so it's something that you know farms  can bear in mind that there might be cereals, there might be crops that are better suited  
**0:08:24-0:08:30:**  for those kind of more shady conditions and actually there's some research going on in  France, in Spain at the University of Aix-Médure looking at that idea of kind of developing  crop varieties which are more suitable for those shady conditions in agroforestry.  
**0:08:44-0:08:50:**  And so there's differences between different types of crops, did you also test different  varieties of the same crop like different oats or different wheats?  Not in that experiment, no.  
**0:08:58-0:09:07:**  We did, well it was quite a complicated one but we did look at different varieties but  nothing really to pull out in terms of differences in the work we did at Wakelands anyway. But  some of the other work we did at Wakelands was in the short rotation coppice systems  
**0:09:19-0:09:25:**  and there's two systems at Wakelands, so one is a willow short rotation coppice and the  other is hazel and they're both coppiced to provide wood chip, primarily to go into wood  chip boiler to heat the farmhouse but the willow is harvested on a two-year rotation  
**0:09:36-0:09:41:**  and the hazel is harvested on a five-year rotation. We did some cereal trials in the  willow and what we found was where the willow had been coppiced that year so it was kind  of a more open sunny environment, it just meant that the crops did better than adjacent  
**0:09:52-0:09:57:**  to where the willow hadn't been harvested and was kind of two years old and creating  more shade. So again that kind of opens up another option for farmers that they can kind  of match the crop with the point in the rotation of the tree and so those crops which need  
**0:10:10-0:10:16:**  the kind of more open conditions could be grown after the trees have just been harvested  and whereas those perhaps which are okay in more shady conditions can be grown later in  the tree harvest rotation.  
**0:10:22-0:10:27:**  So obviously in the second experiment shade is what's you know was the variable. I don't  know if you actually had a scientific conclusion but maybe as a supposition if it's not the  case. In the case of oats is it that they were more shade tolerant or was it on an other  
**0:10:40-0:10:42:**  aspect do you think that they did better?  Really hard to say because it you know it's not necessarily just the shade or the lack  of shade where the tree's been coppiced because obviously you know there's so many interactions  
**0:10:54-0:10:58:**  with water with what's going on below ground you know whether the roots are growing back  growing have died back after you've cut the trees above ground. So we you know you can't  well we didn't attempt to pull apart those different interactions.  
**0:11:08-0:11:13:**  And so maybe you know not from directly from your experiment but I'm guessing maybe from  your knowledge and in more of the agroforestry literature the main do you think the main  competitions are in terms of water than in terms of roots and fertility?  
**0:11:24-0:11:29:**  Yeah I mean in northern Europe I would say shade was probably the biggest biggest issue  but you know we did kind of see evidence that things change from year to year depending  on rainfall and timing of rain as well so and when we looked at kind of microclimate  
**0:11:43-0:11:47:**  differences between the agroforestry and the open field which was right next door we found  kind of higher soil moisture in in the agroforestry and that's probably related to wind speeds  we found higher wind speeds in the open field and so obviously you know more wind would  
**0:11:58-0:12:04:**  dry out the soil in the open fields and so you know there's kind of all those interactions  which are yeah quite difficult to generalize about because year on year you've got differences  in the climate.  
**0:12:13-0:12:17:**  And also I guess the trees are growing so every year is different the tree is different  every year it's not an annual crop where you're growing the same sort of similar crop every  year but it's a tree that's changing and growing over time.  
**0:12:25-0:12:30:**  But it's fascinating because it's so complex and there's so many variables and I imagine  it must be so hard to really get to like rigorous conclusions about these things because what  I feel often is you know there's a lot of big claims that are being circulated and you  
**0:12:44-0:12:49:**  know on agroforestry in general and we probably you know contribute to that to a certain extent  but once you start you know having scientifically rigorous conversations it's so hard to make  these claims isn't it?  
**0:12:57-0:13:05:**  Yeah it really is and you know both at Wakelands and at Tollies they're working farms you know  they weren't set up as scientific experiments in terms of having replicates and controls  and you know tightly controlled systems and so you know there's also kind of the interaction  
**0:13:16-0:13:22:**  with different management practices going on and they can even change from year to year  you know they might want to plow at a certain time but because they've been busy elsewhere  it gets delayed and so on so but it's real life and I guess that's you know that's the  
**0:13:30-0:13:35:**  beauty of working in real systems and working with farmers it's you know making sure things  work in real life rather than under those kind of tightly controlled systems.  But it's already very interesting that you were able to kind of study the the coppice  
**0:13:44-0:13:49:**  system and demonstrate that positive impact because I guess that's a really useful tool  for a lot of farmers it's such a efficient way of managing biomass and pruning and that  looks like it's a really promising avenue for you know synchronizing that with different  
**0:14:01-0:14:02:**  crop rotations.  Yeah definitely I think the coppice system is works really well in agroforestry systems  because you can manage the tree canopy a lot a lot better and in terms of timing I mean  
**0:14:16-0:14:22:**  that the willow is harvested every two years whereas the hazel is every five years and  you know that gives you different options again in terms of management and how you work  your rotations in between. I mean at weightless the alleys are quite narrow they tend to 12  
**0:14:31-0:14:36:**  meters whereas most silver arable systems we see now are more like 24 and so I think  you know those shade effects probably you know not so important in these in these kind  of wider alleys because the trees don't ever really get that that high you know they're  
**0:14:45-0:14:49:**  kind of two to three meters high maximum.  Is there anything else you'd like to say about interactions? Sorry if I'm I'm trying really  hard to not ask two generalist questions and make a fool out of myself but please feel  
**0:14:59-0:15:05:**  free to I don't know to add anything or correct me if yeah.  I think just kind of coming back to the microclimate and this idea of having lower soil moisture  in the in the open field I mean one thing that did come up is that actually that I mean  
**0:15:20-0:15:25:**  the guys who work at Wakefield, Paul and Mark who work on the land they found kind of one  of the downsides of the higher soil moisture in the agroforestry system is that they couldn't  get onto the land at the right time because it took longer to dry out and you know it's  
**0:15:35-0:15:39:**  lower wind speeds in the agroforestry and the soil kind of stayed wetter for longer  earlier in the year and so that's kind of one of the kind of negative effects I guess  is you know it holds the water longer than an open field.  
**0:15:50-0:15:55:**  But did they also kind of was there a positive effect as well of having long moisture for  longer in the summer as well or was it just negative?  Yeah the positive effect I guess was seen in the well when we were looking at it it  
**0:16:03-0:16:08:**  was looking at the fertility building lay so you know there was kind of higher productivity  in the agroforestry because the moisture was in in the system longer and so that would  be kind of the positive effect but I think you know it's not always positive there's  
**0:16:18-0:16:25:**  sometimes kind of negative implications of the differences in the microclimate.  That's fascinating yeah I never thought about of too much moisture as a potential problem  for entering with machines really interesting.  
**0:16:35-0:16:38:**  Sally is there anything you want to add on this topic?  No I think Jo's just about covered most of that I mean yeah it's complicated and pulling  it apart is difficult and I guess that's where we need more research is over time over  
**0:16:49-0:16:53:**  a significant amount of time as well where you're following the system through and looking  at how things change as time goes on.  There was something that Martin kind of triggered in the last few years was trying to manage  
**0:17:05-0:17:12:**  the shade in the timber tree systems and victories and he was fascinated by this idea of quality  pollarding wasn't he Sally and trying to kind of maintain the trees in the kind of peak  productivity stage whilst also kind of managing the shading from the canopy so he started  
**0:17:24-0:17:28:**  pollarding some of the trees in that mixed system.  Yeah we didn't manage to collect much data on them did we but we didn't it would be interesting  to look at that.  
**0:17:34-0:17:39:**  Exactly and I think that's maybe a really promising area for research going forward  is because you know a lot of trees used to be pollarded in the UK you know very much  working trees but we've kind of lost that tradition I know in areas of France you know  
**0:17:49-0:17:54:**  almost every tree you see is pollarded or managed to a certain extent and you know we  just don't see it in the UK other than kind of for their cultural values you know you  see these trees that were pollarded in the past and recognized for their biodiversity  
**0:18:02-0:18:08:**  value and their cultural value and I guess it's just it's not easy to build it into a  kind of working farm anymore in terms of having the machinery to do it and not relying on  kind of people going out there with a chainsaw and you know it's being very manual so I think  
**0:18:18-0:18:24:**  that you know maybe that's one avenue for research and it's a way that farmers can manage  the shade in those kind of big tree systems.  Yeah definitely but since we're on the topic of future research because it's so complex  
**0:18:35-0:18:40:**  and the interactions are so hard to pinpoint you know to one element how do you see the  future of research do you think it's kind of that that's not you know it's pointless  to try and demonstrate these positive interactions or do you see ways where you can have that  
**0:18:49-0:18:54:**  data because you'll always be doing that on farms that are not designed for experiments  and you'll always be faced the constraints we just discussed?  I don't know I know not at all I think I think we need to just build up the evidence base  
**0:19:02-0:19:07:**  you need the sort of big data approach where data is coming from various different places  and you can feed it all in and then you can extrapolate from that and there's a lot of  modelling around agroforestry which Jo may say more about than me but I think a lot of  
**0:19:19-0:19:23:**  the time those models are quite data poor so if we can increase the quality of the data  going into those models then we can increase the sort of like quality of the data that's  available to farmers to predict what might happen if they put trees on their land.  
**0:19:32-0:19:39:**  Yeah I mean there's a lot of modelling there in routine led by Christian de Praese in Montpellier  I mean they've been working on the high-safe model for a long time now and it is looking  at those really detailed interactions between the trees and the crops and they've also done  
**0:19:48-0:19:53:**  great work down there below ground digging big big pits to see what's happening with  the roots and yeah kind of measuring the trees as they grow and so those kind of experimental  platforms where you've got the replicates and you've got these trees that have been  
**0:20:05-0:20:11:**  monitored now for 20 years or so that's all building up the evidence I guess it is then  just seeing how it works in real life on real farms which is the interesting part as well.  I think as interest increases and more people are planting as well you're getting more opportunities  
**0:20:21-0:20:27:**  to collect data as well more opportunities to sort of like have information that's for  wider relevance so it's not just based on one or two farms but just on farms across  a wider geographic area. I think we're really missing financial data as well which is the  
**0:20:36-0:20:42:**  other sort of key bit of information that I guess a lot of farmers want to know about  when they're thinking about setting up an agroforestry system is how much it's going  to cost them and how much they're potentially going to get back so that's another thing  
**0:20:51-0:20:56:**  I think where it would be good to have more information and collect that in a little bit  more of a strategic manner as well. That's definitely something we felt with Dimitri  when we started working on agroforestry and one of the reasons for starting the podcast  
**0:21:06-0:21:12:**  although it's never so easy in a podcast format to be really you know having a rigorous  you know collection of numbers and really getting to the bottom of things but I'd agree  with you that from a kind of farmer perspective that would be really helpful. Okay thanks  
**0:21:23-0:21:28:**  for that. Really interesting to understand that basically we can kind of overcome these  complexities of the living world by having you know enough farms and data and collecting  the clues little by little and that sounds really interesting and looking forward to  
**0:21:37-0:21:44:**  that. One of the other big themes I think that often comes with discussing agroforestry  and that's you know also came in our episodes with Wakelands and Tallest Organics is this  idea of diversity. You know some advantages are said to come with diversifying productions  
**0:21:58-0:22:04:**  but we also know that there's some practical constraints with having diversified productions  and I was wondering if you had in your research studied a bit of the impact of diversity whether  it be you know biodiversity or just diversifying productions on the farm production. I mean  
**0:22:17-0:22:23:**  Wakelands obviously is probably one of the most diverse systems out there and we did  some nice work as part of a European project looking at apple production and specifically  organic apple production and the aim was trying to reduce copper which is used to reduce scab  
**0:22:40-0:22:46:**  and the project we well the work that we did and how it fed into it was can we use an agroforestry  approach to grow apples that don't need so much copper to control scab levels and in  this mixed timber and apple tree system at Wakelands we were basically comparing that  
**0:23:01-0:23:07:**  system with an organic orchard nearby and looking at levels of scab and it's something  that Martin said which has always stuck with me it's like the worst place to grow apples  isn't in an orchard because you have all these problems with pests and diseases and so he  
**0:23:18-0:23:24:**  was growing his apples in mixed in amongst these timber trees and so what you do is you  get a pair of apple trees and then you get pairs of seven other timber species and then  you get your next pair of apple trees and I think he had I think there was probably  
**0:23:34-0:23:40:**  about 20 odd different varieties as well so they're all mixed in together and we're comparing  levels of scab on this kind of really diverse system compared to an organic orchard and  we found actually that the levels of scab in the agroforestry were less than half what  
**0:23:50-0:23:54:**  they were in the orchard and there's again there's probably a few different reasons why  that might be but I think key to that was the diversity and so you've got you know lots  of different species as well as you've got your apples in there so you know you've got  
**0:24:04-0:24:12:**  your apple trees which are separated from the next apple trees by you know 10 different  trees in between so they're kind of sprinkled throughout the system and then you've got  your different varieties as well some of which were more susceptible to scab than others  
**0:24:21-0:24:24:**  so it's you know it's a case of don't put all your eggs in one basket don't put all  your apples in one basket when it comes to choosing your varieties and choosing your  different species.  
**0:24:29-0:24:35:**  So you're saying that diversity works both by choosing a diversity of varieties of apples  and also then including them in a variety of trees then like this double layer?  Exactly so the different species of trees are like a barrier you know both a physical  
**0:24:44-0:24:48:**  one and you know having the different species and so they wouldn't be spreading the scab  from tree to tree which is what you'd often get in in orchards but then you know with  with the different varieties you know one one year you might get one variety which seems  
**0:24:58-0:25:02:**  to get hit quite hard and next year it might be a different variety but because you didn't  have kind of blocks of single varieties and you had so many different varieties mixed  together that spread of scab was much lower.  
**0:25:09-0:25:15:**  Wow well it's great to you know it's the assumption isn't it when we when we defend  diversity and plant diversity but it's good to know that it actually works.  Yeah I mean the I suppose the other side of that is how practical is that if you're trying  
**0:25:26-0:25:33:**  to scale it up I mean it worked well at Wakelands because you know the apples can feed into  veg box systems and it's something that Tolly's also doing he's growing apples as  well as part of his mix and he's obviously got a veg box system there and he's got  
**0:25:41-0:25:47:**  the little shop there as well so you know you can you can also tell the story behind  why you've got all these different varieties but then if you're trying to sell to wholesale  or you're trying to scale it up you know you need more of the same variety to make  
**0:25:57-0:26:01:**  it worthwhile. The other option the other issue obviously is when you come to harvest  you know they're coming to they're ripe at different times or they're ready to  harvest at different times so you know that that then means you're harvesting over a  
**0:26:09-0:26:14:**  longer period than if you had maybe only two or three varieties so you know there are management  implications of having that diversity and I think it's kind of choosing you know choosing  what's best for the system I guess in terms of how you go about harvesting and what you  
**0:26:24-0:26:30:**  do with those as an end product. So I don't know if you've heard of Stephen Briggs and  his apple agroforestry system in the UK? Yeah we actually had him on the podcast a few episodes  ago so we're kind of we're just you know drilling into your whole network of English  
**0:26:43-0:26:51:**  agroforestry farmers. So you know he was inspired by by Wakelands but he went with apples as  his you know his his tree crop. He's got different varieties there as well which is really nice  but he's planted them in blocks and so they're easier to harvest. He's got obviously a lot  
**0:27:02-0:27:08:**  more apple trees and so he's got the bulk as well and so he's kind of taken parts taken  inspiration from Wakelands but scaled it up and to a different system but one that perhaps  works better at that larger scale. Sure I think there's a theme we always come back  
**0:27:18-0:27:24:**  to Dimitri because it was something that we are really faced to on the ground is always  balancing you know practical management and diversity and I don't know you were talking  about varieties but I think there's a lot of work to see how you know we can introduce  
**0:27:35-0:27:42:**  a variety of trees without really complexifying too much the operation and maybe having like  smaller blocks with hedges and kind of managing to bring in like a diversity of trees but  not maybe in the tree line but like smaller hedges around. I mean there's a lot of discussions  
**0:27:52-0:27:59:**  around that and there's a lot to to innovate and yeah it's a really exciting and vital  question I think. That you have to think about growth rate of the trees as well if you're  managing for coppice products and you plant a diverse mix which we did on the farm where  
**0:28:08-0:28:14:**  we were based you plant a diverse mix of tree species for your coppice production if some  of them grow at different rates to the others then you have a problem when it comes to harvesting  around practicality so we planted willow which shot away and then you have to sort of pick  
**0:28:24-0:28:29:**  your way through the willow and harvest them separately and you can't mechanize it as easily  as well. Yeah so do you think the best would be to just have like a row of single species  but then maybe alternating these rows to have that diversity across the rows? Yeah I mean  
**0:28:42-0:28:46:**  we're thinking about this at the minute on the market garden where I work where we have  high winds we're planting shelterbelts but we want to keep the shelterbelts diverse but  we don't want to make management problems for ourselves in the future so yeah keeping  
**0:28:55-0:29:00:**  single rows of single species but then having multiple species within like within the row  is how we're approaching it. I suppose having kind of different teams of similar species  and just thinking I mean the willow you know you could have different species of willow  
**0:29:11-0:29:15:**  and assuming that they would all grow at a similar rate and you know then mix up the  other species which grow at a different rate and perhaps trying to be a bit clever with  kind of teams of different species. Yeah no totally I mean because the diversity is definitely  
**0:29:27-0:29:31:**  linked to resilience as well isn't it because if you get if you just plant one species and  then you get a disease come in that wipes them out then you haven't got anything else  to back up. No I just I mean talking about diversity I mean we did also do some work  
**0:29:40-0:29:47:**  on biodiversity at Wakelands and again kind of comparing it comparing Wakelands agroforestry  with the organic orchard and I mean things are never straightforward I think when we  when we start looking in detail and so it was quite a mixed picture in terms of the  
**0:29:58-0:30:06:**  effect on pollinators and natural enemies and we found kind of higher wasps high abundances  of parasitic and predator wasps at Wakelands but actually higher numbers of bees in the  orchard and actually when you start to think about it you know at the orchard there's a  
**0:30:20-0:30:25:**  lot more apple trees compared to Wakelands there's a lot more flowering resource both  in the apple trees and in the understory which was kind of it was a grassy flower or sward  underneath the trees compared to Wakelands which has obviously got your trees but then  
**0:30:37-0:30:42:**  you had cereals growing in the alleys so you know there's more kind of bees and stuff in  the orchard compared to Wakelands but then when we looked within Wakelands comparing  it was actually a PhD project comparing bumblebees solitary bees and hoverflies between the short  
**0:30:56-0:31:03:**  rotation coppice willow system and the neighbouring open field there are more insects in the agroforestry  so it's kind of you know a lot of that is what are you comparing are you comparing agroforestry  to an open field are you comparing it to a the kind of tree control the orchard so yeah  
**0:31:14-0:31:23:**  somewhere in between and there's really nice study it was the RSPB so the bird people came  and did some recording at Wakelands and I think they recorded kind of 40 odd species  but what they found was it's a real mixture of different categories of birds so they had  
**0:31:34-0:31:38:**  the kind of typical farmland birds there but they also had birds which are characteristic  of woodlands as well and so you know that in terms of the habitats that the agroforestry  provided it seems to be offering things to both woodland species and to those kind of  
**0:31:48-0:31:50:**  farmland birds as well.  It's good to say we looked at plant species as well at the tollies over a number of years  in his agroforestry system and actually when you picked into the detail of the species  
**0:32:04-0:32:08:**  data that you were collecting there was a high number of species overall but the long-term  beetle bank which was present before the trees were planted actually had the highest diversity  of any of the understory habitats so you were getting that high diversity with the beetle  
**0:32:17-0:32:21:**  bank without the trees at all.  You mean before they planted any trees they still left a strip with just flowers or what  were they comparing to?  
**0:32:28-0:32:35:**  Yes a beetle bank it's sort of a strip of perennial grasses and flowers for beetles  it doesn't contain any trees but it's a habitat strip for various different reasons people  will plant, farmers will plant them but the trees were planted into the beetle bank one  
**0:32:46-0:32:51:**  of the rows of trees that he planted as his agroforestry system was planted into the beetle  bank and the other ones were planted into various different rows so they sowed some  wildflower mix under one row I think and some cut flowers and some rhubarb and various other  
**0:33:02-0:33:07:**  crops underneath them but in amongst that there was other species as well and we monitored  the species diversity going forward at the beginning when the trees were planted and  then going forward as well and the long term beetle bank had the highest diversity overall  
**0:33:16-0:33:21:**  I think it maintained that as well and then we saw so some of the sown species as well  some of the legumes that were sown the fertility building legumes got out competed over time  as well and the numbers of those reduced as well but the beetle bank stayed quite high  
**0:33:32-0:33:36:**  so I guess that's you have to be a bit careful about what you're attributing your benefit  to because it wasn't really the trees necessarily because the beetle bank was quite diverse  in the first place so you could say that the you could lump them all together and say that  
**0:33:44-0:33:49:**  diversity was high under the trees but then if you pick it apart and look at the beetle  bank you've actually got the high diversity in the beetle bank itself without the trees  there at all does that make sense?  
**0:33:55-0:34:02:**  That makes a lot of sense yeah really interesting and yeah another example of how nuanced we  have to be about you know correlating unproblematically agroforestry and biodiversity going back to  what you were saying Joe I guess in of itself it's interesting that there's an increase  
**0:34:14-0:34:19:**  in diversity of birds I think I don't know if there's any research on that but I guess  the other question afterwards it'd be really interesting to see the impact of that high  diversity on production maybe on reducing pest pressures and hopefully that's also research  
**0:34:30-0:34:33:**  that's going to go forward and that'll be really interesting.  No I mean I think as we don't have any research on it specifically but just a general diversification  of farm incomes I think is important to mention as well so it's not just about biodiversity  
**0:34:43-0:34:48:**  but it's about diversity of diversification systems and I guess some of the work that  we did on looking at looking at whether you can be self-sufficient in fuel and fertility  and from your own trees feeds into that you've got another resource coming out of your system  
**0:34:59-0:35:03:**  that you can use to increase the resilience overall.  And it could be that you're not harvesting that product every year but it's there in  times of need if you see what I mean so one thing I'm thinking about is tree fodder and  
**0:35:17-0:35:21:**  you know you've got trees in the environment and you've got livestock and actually it's  in those years the really dry years when the grass is really not performing but your trees  are still green and that they might be the years that you're relying on your trees to  
**0:35:30-0:35:34:**  provide feed for your animals.  Another interesting topic is productivity and whether agroforestry systems are more  productive or not and I know I read a bit in your research that you were measuring LER  
**0:35:51-0:35:56:**  and weight cleanse I think at least and it'd be great if you could explain to us a bit  you know what it is and how you go about measuring it and some of the findings on that topic.  Yeah sure so I guess LER is sort of useful it's useful in giving you that sort of overall  
**0:36:08-0:36:14:**  overview of how productive your system could be in theory it compares the basically compares  the productivity of the two different crops doesn't have to be an agroforestry system  it could be an intercropping system as well but of two different crops growing together  
**0:36:25-0:36:29:**  against the productivity of them if they were grown in two separate fields so sort of as  monocultures I guess and it gives you a value I mean the calculation is the yield from one  crop divided by the yield from the monoculture of that crop the yield of the intercrop divided  
**0:36:42-0:36:47:**  by the yield of the monoculture plus the yield of the second crop when it's grown as an intercrop  divided by the yield of the monoculture you might want to cut that bit out that's a bit  of a problem but basically it gives you it gives you a figure and if it's if it's greater  
**0:36:56-0:37:03:**  than one then your intercrop is more productive than your equivalent crops would be grown  separately. It's the thing that I think is slightly misleading about it is that it depends  on what you use as an input figure so you can and a lot of the work that we did at Wakelands  
**0:37:17-0:37:23:**  we used an overall biomass figure so you're comparing your biomass of for example your  lay so a lay cut in the alley and the biomass of the willow which is the agroforestry crop  with the biomass of the willow set growing separately as a monoculture or the lay grown  
**0:37:36-0:37:41:**  separately as a monoculture but biomass of willow is not necessarily equivalent to the  biomass of the pasture crop so when you put them together you'll end up with a positive  result we did end up with a positive result and the LERs at Wakelands calculated in a  
**0:37:52-0:38:00:**  variety of different ways were all positive which is great but I suppose to make it more  useful you maybe look at energetic value which I think we did in one case when we were looking  at LERs at Wakelands or possibly even your value so the value of the crop so the value  
**0:38:11-0:38:17:**  in terms of economic return I guess on the crop because your willow wood chip won't be  equivalent to a kilo of willow wood chip won't be equivalent to a kilo of wheat grain for  example so your biomass is not very comparable so it's a useful measure but I think you have  
**0:38:28-0:38:31:**  to be a bit careful about how you interpret the results I suppose is what I'm saying and  then make sure that the data that you're feeding into it is relevant as well.  Okay yeah now that's an interesting point actually of finding that common denominator  
**0:38:40-0:38:46:**  but I guess it's the tricky bit with the economic value would then be that there's so many variables  and how you can commercialize the apple or completely or completely it's just I suppose  I feel a little bit when you when you sort of say well LERs of one point all greater  
**0:38:56-0:39:02:**  than one you've got agroforestry systems that are more productive but then it's like I said  it depends on on what that production is and how useful that production is because if that  production doesn't actually translate into a useful product or a product that can be  
**0:39:13-0:39:19:**  sold by the farmer for example then it doesn't or can be used by the farmer it doesn't necessarily  mean that the system overall is 10% more productive or 20% or 40% more productive.  The system at Wakelands with the short rotation coppers is kind of a good example of that  
**0:39:29-0:39:36:**  whereby like Sally says it had a positive LER but actually in terms of value if you  sell wood chip it had this you know it's very low value compared to selling the cereal crop  and but because the the wood chip was actually used on the farm to replace heating oil so  
**0:39:47-0:39:52:**  you know there's no need to buy in heating oil it actually makes the economics stack  up much more favorably so you're saving a lot of money by not spending on heating oil  and using homegrown wood chip as well and that kind of balanced out the the kind of  
**0:40:02-0:40:10:**  loss of cereal. And the LER was calculated at Wakelands using a tool called the public  goods tool as well which looks at the entire farm system and it was quite a basic calculation  but the positive LER for that I think was more indicative of overall production because  
**0:40:23-0:40:29:**  the actual the units that went into that were metabolizable energy so you're looking at  the energy that's coming out of the products and you're looking at everything so the whole  system so all of the different agroforestry systems and all of the products coming off  
**0:40:36-0:40:46:**  the farm as well so I guess yeah that's maybe a little bit more representative of what's  going on but then because it's looking at the whole system and it's only looking at  one year in a snapshot there's problems with that as well.  
**0:40:53-0:40:59:**  We looked at the LER of the willow system over two years and in one year it was 1.4  and the following year it's 1.1 and again that was kind of impacted by the weather and  so it just shows you that from year to year you can have that variation and what would  
**0:41:10-0:41:15:**  be nice is to look at it over the whole period of the tree rotation so 20 years you know  20 years plus and obviously you'll see that change as the trees get bigger and the trees  mature.  
**0:41:22-0:41:26:**  I think the sort of looking at it year on year is actually quite interesting in itself  though because then you can see what's making that change happen and those two years where  the LER was calculated in the willow system one was very dry and in the dry year the agroforestry  
**0:41:37-0:41:42:**  system overall performed a lot better than the monocultures didn't it so you can sort  of then start to pick out your interactions and where things are happening in a positive  or a negative way so it gives you rather than just being a snapshot having two years data  
**0:41:50-0:41:53:**  gives you a little bit more information but you're right if you could have it over a longer  period of time and it was modeled as well wasn't it at Wakeland over a longer period  and again you had a positive LER then but it was based on the biomass of the systems  
**0:42:03-0:42:04:**  as well.  Yeah but do you from the different farms that you've seen and studied do you still see a  real opportunity in terms of increased productivity you know obviously as you said it depends  
**0:42:18-0:42:23:**  how you define productivity but kind of going beyond the metric do you think there's something  interesting there or do you think it's just not the right angle of looking at it?  I think it's a really interesting question and I think the jury's out I think systems  
**0:42:31-0:42:37:**  like Stephen Briggs where you've got that definite product you've got the apples and  you've got the arable crops as well that's it's an easier question to answer but some  I mean and then some agroforestry systems are just windbreaks so if you've got a windbreak  
**0:42:49-0:42:53:**  you've got land out of production for the windbreak and is that offset then by the increase  in production I don't think we necessarily know the answer to that yet but I guess agroforestry  systems themselves are so varied and whichever agroforestry system you design you're taking  
**0:43:06-0:43:13:**  a certain area out of production so for the trees until the trees start to become productive  if they are going to become productive in the end I guess that's one of the things that's  motivated me is to try and make sure that those trees can be productive and can be seen  
**0:43:22-0:43:28:**  as part of the farming system because there's already a lot of trees in the UK anyway not  so much over in the east of the country in the arable big arable areas but certainly  in the west there's already a lot of trees on farms which aren't necessarily currently  
**0:43:37-0:43:41:**  used as part of the productive farming system so they're already there but they're not being  sort of integrated into the farming system so if you can bring those trees into the farming  system and then add on additional trees in a way that you're thinking about how you can  
**0:43:51-0:43:55:**  maximize your production I think that's the way to go about designing an agroforestry  system because you do have additional benefits from the agroforestry system if you design  it right but the actual overall production I think to get to hit positive on that and  
**0:44:10-0:44:14:**  hit positive overall productions is more tricky I think and it depends on what you're using  your trees for.  Yeah and I guess it's such a good reminder that using big words like productivity doesn't  
**0:44:21-0:44:26:**  mean anything like it's always in a context depending on you know what are you trying  to aim for and I guess that's what's exciting as studies come out then we'll just have a  clear idea of the different possibilities and then it's up to every farmer to really  
**0:44:36-0:44:41:**  define what they're trying to achieve but yeah thanks for nuancing that again like another  claim because we often hear the terms over yielding polycultures and stacking productions  and all these things but it definitely looks much more complex and less straightforward  
**0:44:52-0:44:55:**  that you can sometimes think.  I think it's a really good point that you know that Sally made and quite a lot of our  work at the Organic Research Centre was looking at you know in the UK there are a lot of trees  
**0:45:05-0:45:11:**  in the environment whether it's woodlands, trees or hedges and for many farmers there  are a burden, there are costs you know to manage and particularly to work on the hedges  was looking at okay we know they do have benefits you know providing shelter and as a windbreak  
**0:45:22-0:45:26:**  good for biodiversity but actually it's a cost for the farmer to manage them year on  year. They can't remove them, they're you know they're prevented from removing them  by law so actually can we make them a positive part of the farm system and manage them to  
**0:45:38-0:45:44:**  give a product and I mean we were looking at them for wood chip and for producing wood  chip and we did some work on our farm in Newbury comparing different management techniques  and you know the financial elements of doing that.  
**0:45:56-0:46:01:**  Yeah and then if you can I mean because we also planted additional hedges at Elm Farm  with the intention of then managing them for biofuel because the species mix in traditional  hedges in the UK is quite often not optimal for biomass production. You've got sort of  
**0:46:11-0:46:18:**  thorn species which are slower growing and mesh together a bit more and harder to manage  on copy cycles and I think then if you can combine that sort of need for your biomass  on your farm with some planting of agroforestry rows or new hedgerows for the production of  
**0:46:34-0:46:42:**  that biomass and also for other purposes as well. So for example for windbreaks then you're  looking at a system that sits together as a whole or for other wood chip production  for other purposes as well so for rami or wood chip production and that's certainly  
**0:46:52-0:46:56:**  something that we're looking at the moment on the market garden that I'm working at.  We're planting trees with the intention of coxing them for wood chip production.  What's changing or what kind of new ideas or new management techniques are coming forward  
**0:47:07-0:47:12:**  to enable farmers to use these existing trees then because I'm assuming that if they were  in doing so is that there's obvious practical challenges in terms of doing it in a time  efficient manner and are there new approaches to hedges that enable using that biomass in  
**0:47:25-0:47:32:**  a cost effective way? I think it's partly a need for new and more efficient methods  but it's also partly a mindset change as well so seeing them as a resource rather than as  Jo mentioned seeing them as something that is sort of a bit of a pain and you have to  
**0:47:43-0:47:50:**  manage so starting to change your mindset to seeing that those hedgerows is potentially  a resource for your farm and then I think coupled with that there is some logistical  challenges as well particularly where there's wire in the hedge and that has to be cut out  
**0:48:02-0:48:07:**  and you haven't got good access as well I think for management but they can be overcome.  I think we did various machinery trials looking at different methods for management of hedgerows  using bi-cobscen using sort of different scales and I think all of those logistical challenges  
**0:48:18-0:48:24:**  can be overcome and if you've got a ready market or you can use the wood chip yourself  then the economics can stack up but it is that sort of mindset change I think.  Some of it's having access to the machinery wasn't it Sally and all the machinery exists  
**0:48:35-0:48:41:**  and it's there it's just yeah sometimes having access to it so the kind of more forestry  specific machinery was the kind of biggest issue in terms of haulage getting it to the  right site but then there's a scale in between which is more kind of farm scale and got a  
**0:48:54-0:49:01:**  nice example of a contractor who used to work with Martin who had tree shears that weren't  so expensive and it was kind of more of a farm scale rather than a forest scale piece  of kit and you know the economics stacked up for that as well so it's kind of getting  
**0:49:10-0:49:14:**  the appropriate scale for the farm.  Yeah I think weight cleanse was always a good example as well I always used weight cleanse  as an example when talking to farmers about how they had these sort of barriers to managing  
**0:49:26-0:49:32:**  their hedges or cutting their trees down because weight cleanse did everything on really quite  a small scale and managed to make it work and so yeah I think they just had a sort of  hand fed chipper they probably still do which they chipped all the material in stacked it  
**0:49:45-0:49:49:**  up and put a cup of that side a day or two to feed it through the chipper and yeah like  Joe said there was the guy with the tree shears on hand who I think has been doing some work  with them recently as well or they've got a tractor mounted circular saw as well which  
**0:50:00-0:50:05:**  they use for management so there are ways to get around these management issues and  yeah if you've got lots of hedge it is worth or lots of trees to cut it is worth getting  in bigger kit and bigger machinery but it doesn't have to be that way.  
**0:50:15-0:50:21:**  Tolly managed his hedges as well and his trees on farm just using a local tree surgeon.  I guess there's the opportunity also for farmers to work together isn't there and you know  so if you're getting in a big piece of kit it's like working with the neighbors to give  
**0:50:31-0:50:36:**  it enough hedge or trees to keep it busy so working together.  Yeah.  Yeah and I'm wondering since you know well you've had experience studying hedges does  
**0:50:44-0:50:53:**  the state of research now enable us to kind of claim that hedges really bring environmental  or ecosystem services to the production or do you still think you need to be able to  defend them from like a production angle for them to be valued by farmers?  
**0:51:05-0:51:09:**  I think that's a really good question because there's actually a lot more research on hedges  than there is on agroforestry and you can almost use them as a proxy for agroforestry  systems and there's quite a lot of evidence on the ecosystem service provision of hedgerows  
**0:51:20-0:51:27:**  from various different ecosystem services from water management to sort of providing  a habitat for biodiversity, beneficial biodiversity on the farm through to sort of crop protection,  wind protection for livestock as well.  
**0:51:39-0:51:43:**  There's a whole wealth of research out there that basically demonstrates that hedges are  a good thing.  But I think despite that not all farmers kind of see the benefits of that so particularly  
**0:51:50-0:51:55:**  over in the arable east where Wakelands is you know farmers can't remove the hedges but  they're keeping them as small as they possibly can so they're basically cutting them right  back so they're only like a meter square box.  
**0:52:04-0:52:09:**  So they're not delivering those biodiversity benefits or the other benefits because they're  just this little this little kind of linear feature.  So I think despite recognition of the ecosystem services that hedges provide there's still  
**0:52:17-0:52:24:**  a case for building in the productivity angle as well and actually you know if we're talking  about homegrown energy surely that is perhaps something we should be looking at anyway.  And we're not proposing really that farmers would manage all of the hedges on the farm  
**0:52:34-0:52:39:**  in that way and it's more about kind of creating a mosaic of different stages of regrowth and  different types of hedges you know some hedges might be laid instead of coppiced and others  would be more traditionally managed as a hedgerow.  
**0:52:49-0:52:55:**  And so you know in a way it could be seen as a means to enhancing biodiversity because  you've got these different types of hedge habitats so it's not just kind of one type  of hedge you've got different characters in the different hedge regrowth stages.  
**0:53:06-0:53:12:**  And sadly since you say that there's you know so much more research on hedges could you  tell us briefly what are the most well established or documented benefits that hedges bring?  Again that depends where you are in the country I mean the first thing that popped into my  
**0:53:23-0:53:29:**  head there was some of the work that's been done at Bangor University looking at the impacts  of shelter.  So they've got a is it Bangor?  
**0:53:33-0:53:39:**  Yeah, it's the electric sheep Jo, they've got an electric sheep with a sort of weather  station in it that they've been moving around and putting next to hedges and out in the  field and you can sort of see the benefits of the shelter on the welfare of the sheep  
**0:53:50-0:54:00:**  and that sort of animal welfare then translates into increased live weight I guess is it or  not the birth of lambs livestock's not my area but it's good for the sheep basically.  So that's the first thing that popped into my head but then in other parts of the country  
**0:54:12-0:54:20:**  I think over in the east you've got maybe sort of like watercourse management sorry  and other benefits as well.  Yeah really interesting I think for the livestock it seems pretty obvious again it might depend  
**0:54:29-0:54:34:**  on where you are but even in the mountainous area where I'm working at the moment and the  farmer I'm working with he's taken out like old walls to make bigger fields and he still  isn't that approach of trying to make his work easier with his tractor but on the other  
**0:54:48-0:54:52:**  side I was asking him like well why did you leave the hazelnuts and he was like yeah that's  absolutely crucial shelter for the animals and he's definitely not taking out the trees  because it's such a high value for him and on the higher altitudes where they were never  
**0:55:02-0:55:08:**  really hedges they're now starting to plant them for shelter for the animals and the heat  waves so even from a kind of practical experiential basis I think there's yeah there's a clear  benefit there.  
**0:55:16-0:55:22:**  Yeah I think the benefit for biodiversity is obviously quite massive in agricultural  areas as well you know not just as a resource but also as a corridor allowing animals to  kind of move across agricultural areas and being able to get from habitat to habitat  
**0:55:34-0:55:36:**  basically.  But I assume that could be a challenge as well because you know for example if you're  transforming your land into a deer corridor you know that could also bring some challenges  
**0:55:45-0:55:48:**  I could see some farmers being maybe worried about that.  Well that's another opportunity I mean that was a nice thing at Wakelands so they had  the muntjac deer at Wakelands the little deer invasive and yeah it was a pest and then Martin  
**0:56:01-0:56:06:**  saw it as an opportunity worked with a local gamekeeper who would come and shoot the deer  and make them into pies and sausages and sell them in the local deli and so you know we  should perhaps again it comes down to mindset but perhaps think about this as another product  
**0:56:18-0:56:25:**  of agroforestry another potential and another part of the kind of livestock system maybe  but yes you're right I mean there's you know there's agroforestry and kind of increasing  trees in the landscape do bring with them potential pest problems.  
**0:56:37-0:56:42:**  I know one of the problems Stephen Briggs had and I'm sure he said about it was having  pigeons using his apple trees as posts and breaking the apple trees yeah and at Wakelands  I mean there were hares but it was lovely to see the hares I mean they're quite a rare  
**0:56:54-0:57:00:**  species now and the deer as well not so many squirrels I mean that's the other thing that  people are concerned about when planting particularly hazelnuts is you know increasing grey squirrel  numbers but there's never really a problem at Wakelands.  
**0:57:10-0:57:14:**  I love the example you just gave about you know hunting the deer and making pies out  of them like they're a great example of using the problem and turning it into a solution.  We kind of touched upon woodchips as fuel a bit but I wanted to come back to woodchips  
**0:57:27-0:57:33:**  in general because I know Sally that you've been doing some research on woodchips at Tall hurst organics and I know how important woodchips are for for Tolly over there and maybe you  want to you know walk us through your experiments there and some of your findings.  
**0:57:46-0:57:53:**  So we just sort of finished those trials at the end of last year it was over a three year  period although we actually snuck in an extra year at Tolly's because we had a trial trial  there before we started the bigger trial and so we had four years worth of trials at Tolly's  
**0:58:04-0:58:09:**  and then we also did a trial on the Ramia woodchips at Wakelands as well which was really  interesting and it complemented the trial at Tolly's quite well because we had the single  species woodchip there from the short rotation coppice agroforestry systems and we also had  
**0:58:20-0:58:27:**  a trial on a conventional arable farm so nearby where he used woodchip from his hedge rows  so all of them were looking at using woodchips sourced from their on-farm resources and using  it as a soil improver so as a sort of ramial woodchip which is a term that I think was  
**0:58:43-0:58:48:**  coined in Canada a number of years ago but it's sort of a smaller woodchip that comes  from the twigs and the smaller diameter material so it's exactly the opposite of what you need  for a good fuel which is I guess one of the things that interested me straight away was  
**0:58:59-0:59:05:**  when I was early on first started at the organic research centre looking at woodchip for fuel  from hedge rows the thing that everybody says to you is oh no you can't use it from hedge  rows you've got too much bark the materials to the diameter is too small you'll have too  
**0:59:14-0:59:18:**  much bark in it and for Ramia woodchip that's exactly what you want you want the high bark  the high bud ratio because this material breaks down faster and it's more nutritionally dense  as well so it's sort of where the active part of the tree is I guess so we cut this material  
**0:59:32-0:59:41:**  from the on-farm sources and applied it to the soil so it's a way of closing the fertility  loop on farms and looking at becoming less reliant on external inputs while also I think  the nice thing is the trees have got deeper roots as well than your annual crops so you're  
**0:59:53-0:59:57:**  bringing some of that nutrients back up into the tree and then instead of the leaves just  falling underneath the tree with the woodchip if you then spread it onto the soil you're  moving some of that fertility back out into the field as well so again moving the trees  
**1:00:06-1:00:11:**  out into the tree fertility out into the field but there's a lot there's a lot of skepticism  about whether you can put woodchip on annual and your sort of cropping areas and whether  you will get nitrogen lock up in particular also the feasibility around it was something  
**1:00:20-1:00:25:**  that we looked at quite closely in the trials because I think that the organic research  center one of the really nice things about a lot of the research that I was involved  in when I was there and I think the organization as a whole focuses on is making sure that  
**1:00:34-1:00:41:**  what we're doing is actually practically feasible and works as well for the farmers yeah so  we measured all sorts of different things with the farmers with this woodchip we put  it on every year we added another trial so we had different phases of the rotation so  
**1:00:53-1:01:00:**  at Tolly's we had woodchip over four years in four different locations which was great  so we could see the sort of impact with the early trial of that woodchip a few years on  and a few years down the road as well so after a few crops had been planted and so we monitored  
**1:01:13-1:01:20:**  the crop health we monitored the soil health as well and the soil nutrients over the over  the four-year period and I guess one of the headlines is we didn't really find any negative  impacts we half expected to see sort of nitrogen lock up and and certainly the crop in the  
**1:01:34-1:01:40:**  first year following woodchip to see some sort of impacts on the on the crop health  of the woodchip with potentially then following years and when you look to the literature  which is quite limited on on other trials you did see the sort of dip where the woodchip  
**1:01:50-1:01:54:**  in the first year is maybe locking up a bit of nitrogen and and then as it breaks down  you haven't got that and I think maybe we were a bit cautious because we the trials  were on farm so and they were on commercial farms we didn't have a sort of trial field  
**1:02:04-1:02:10:**  that we were doing it on it had to fit in so at Tolles and Wakelands the woodchip went  onto a legume lay so you've got that sort of legume nitrogen fixing legumes maybe offsetting  some of the nitrogen lock up if there was any with the woodchip but we didn't see any  
**1:02:21-1:02:25:**  nitrogen lock up really any of it did spit at all. Three years on at Tolles we saw a  slight maybe on the cabbages on the brassicas a slight sort of dip in the growth in the  early growth then we followed them through to harvest and we saw no negative effects  
**1:02:36-1:02:41:**  on on on that at all as well and there was even some signs that there may be a positive  effect on yield as well although the the data wasn't significant enough to sort of say yes  definitely rameo woodchip definitely gives you an increase in yield there was some signs  
**1:02:52-1:02:59:**  that it may have been positive and some signs as well that the impacts on pest indices of  the woodchip may have been positive in some aspects as well the marketable yield of potatoes  over two years of the trial at Tolles were higher in the rameo woodchip than in the other  
**1:03:09-1:03:16:**  plots. And just to understand the the trials a bit so the woodchips are just kind of spread  on the soil surface at what kind of volume and what time of the year? So we spread them  in the winter when the sort of so you want to cut the material and spread it as soon  
**1:03:33-1:03:38:**  as possible after cutting so it's fresh and cut it with the leaves off because with the  leaves on the tree the balance when it breaks down is slightly different and it's more bacterially  rather than fungal dominated the woodchips is when it breaks it breaks down so we spread  
**1:03:48-1:03:52:**  in winter which creates some problems when you've got wet ground and in particular at  Wakelands it was a very wet year one year so finding that window to spread was quite  tricky. The volume the rates we were varied so for the application rates we tried to match  
**1:04:08-1:04:15:**  the application rate that they were the farms were using with compost so Tolly was using  sort of 60 cubic meters of compost 60 cubic meters per hectare of compost so we used the  same amount of woodchip but to a certain extent the application rates were determined by the  
**1:04:25-1:04:29:**  amount of material we had available as well so again it's sort of taking a practical point  of view we work with the farmer to look at what area we had for the trial and how we  could set it up so that we had enough replicates to get good data and then what area we had  
**1:04:39-1:04:44:**  there and then how much material we had to coppice and how we could match that to the  application rates so there was a bit of variability and we did it it was about 60 at Wakelands  at the Arable farm he used a lot of green waste compost and he also had quite a lot  
**1:04:57-1:05:05:**  of a large mature hedge that he wanted to use and chip for the trial so the application  rate there was quite a lot higher and that made me quite nervous because he wasn't putting  it onto a legume lay as well and he was putting a higher application rate on just prior to  
**1:05:14-1:05:20:**  a spring crop and then putting a spring crop in sort of a month or two after I'm sort of  thinking oh my god the nitrogen lock up but actually because he was conventional he was  putting nitrogen on as well so I guess you offset that potential nitrogen lock up with  
**1:05:29-1:05:36:**  an application of mineral nitrogen and then at Wakelands we had that flexibility with  the different coppice species because there's so many trees there that the application rate  so it wasn't such a problem and we started with quite a low application rate and the  
**1:05:47-1:05:52:**  first year of monitoring we didn't really see any difference between the treatment and  then Martin came out and said right next year let's double the application rate and reapply  it and he made our experimental design very complex up there which I cursed him for when  
**1:06:01-1:06:07:**  I was analyzing the data but it was actually quite interesting because we had that sort  of double application with a higher rate which did sort of push the system a little bit into  into showing us some differences and we definitely saw a sort of jump up in soil organic matter  
**1:06:20-1:06:27:**  which we didn't see in the other lower application rates even actually at Down Farm so the farm  the conventional farm we didn't see that but we reapplied it at Wakelands we saw that difference  and yes soil health we monitored as well so we looked at different elements of soil health  
**1:06:39-1:06:45:**  we looked at soil respiration we looked at the different sort of key nutrients as well  and then we counted a lot of worms Joe helps count worms as well Joe's a worm expert so  we did an actual two species survey of worms as well and found an insane amount of worms  
**1:06:55-1:07:02:**  at Tolly's high numbers of worms at all three sites but an awful lot of Tolly's and sort  of a slight sort of differentiation in species as well between the treatments that the species  overall I think were not particularly spectacular they were mainly your common types but there  
**1:07:13-1:07:19:**  was a slightly different species set that we found in the compost treated rather than  the Ramia wood chip treated sites I think my overall conclusion is that the compost  of the Ramia wood chip doesn't necessarily replace the compost it has a slightly different  
**1:07:30-1:07:38:**  action and I think potentially you want to use both of them in what's the word I'm looking  for together basically but maybe one cycle of compost and a few years later a cycle of  Ramia wood chips so you've got these sort of different actions on the soil that both  
**1:07:47-1:07:51:**  of them are producing for the application rates we tried to match the application rates  and the compost you were comparing to was composted Ramia wood chips or was it just  bought in compost?  
**1:07:57-1:08:05:**  It was composted wood chip at Tolly's which is the material that he uses it was green  waste compost at the conventional arable which he produces on site he's got a green waste  composting plant on site so that was there and then at Wakelands actually we didn't have  
**1:08:17-1:08:22:**  a compost treatment we just compared the different species of wood chip against each other we  included a sort of mixed hedge there as well and when you look at the when we did a sort  of analysis of the chemical composition of the substrate the compost or the wood chip  
**1:08:32-1:08:37:**  before we applied it as well and the different species of wood chips had really quite big  differences between the nutrients that was available in them but this didn't sort of  carry through into the soil but maybe it would after a number of years.  
**1:08:50-1:08:55:**  Willow in particular was quite low overall in nutrients compared to some of the other  species which is quite interesting because in a way willow is one of the species that's  maybe best suited for ramia wood chip production as well because it's fast growing and you  
**1:09:04-1:09:10:**  can cop it quite easily so you can sort of fit it into your system and as a veg grow  it's certainly one of the species that we're thinking about using but then the nutrients  in it is lower but that's probably matched by the fast growing nature of the tree as  
**1:09:19-1:09:20:**  well.  But then you would would the ideal be having a variety a mix of different tree species  to try and have a balanced input of nutrients or do you think it's not that important?  
**1:09:34-1:09:38:**  I would instinctively say yes.  I don't think the results of this trial necessarily back up that but that's my instinct and I  think with more years of research you would perhaps see like the results because these  
**1:09:51-1:09:57:**  sort of soil it changes quite slowly over time and wood chip as well the action of wood  chip on soil I think is quite a long term process for it to sort of break down and fully  realise its action.  
**1:10:06-1:10:10:**  So yeah I think I would instinctively say yes a mixture would be better but then that's  probably partly the fact that I'm totally sold on the idea that diversity is important  as well.  
**1:10:17-1:10:21:**  I just wanted to say as well that the three farms I suppose as well that we used in the  study all had even the conventional arable because he was using quite high amounts of  green waste compost on a regular basis all had very high existing levels of sort of soil  
**1:10:33-1:10:40:**  biology and soil health so it'd be quite interesting to try the same technique on a more degraded  soil.  I think you may see more spectacular results on a degraded soil.  
**1:10:45-1:10:51:**  Yeah that's very interesting because just to understand properly you're saying that  on the two farms that used compost you didn't really see a difference between ramial wood  chips and then compost in terms of plant reaction that they were pretty equal is that kind of  
**1:11:04-1:11:05:**  what you said?  Yeah they were pretty equal we saw some fairly subtle differences but not a huge amount.  There was increased phosphorus overall with the ramial wood chip and there were some differences  
**1:11:15-1:11:22:**  again I think in the potato crop at Tolly's we saw a difference in marketable yield so  the the ramial wood chip had lower slug damage than the compost which surprised me actually  I wasn't expecting to find that but we did see this sort of lower instance of slug damage  
**1:11:33-1:11:37:**  in the ramial wood chip and that was on both years as well so it's two years later in two  different fields so I think there's a little bit more certainty that that was actually  a trend.  
**1:11:42-1:11:47:**  I guess it'd be interesting to to be able to compare as well how energy intensive and  time consuming the two inputs are because it's true that ramial wood chips you know  instinctively you kind of think well it's great that you're able to almost equal the  
**1:11:58-1:12:04:**  results of compost with like something that's you know if you have planted trees and you  can have like on-site input production but then I don't know how it would compare once  you take into account the chipping etc because both seem to be you know quite labor intensive  
**1:12:14-1:12:18:**  inputs but it'd be interesting to have that comparison.  I think we did we did try and get our heads around that comparison that was something  I was definitely interested in and I think on a purely financial basis you wouldn't just  
**1:12:28-1:12:34:**  produce ramial wood chip as opposed to compost but then when you tie it into the fact that  you need to manage your trees on site anyway and if you want to reduce your reliance on  external inputs so if you're producing material on site to compost then you've got to go through  
**1:12:47-1:12:52:**  that process anyway whereas if you're relying on sort of external deliveries of material  that you either compost yourself or external deliveries of ready-made compost then that  in at the moment I think is more economically viable but I think there's going to be a future  
**1:13:05-1:13:11:**  where maybe there's going to be more value attributed to green waste compost and to wood  chip and becoming reliant becoming sort of self-reliant is maybe a good goal as well.  Sure for my own interest is Tolly still using ramial wood chips and will he carry on to  
**1:13:25-1:13:26:**  use it?  I think he will yeah I don't know I'm sort of yeah I hope he will I think he's quite  sold on it though and I think he's also inspired other people I mean we're certainly planning  
**1:13:39-1:13:43:**  to try using it and I've spoken to various other growers as well it fits quite nicely  that's the thing if you can get your sort of like windbreak short rotation coppice rows  and you can not move the material too far so you can be basically having your wood chip  
**1:13:52-1:13:57:**  production very close to your your vegetable production and I think and you tie it in with  your rotation so that's your lay phase then I think it can work very nicely with the system  and I think Tolly will carry on using it he's a wood chip addict.  
**1:14:09-1:14:15:**  Yeah so I think the the last question I wanted to ask both of you because you have that kind  of more global vision you've you've done trials on different farms and you know Sally you're  working on a farm as well and you have experience with agroforestry for you you know what what  
**1:14:26-1:14:31:**  kind of has to change for agroforestry to scale up or what what is the main challenge  is it you know a change in mentality is it more technical solutions that have to be developed  you know where do you see the kind of main thing main blockades to be lifted for us to  
**1:14:42-1:14:45:**  scale up agroforestry?  I think it is the mentality question really and you know we've been involved for 10 years  or so and in the early early years people didn't know the word they didn't know agroforestry  
**1:14:55-1:15:00:**  they didn't understand it and you just had a few pioneering farmers like Stephen Briggs  and Martin and taking it forward but it is that kind of peer-to-peer sharing of the experience  that I think we've seen it grow over the last 10 years and you know it's it's now definitely  
**1:15:14-1:15:21:**  more widely understood and widely known in the UK and more people are doing it so bit  by bit it is increasing we are hearing about all these systems that are being planted or  people using their resources on farm in a different way and so I think it is that change  
**1:15:34-1:15:38:**  of mentality of trees aren't a bad thing to have on the farm and recognizing the benefits  and perhaps going that step to making them a productive part of the farm is is the way  forward. I mean obviously it's you know in terms of support farm support and agroforestry  
**1:15:51-1:15:55:**  has suffered from kind of falling through the gaps of not being agriculture and not  being forestry and being some kind of weird combination of the two and you know classically  that it's not you know if you've got too many trees you lose kind of eligibility for for  
**1:16:04-1:16:11:**  your farm payments and I think we're seeing greater recognition from policy makers that  you know agroforestry provides a way of storing carbon and you know improving the environment  whilst maintaining agricultural productivity as well and so it should be something that  
**1:16:22-1:16:28:**  that is supported even if it is complicated and I think in the UK and the European level  there's greater support for agroforestry amongst policy makers as well.  Yeah I think I'd agree with all of that I'd maybe only add the need for advice as well  
**1:16:42-1:16:47:**  I think we come across a lot of farmers who are quite keen to do it but want that just  that little bit of help because it's quite complex and there are lots of different options  out there about where you plant them and also when you put a tree in the ground it's not  
**1:16:56-1:17:01:**  like an annual crop where you can change it next year that tree will be there for a significant  length of time so I think it's sort of getting over that hurdle and that step of planting  the trees is a mindset thing but also the need for advice and sort of that peer-to-peer  
**1:17:10-1:17:16:**  learning as well so exactly like this podcast basically getting people to listen to the  experiences of other farmers and hear them and see them as well.  Yeah and having a bit of support for getting the trees planted so and the Woodland Trust  
**1:17:26-1:17:32:**  in the UK have been really successful working with farmers helping them design their scheme  their agroforestry systems and giving support for the trees so paying for the trees paying  paying for the protection of the trees as well so I think just having you know a little  
**1:17:43-1:17:49:**  bit of money input at that early stage to support the tree planting has been hugely  beneficial as well as the advice that they've been given giving to the farmers.  Well yeah thank you so much for all this information it's been really fascinating for me to get  
**1:18:00-1:18:06:**  a bit of a different perspective on these questions because so far we've mainly talked  to farmers and organizations and we haven't had the chance to talk to researchers so yeah  thank you so much I really enjoyed this conversation and yeah maybe we'll have you another time  
**1:18:18-1:18:19:**  on the podcast then.  Yeah thank you it's been fun.  Thanks very much it's been nice talking to you.  
**1:18:28-1:18:32:**  I hope you enjoyed the episode some of you have been getting in touch with us with some  ideas and feedback and we really appreciate that and we'll do our best to try and include  it in upcoming interviews with our guests.  
**1:18:41-1:18:46:**  If you'd like to get in touch with us as well you can do so on social media or websites  as usual we'll have included all the relevant links down below in the description.  