---
title: 18 Grazing Turkeys In An Organic Fruit Orchard With Garrett Miller
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

<script src="https://cdn.podlove.org/web-player/embed.js"></script>
    <script>
        document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', function () {
          if (document.readyState === 'interactive' || document.readyState === 'complete') {
            podlovePlayer('#player', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast/18-grazing-turkeys-in-an-organic-fruit-orchard-with-garrett-miller.json', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast/config.json').then(registerExternalEvents('player'))
          }
        })
  </script>

### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2021-04-01)  

**0:00:00-0:00:23:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:23-0:00:33:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  these challenges.  
**0:00:33-0:00:49:**  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Hello and welcome to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:00:49-0:01:05:**  I'm your host Dimitri and today I interviewed Garrett Miller from the Good Life Farm.  As you probably worked out by now, one of our favourite topics on the podcast is diversity  and how we can integrate it on our farms in an economically viable way.  
**0:01:05-0:01:15:**  It so happens that Garrett has been doing this to an extraordinary degree for the past  ten years.  His business goes beyond what we think of as a farm, producing too much diversity for  
**0:01:15-0:01:31:**  me to really get my hand around with a crew of 12 people year round.  We had a fantastic conversation on how he runs his diverse business and we then focused  on how and why he is integrating turkeys in his orchard.  
**0:01:31-0:01:43:**  For us agroforestry isn't just about planting timber trees in agricultural settings, but  also how we can integrate different elements in a way that improves the quantity and quality  of overall production.  
**0:01:43-0:01:52:**  Garrett has been doing a great job on his farm and I hope you enjoy this episode as  much as I did.  Okay Garrett, welcome on the podcast.  
**0:01:52-0:02:10:**  Yeah thanks for having me.  Cool, so it would be really great to start with a description of yourself, how you got  started in agriculture and how you started the Good Life Farm.  
**0:02:10-0:02:28:**  Yeah I'll do my best to remember here.  It feels like it's been a lifetime ago and also really, really brief.  We started this business probably almost 13 years ago now, maybe 12 years ago.  
**0:02:28-0:02:50:**  And we're in New York State, here in the central part of the state in the Finger Lakes region.  So it's an area I grew up in and then moved back to as a young adult and it kind of chose  this as a place that I really wanted to get set up in life for a bunch of different reasons.  
**0:02:50-0:03:03:**  But I identified this as the place to get started.  So I got started relatively young with the business here.  I was 22 at the time and didn't have nearly enough experience or background to be doing  
**0:03:03-0:03:21:**  what we wanted to take on but that had the energy and attitude so I went for it and have  kind of paid for our education along the way.  But definitely started out as a really relatively inexperienced farmer and land manager and  
**0:03:21-0:03:39:**  have kind of gone the road of paying for our own education and learning things the hard  way often.  Got started the business with my partner at the time, life partner, business partner,  
**0:03:39-0:03:55:**  got married along the way, got divorced along the way and still running the business now  as a solo entrepreneur but our team has grown dramatically.  So kind of the trajectory has been two people starting a farm from scratch here in the Finger  
**0:03:55-0:04:17:**  Lakes on a piece of vacant land, a land with no buildings, no water, no infrastructure,  no plants, really no soil life, no biodiversity, kind of an intensively managed cornfield for  the last 50 years and setting up to try to make a go of a diversified small farm, a sort  
**0:04:17-0:04:33:**  of a thriving ecosystem, something that would leave the land a little better than we found  it.  So have just been on a 12 year journey trying to learn how to make that possible and we  
**0:04:33-0:04:50:**  can get into all the details later I guess but have grown a wide array of crops, annuals  and animals and planted perennials along the way, primarily fruit trees.  About halfway through that trajectory we started a second business that's a farm winery, so  
**0:04:50-0:05:13:**  it's called the Finger Lakes Cider House and it's our customer facing agritourism value  added business that makes a whole lot of products and primarily ciders and now wines and interfaces  with customers about the farm and since that point the business has grown pretty dramatically  
**0:05:13-0:05:27:**  and has involved a lot more people now.  It used to be two people doing it kind of part time figuring out how to make ends meet  and now there's probably 12 people full time on staff and seasonally double that and we  
**0:05:27-0:05:43:**  kind of are just figuring out where we can take this thing as far as connecting people  to agriculture and producing interesting products from a land that hopefully is getting healthier  every year than the year before.  
**0:05:43-0:05:54:**  Okay, nice.  And how did you, like when you were 22, how did you decide to get into agriculture?  What was the inspiration for you?  
**0:05:54-0:06:05:**  Yeah, I have a kind of a weird educational background.  I guess I dropped out of high school as a pretty young person just finding it not to  be a good fit for me.  
**0:06:05-0:06:17:**  I was interested in other things that weren't schooling related, primarily like the trades  I was interested in carpentry and building and in agriculture and public schools weren't  the best place to be learning that.  
**0:06:17-0:06:38:**  So I tried a bunch of different self education things and other school options for a couple  of years and then found some awesome mentors that inspired me to get into agriculture.  One of those was Mark Shepherd in Wisconsin, New Forest Farm, a place where we went and  
**0:06:38-0:06:58:**  lived and sort of apprenticed is a loose word, but was mentored by Mark in broad acre agroforestry  and kind of permaculture type principles and was very much inspired by work he was doing.  That was something we did just before launching the project here.  
**0:06:58-0:07:13:**  And I had also done an apprenticeship at a very unusual place in North Carolina called  Turtle Island that was also probably a formative and inspiring thing that helped me feel confident  to take on building a land based project from scratch.  
**0:07:13-0:07:22:**  It was sort of a wilderness apprenticeship thing for a year or so with a crazy outfit  down in North Carolina.  Okay.  
**0:07:22-0:07:36:**  Yeah.  So eclectic background, but a few good mentors and a lot of good mentors since then.  Since we started with this kind of big idea and ambition, we ended up finding ourselves  
**0:07:36-0:07:44:**  in a really good community of people who were very generous with information and willing  to help us get started.  So we've had lots of mentors since then.  
**0:07:44-0:07:57:**  So it's been like a bit of a blessing to find ourselves where we are.  Yeah, that's amazing.  I mean, I can't help to feel impressed that starting a business like the one you set up  
**0:07:57-0:08:12:**  at 22 from scratch, starting with a white piece of paper and building everything that  you've built.  I mean, I invite all of our listeners to go check out your website and Instagram and just  
**0:08:12-0:08:21:**  to see what seems to be a thriving system with so much going on.  Yeah.  Yeah, I appreciate that.  
**0:08:21-0:08:37:**  It definitely could have been a lot easier, a lot less expensive and yeah.  But yeah, totally a lot of luck along the way too for the location in particular has  helped us out more than we could have imagined.  
**0:08:37-0:08:47:**  The physical side, the community, all that has helped us get started.  And at the beginning, certainly didn't realize what we were starting or what we were trying  to do.  
**0:08:47-0:08:59:**  And so probably at this moment still don't really understand.  We have a little bit better of an idea, but the trajectory has changed and I'm open to  like 10 years from now being in a place we never expected.  
**0:08:59-0:09:10:**  That's kind of where we find ourselves today is a place we hadn't expected.  But the underpinning principles are the same about land management.  Okay.  
**0:09:10-0:09:22:**  We like to give our audience a bit of a context of the physical context that you're in.  Could you tell us a bit about the acreage that you're farming on?  What's the soil like?  
**0:09:22-0:09:26:**  The rainfall, the slope?  Sure.  Yeah.  
**0:09:26-0:09:34:**  Yeah.  I'm sitting in my office right now looking out the window.  At the time of this recording, I guess it is the very beginning of March.  
**0:09:34-0:09:53:**  So the ground is still covered in snow or I have 43 degrees latitude here and it's generally  have long wet winters where near this beautiful geological phenomenon called the finger lakes,  which are these super deep glacial lakes that are in the center of New York state, kind  
**0:09:53-0:10:02:**  of near the great lakes.  So we're near a ton of fresh water.  I think it's like 7% of the world's fresh water is in our sort of bio region of the  
**0:10:02-0:10:08:**  great lakes here.  And the finger lakes are a big part of that.  So we're near a ton of fresh water.  
**0:10:08-0:10:21:**  So the landscape is pretty abundant with water and we're on a beautiful east facing slope.  It's probably about mostly 8% slope down to Cayuga Lake.  We're probably about a mile.  
**0:10:21-0:10:38:**  I'm sorry if I have this upstate New York accent, but that yeah, Cayuga Lake is the  lake that we're near and it's really good agricultural soil in this region in general.  The finger lakes you'll see from aerial maps that a lot of southern New York is forested.  
**0:10:38-0:10:50:**  When you start to get to these areas, a satellite map unfortunately ends up usually looking  like a desert because there's a lot of huge cropping happening in this area, but it's  good soil and so farming is still thriving and alive.  
**0:10:50-0:11:02:**  So we moved to this area because land was both affordable at that time becoming a little  bit less so now, but definitely affordable and it was very high quality land for lots  of different farming enterprises.  
**0:11:02-0:11:15:**  So it's largely a corn and soy and wheat growing area, but also there's New York's  biggest grape industry activities happen up here.  So there's a wine region that we're part of.  
**0:11:15-0:11:26:**  So these sites are very good for wine grape growing.  Little temperature buffers, high quality soils, good mineral subsoil base and decent water  resources.  
**0:11:26-0:11:41:**  We have typically a wet spring and a dry couple months in the summer and then moisture returning  as the fall rolls around and usually good ripening for fruit crops, tree fruit and grapes  and all sorts of stuff.  
**0:11:41-0:11:54:**  So pretty abundant growing zone.  Not as great as some other parts of America, but it's up there.  Better than many parts of the world, that's for sure.  
**0:11:54-0:12:06:**  Based on your description, so it seems like there's a lot of potential.  Yeah, and definitely some of the sites are getting degraded here because they're hillside  sites and erosion just like everywhere in the world is a huge problem.  
**0:12:06-0:12:20:**  This site has been heavily eroded over probably the last hundred years and there's a lot  less soil on this site than there recently was and it's mostly in the lake, which is  unfortunate because it's not coming back.  
**0:12:20-0:12:37:**  But that's one of the bigger hurdles with these sites is the soil is getting degraded  more rapidly.  Just as we had talked about in our previous call, it would be great for you to tell us  
**0:12:37-0:12:50:**  everything that you produce on the farm.  Also in terms of your activities, but especially looking at the agricultural produce.  There was even more than what you had mentioned when I looked at your Instagram, so it's  
**0:12:50-0:13:02:**  kind of surprising.  I'd love for our listeners also to have an idea of what are you producing there.  Yeah, it's ebbed and flowed over time.  
**0:13:02-0:13:18:**  Currently it's a mix of annuals, perennials, and a little bit of livestock.  We've dialed back on the livestock a little bit for complexity reasons recently.  In chronological seasonal order, I guess it's an easy way to think about it.  
**0:13:18-0:13:31:**  We'll start harvesting asparagus soon in usually the end of April, sort of the first crop that's  coming off the farm.  So we've had a 12 year old asparagus planting.  
**0:13:31-0:13:44:**  We now have a Yup'ik strawberry planting that's thriving and healthy.  I should mention, I guess our farm is certified organic, so a lot of our management practices  around the fruit in particular are very focused around that concept of being certified or  
**0:13:44-0:13:56:**  organic.  So we have a good strawberry crop.  We have a growing seed garlic planting, so an annual crop that we harvest for scapes  
**0:13:56-0:14:13:**  and bulbs that go to seed stock for other producers in the Northeast primarily.  And I'm sure I'm already forgetting stuff, but we grow peaches and Asian pears and a  diversity of apples, both for fresh eating and specifically for cider making.  
**0:14:13-0:14:29:**  In the fall, we'll also harvest a ginger crop that we grow.  We've been maybe growing ginger for eight or nine years in our high tunnels where we  also produce specialty salad green mixes in the spring and in the winter, kind of the  
**0:14:29-0:14:47:**  no heat, hearty greens concept.  So I guess also in there is raising turkeys primarily for Thanksgiving, but also for value  added processing is sort of the main animal activity on the farm at the moment.  
**0:14:47-0:15:06:**  We've raised chickens and had beef, herd of beef cows in the past and farmed with draft  horses for the better part of a decade and have dialed that back recently.  There'll be a few more animal activities coming in the coming year, but this season looks  
**0:15:06-0:15:14:**  like probably just we'll stick with our turkey system to have that be that energy fertility  driver.  Okay, nice.  
**0:15:14-0:15:24:**  So that's a quick rundown and then there's a ton happening on the cider house side with  products, value added products, but that's a whole other bag.  Yeah.  
**0:15:24-0:15:34:**  Well actually it would be great to know what are these value added products?  You mentioned cider, right?  What else are you, just a quick overview, what else are you transforming there?  
**0:15:34-0:15:46:**  Yeah, so we, we'd probably make 30 different labels of cider of different types of alcoholic  cider.  Um, kind of made like make like one would make sparkling wine.  
**0:15:46-0:15:57:**  We now also make a few different types of sparkling wine made from grapes grown from  our neighbors farms here.  There's a lot of vinafore grapes growing nearby, so we're working with those.  
**0:15:57-0:16:09:**  We turn our cider into vinegar and vinegar based products.  So that would be like, um, things like shrubs we make these that are cocktail mixer, uh,  fruit infused vinegar type products.  
**0:16:09-0:16:24:**  And we have a lot of different cider vinegar products and we have some sparkling nonalcoholic  beverages that we make both out of vinegar and out of ginger.  So we make some sort of fresh, uh, ginger style sodas for people who don't drink alcohol.  
**0:16:24-0:16:44:**  Um, and we do some other sort of fruit preserves and things like that, canned products, jams  and sauces and things like that as well as sourcing a tremendous amount.  We probably, I don't know, we spend, we probably spend $100,000 this last year purchasing in  
**0:16:44-0:16:57:**  products from other farms to turn into food, uh, ready to eat meals.  Like we have a small cafe on the farm.  Uh, people will come and eat lunch here and do a little dinner events and things like  
**0:16:57-0:17:03:**  that.  So we're sourcing food from our farm and primarily from the neighboring farms to supply all those  needs.  
**0:17:03-0:17:21:**  That's overwhelming the amount of diversity you're having to deal with.  And this is something that, you know, obviously we're going to, we're going to get into is  managing that complexity, but let's just hold up a bit now because, uh, you know, um, I  
**0:17:21-0:17:34:**  mean, it seems to be to this kind of diversity of production seems to can just imagine an  amazing, very beautiful and diverse farm.  And, and this is something that, you know, in agroecology, there's a lot of talk about  
**0:17:34-0:17:45:**  it, you know, diversifying our farms and, you know, creating, um, um, small and diverse  systems.  Um, and so, or big and diverse systems, but diversity is becoming more something that  
**0:17:45-0:17:56:**  we hear more and more about.  But of course, this, this comes with a challenge, which is selling it, right.  That one of the pillars of the farm is to be able to, to sell and distribute, uh, and,  
**0:17:56-0:18:03:**  and create value from this diversity.  And that's often one of the big challenges that we hear about with farmers that are,  that are diversifying.  
**0:18:03-0:18:14:**  And one of the things that we're concerned about with, you know, on the podcast with  agroforestry, because agroforestry often means bringing in more complexity and diversity  into a farm system with the tree layer, for example.  
**0:18:14-0:18:28:**  But you know, stepping away from the agroforestry now specifically, um, and looking more at  the diversity of products that you have to manage and to sell, I'm really curious about  how you, how you manage to do that, you know, has this diversity come in like little by  
**0:18:28-0:18:42:**  little through the years, or did you start with a huge diversity from the, from the get-go?  Um, it definitely didn't start all, you know, all, all, all at once like that has incrementally  increased over time.  
**0:18:42-0:18:56:**  And we, I think my personality lends towards like, uh, complexity a little bit.  Like I am interested in a lot of different, uh, things that can be produced from food  products, from soil, from land.  
**0:18:56-0:19:08:**  And so probably tend toward over complexity oftentimes and have to get dialed back by  the team that surrounds me.  I have some awesome people around me who are, uh, very balancing outlooks and help me dial  
**0:19:08-0:19:19:**  back in some of that complexity because it can be a big, uh, it can sometimes be a burden  or a risk.  So we have added over time and haven't been afraid to subtract things here and there.  
**0:19:19-0:19:35:**  Um, we currently don't raise beef cattle or farm with draft horses and we certainly have  made products that maybe were a little bit of a flop and we've dialed them back.  Um, almost all of our marketing, I would say 90% of our income, maybe 80% is direct to  
**0:19:35-0:19:46:**  consumer.  So, and so that has allowed us to really market complexity because consumers are, seem like  they're often really embracing that story.  
**0:19:46-0:19:58:**  They want something that has a lot of, um, nuance and depth and things that they can  come back to and revisit and find out more things and feel connected to a space that  is providing for a number of their needs.  
**0:19:58-0:20:12:**  So that has really helped the direct to marketing.  And I think we've sort of been very fortunate in finding ourselves in a location that allows  for direct marketing off our premise.  
**0:20:12-0:20:23:**  So people come to our site, we're open 360 days a year and see tens of thousands of people  now coming.  I'm watching a car drive down the driveway right now as we're talking that someone who's  
**0:20:23-0:20:32:**  coming to visit the cider house and do, I don't know, a drink cider, have lunch maybe.  Um, and maybe leave with some produce as well, right?  Yes.  
**0:20:32-0:20:38:**  Yeah.  Um, frozen food items at this point.  Soon we'll have our spring salad mixes again.  
**0:20:38-0:20:50:**  Okay.  And we're certainly processing local foods all the time.  So the on premise visitation place, a sense of place that like people can come and feel  
**0:20:50-0:21:03:**  like it's one of their places that they can go to has been a huge ability to sell the  diversity.  So, um, at this point we're looking for what kind of diversity makes sense for this physical  
**0:21:03-0:21:10:**  site and what's, what's putting too much pressure on the system and what's just like a really  solid fit for the ecosystem.  Okay.  
**0:21:10-0:21:20:**  Delving a bit more into the, into the, your sales approach.  Cause you know, that's the key to, as you described that, that direct selling is the  key to being able to distribute diversity.  
**0:21:20-0:21:37:**  Um, but do you have a, um, a shop on the farm and is that where you sell most of your products?  Also do you also go out to markets and go sell produce to local shops?  Um, you know, what, what, if we could give some proportions.  
**0:21:37-0:21:48:**  Yeah, I would say 80% of our products are sold or income, um, is, is coming from on  farm sales.  Okay.  
**0:21:48-0:22:03:**  And the other percentage is, is to either online where we're shipping product or to  local accounts within probably 20 miles of here, maybe 30 miles of here where we will  deliver product to.  
**0:22:03-0:22:17:**  Um, and it varies product type, um, how we distribute it, but primarily, um, primarily  off site here we are onsite.  Here's where we sell.  
**0:22:17-0:22:31:**  Um, yeah.  Trying to think how to, how to break it down a little bit.  Um, the more I'm a pretty introverted person and like to like to stay here and be here  
**0:22:31-0:22:41:**  on this, on the farm and I'm happy on days when I don't have to like get my car and go  anywhere.  Um, so I, I'm inclined to, I'm not a very good sales person and I'm inclined to not  
**0:22:41-0:22:50:**  go out and develop new accounts.  So I'm usually trying to figure out how we can get more people to come here and purchase  products directly from here.  
**0:22:50-0:23:11:**  So we do have a storefront that's open, um, you know, seven to nine hours a day year round  and people can come in and meet with one of the farm staff to either buy products from  our little shop or do a, um, kind of a, of hub style experience where they're drinking  
**0:23:11-0:23:21:**  various local beverages and eating local foods.  Um, we do a lot of online marketing to, um, let people know when there's things that they  can come pick off the farm.  
**0:23:21-0:23:34:**  So we do you pick, we let them know they can sign up for Thanksgiving turkeys and come  at a certain date and pick them up.  Um, but when things can't be sold here, we will definitely get in our little, um, Scooby  
**0:23:34-0:23:42:**  Doo delivery vehicle and drive 30 miles to our near town and often and drop off a lot  of products.  And that's probably 20% of the income.  
**0:23:42-0:23:48:**  Okay.  And then drop off products directly to the consumers again.  Uh, no, that's often being dropped off to a retailer.  
**0:23:48-0:24:01:**  Yep.  To a local co-ops and a few little restaurant accounts and wine shops and things like that.  And do you see that as an interesting sales strategy as well?  
**0:24:01-0:24:14:**  Are you, what's, I mean, what's the future prospects of, of your approach now this 80  20 approach, if we can call it a direct setting on the farm vs retailing, are you imagining  to, to, to, to increase that retail opportunity?  
**0:24:14-0:24:29:**  Um, or how, how are you seeing this evolve in the future?  I'm not that inclined to develop more off farm retail accounts.  I think the finding the direct to consumer marketing to be really resilient, like even,  
**0:24:29-0:24:44:**  you know, especially during the pandemic and other, all sorts of other situations I can  imagine when you have a customer base of tens of thousands of people versus maybe five accounts  that or it's been, you know, especially in say the wine world where you might have one  
**0:24:44-0:24:55:**  distributor or two distributors, if they, if they change their business model, if two  people change their mind, your whole sales channel has fallen apart and which is the  driver of your whole kind of vision and business.  
**0:24:55-0:25:08:**  But it's unlikely that 20 to 40,000 people will all change their mind at the same time  and decide that they don't want your stuff anymore.  Um, so we have a lot of resilience with a lot of people and the internet has pretty  
**0:25:08-0:25:24:**  much made that possible to connect with that many people because they can view your platform,  they can see, um, you know, they can just kind of follow you on all the different social  medias and review sites and kind of get a sense of what you're doing.  
**0:25:24-0:25:32:**  We have newsletters that go out, they connect with people in that way.  It's a lot to keep up with and we don't keep up with it nearly as well as we should, but  it's, it's, um, functional.  
**0:25:32-0:25:51:**  It's allowing us to climb in stability and sales.  So I think if we do do, um, expand in a market opportunity, it will be, um, both getting  more people here for more reasons and to stay in longer and do more, but also, um, trying  
**0:25:51-0:26:01:**  to ship our products to people who have visited us and connected and want to stay in touch.  And I know there's, you know, there's drawbacks and an energetic cost of moving product around  the country.  
**0:26:01-0:26:15:**  Both, um, you know, primarily right now it's shelf stable products like ciders and wines.  Um, we hope to be able to ship other products eventually, value added shelf stable products  or frozen meats and things like that.  
**0:26:15-0:26:34:**  But, um, it's an awesome way to, to scale sales without scaling the, like climbing the,  uh, scaling the farm beyond its, uh, maybe it's beyond its means here.  So we're chasing sort of higher return sales without having to hugely increase your infrastructure  
**0:26:34-0:26:46:**  as well, having to put, put up shops in different places and et cetera.  You've got one base, but you can just, you know, use the kind of postage system to, to  get product out to, to other people in different parts of the country.  
**0:26:46-0:26:51:**  Okay.  It's interesting.  I mean, as a little anecdote, I think is quite interesting to share here.  
**0:26:51-0:27:00:**  I'm working with a farmer now who was doing wholesale farming.  He's got 10 hectares of apples.  And um, at some point he tried to, he tried to direct sell, you know, and he started,  
**0:27:00-0:27:12:**  started producing some apricots and he tried to direct sell apricots, put a small quantity,  um, and some of his apples, of course.  Um, but it didn't work out for him because, um, he didn't, he wasn't able to, you know,  
**0:27:12-0:27:21:**  people, um, they, they want to, if they're going to buy produce, they want convenience.  This is what he was saying, right?  So they want to go to the supermarket where everything is kind of accessible.  
**0:27:21-0:27:35:**  So he was, what's different between you and him here and which is very clear, your farm  and his operation is, is that you're, you're able to attract many people and to come onto  the farm through the side house and through also, uh, I can imagine people are very interested  
**0:27:35-0:27:49:**  in seeing what a, uh, you know, a diverse, um, um, um, innovative farm looks like.  And this is something that I think would, is key to get these people here, get them  interested, share the story, get them to see the, you know, see the, the, the, the people  
**0:27:49-0:27:55:**  that work there as well, your crew and, and then be able to get an emotional attachment  in a way.  Right.  
**0:27:55-0:28:03:**  And so this is interesting, I think though, because I made, it made me think a lot, you  know, we're always thinking diversity, uh, sorry, direct selling.  That's a key, but it's not always accessible for everybody.  
**0:28:03-0:28:12:**  And you've managed to kind of crack it there and to get, I mean, you're talking about tens  to 20,000 people visiting your farm.  That's a huge amount of people coming in.  
**0:28:12-0:28:26:**  Yeah.  And I, I, sometimes it definitely feels too complex and it is getting a little easier  each year, but I do think it's the burden to direct sell is, is definitely not for everyone.  
**0:28:26-0:28:40:**  And I think there, yeah, the other models have their own challenges, but the support  need to be developed because it's, it's maybe not a realistic expectation for a lot of people  to, to do what it takes to direct sell in the way, especially the way we are.  
**0:28:40-0:28:56:**  I mean, we're there, you do a ton of things that are not farming.  You primarily do things I would say as the business owner that are not farming.  Um, so if your goal and your talents are really in farming, then, um, running a business that  
**0:28:56-0:29:06:**  is a farm that directs markets is probably not, uh, uh, maybe, uh, it'd be something  you should look at closely before jumping into it.  There's so much on that.  
**0:29:06-0:29:20:**  Um, the marketing side and sort of human resources side usually requires more people.  So there's more staff management and, um, yeah.  Just the financial management end.  
**0:29:20-0:29:34:**  Um, and so for one person to be good at all those things, it's just like too burdensome.  So the enterprise usually ends up being bigger and then, um, that becomes a different kind  of business when it's like a, when there's 10 people and there's some, uh, division of  
**0:29:34-0:29:43:**  labor and role division.  So that, that wasn't really on my radar getting started is now, and we kind of lucked out  in that I enjoy that kind of work.  
**0:29:43-0:29:51:**  So it's a decent fit for me, even though I find myself doing less of the things I was  doing when we started.  Yeah.  
**0:29:51-0:29:58:**  Hmm.  Interesting.  I like how you nuance the whole, um, direct selling thing of, you know, it's might not  
**0:29:58-0:30:08:**  be adapted to everybody.  I think that's really important to take into account and important consideration when you're  doing your holistic context, trying to work out what your farm is going to look like.  
**0:30:08-0:30:19:**  Um, but you know, one of the, when, when, when I looked on your website and I saw you  like one of the first things that crossed my mind is, um, you know, now I'm seeing where  I'm working, for example, and how sensitive the trees are.  
**0:30:19-0:30:31:**  You know, you don't want to want to be careful.  You don't want to break the spurs of the apple trees.  You want to, um, I mean, how do you manage with having possibly hundreds or maybe thousands,  
**0:30:31-0:30:42:**  I don't know, of people walking through your farm and harvesting themselves, people who  don't necessarily have a lot of experience with, uh, agriculture with, with farming that  don't necessarily, you know, are you not worried that you get.  
**0:30:42-0:30:47:**  Do you get damaged?  Do you, do you get damaged?  And I mean, how's that going for you?  
**0:30:47-0:31:01:**  Yeah, I, I mean, we're, we're only several years in and with you pick stuff and the numbers  are a little bit lower as far as the volume of people that are out there right now as  we're developing more crops and new plantings.  
**0:31:01-0:31:13:**  Um, so I'm assuming that complexity will increase over time.  Like some of these multi-generational farms or farms that have been doing it for a couple  of decades and there's a big word of mouth and there's a ton of influx of people.  
**0:31:13-0:31:28:**  Um, so we have, we've had to go to ramp up a little bit more slowly through this and  troubleshoot, but it is, it's a little bit of a, um, you know, and letting go and of  like if you're meticulous in nature of exactly how you want your crops to be up to know that  
**0:31:28-0:31:38:**  you're sharing them with everybody and stuff's going to happen.  Um, people are gonna, they're going to break some branches.  They're gonna eat some fruit and throw it on the ground.  
**0:31:38-0:31:44:**  And if that drives you crazy, it's probably not a good fit for you.  Um, okay.  We charge a reasonable amount.  
**0:31:44-0:31:57:**  We kind of charge a little bit less than the retail value of the fruit.  Um, but we don't have to obviously pick, pack, wash, distribute, um, and get a lower price  anyway.  
**0:31:57-0:32:12:**  Um, so the pricing helps definitely offset, um, some of those challenges of welcoming  people onto the farm and extra costs to direct them and communicate with them.  Um, so it's definitely worth it for us.  
**0:32:12-0:32:29:**  And it is, um, also wholesale like, um, the other option when you start to have more and  more product, they become less and less attractive often at sort of a medium scale, like the  ability to sell a couple of thousand bushels of apples locally is not very good.  
**0:32:29-0:32:42:**  Um, there's a lot of apple producers in this area.  So you have to be doing something incredibly unique or you end up selling to the lowest  cost processing endpoint, which is like these died juice and sauce plants that are near  
**0:32:42-0:32:55:**  near us in New York.  Um, so without being so small that all you have is, you know, a handful of bushes you  bring to the farmer's market and the far end being these processing plants, you are looking  
**0:32:55-0:33:05:**  for that.  Um, there's a big squishy middle in there where you have to figure out something that  fits with your specific model, your personality, your land base to have more than, you know,  
**0:33:05-0:33:12:**  to not be in one of those extremes.  I mean, don't get me wrong.  I realize now that my comment may have been a bit negative because I mean, there's, it's  
**0:33:12-0:33:20:**  very, I mean, it's, it's, it looks amazing to have such a beautiful interaction with  your local community.  You know, they come on your farm, they interact with your trees, they interact with your farming  
**0:33:20-0:33:31:**  practices, the positive side, right?  There's, there's a, there's a beautiful connection between the farm and which, which is completely  opposite to a wholesale farm that's selling to a cooperative that nobody enters.  
**0:33:31-0:33:42:**  And, you know, and just to, just to finish off on this, on this sales, um, kind of topic  before we move on to agroforestry.  And again, everybody's probably telling, thinking that we should, they want to move on to agroforestry  
**0:33:42-0:33:50:**  as soon as possible.  But, um, um, you know, apparently transformation, uh, in, for example, of your apples into cider  is a big part of your strategy as well.  
**0:33:50-0:34:00:**  And I'd love to have some to know some of your thoughts about this, you know, how, how  did that come about?  And, and what's your feeling about this transformation thing, which is again, something that we hear  
**0:34:00-0:34:07:**  a lot about to create value, to be able to, you know, try to make an operation profitable  and, um, and a business sustainable.  Absolutely.  
**0:34:07-0:34:13:**  Yeah.  That's been key.  Um, totally core part of our business model and I love it.  
**0:34:13-0:34:21:**  It's good.  We're going to keep doing it.  Um, like for example, when you're harvesting a ton of apples, you have a great bumper crop.  
**0:34:21-0:34:29:**  Almost everyone else also has a great bumper crop at that same time.  But if you're all selling to the same markets, it becomes sort of a race to the bottom and  pricing.  
**0:34:29-0:34:42:**  It's like a, you know, kind of a challenge and you're competing in a way you don't necessarily  want to compete with your neighbors.  And, um, it's the nature of that sort of multi tiered food system where you're not connected  
**0:34:42-0:34:56:**  to customers and the value kind of chain often will collapse with these great abundant yields.  Um, so when you're, uh, the value adding, particularly with making something shelf stable  is really a powerful tool for us.  
**0:34:56-0:35:08:**  Um, alcohol production is, you know, kind of one of the most shelf stable things that  you can make out of a product.  You know, it's kind of crazy that you can make a product that gains value as it gets  
**0:35:08-0:35:19:**  older, even if you haven't done anything to it, just the fact that it gets older, some  of those products will gain value.  Um, so in the kind of the far end of that extreme would probably be distilling products,  
**0:35:19-0:35:26:**  right?  Distilling things deals with bumper crops.  So when you have a good year, you make a lot of spirits or alcohol.  
**0:35:26-0:35:40:**  And when you have the bad years that eventually roll around for your farm, you still have  something that is self stable that you can sell and spread out the inevitable bad years.  Or you can work with another producer who had a good year to purchase in their products  
**0:35:40-0:35:56:**  and add value if you are having a bad year.  And the ability to ship those products is very powerful because there's that connection  of agriculture then to people who are in areas maybe where they can't get connected to a  
**0:35:56-0:36:11:**  farm or are in sort of these food deserts or are not around the style of agriculture  they want to support.  The ability to send them something they can help, any help in any sales mechanism is really  
**0:36:11-0:36:19:**  valuable at this small scale.  So people who want to support us from the other side of the country is a welcome sale.  Hmm.  
**0:36:19-0:36:39:**  Plus you can open a cider house or a pub and you know, and get people to your farm and  interact with the local community again.  Yeah, it's been definitely more, been able to build more culture and more resilience  
**0:36:39-0:36:53:**  and more like getting more, our sort of our rural area here now is like there's a spot  where people can spend time after work.  There's probably three or four of our staff have moved into the region and our young people  
**0:36:53-0:37:14:**  moving into a somewhat economically depressed area and buying homes and trying to put energy  into a small town where a very small town outside of, you know, a larger town of probably  40,000 people but we're 20 miles away and some energy into that economy is fantastic.  
**0:37:14-0:37:27:**  I also wanted to mention too that from the value added sign, like selling an apple, I'm  often, I find our ability to sell that apple at the price we need to get forward is very  difficult.  
**0:37:27-0:37:43:**  I have a very fixed idea about what food should cost and the price flexibility is very low.  They, if an apple is going to cost $2, it's like a big deal for someone if the apple is  going to cost $2 and 25 cents, that's a big change for someone to mentally swallow.  
**0:37:43-0:37:52:**  When you're making value added products, there's much more flexibility in what the product  should cost or what the perceived value is, particularly with making, you know, wine would  be an extreme end.  
**0:37:52-0:38:06:**  If you give us a $10 bottle of wine or a $50 bottle of wine, it's a 500% increase and you  can sell that story if that's your goal.  Like, but there's, that's sort of an extreme example, but any, like food has the lowest  
**0:38:06-0:38:24:**  price flexibility, which is unfortunate because it shouldn't be that way, but kind of as we're  hoping to fix some aspects of the food system, the value added side gives you these little  windows into more flexibility in setting your own price.  
**0:38:24-0:38:29:**  That's fascinating.  Yeah.  Well, that's really interesting information.  
**0:38:29-0:38:46:**  And just stepping back a bit, what you were saying earlier on, going back to the social  side, it's just amazing how a diversity of produce, diversity, sorry, of production,  agricultural production has led to a diverse business, which has led to create a variety  
**0:38:46-0:38:59:**  of functions in the local, you know, social context, which is, you know, reuniting people,  creating a place where people can enjoy themselves and connecting and connect together, connecting  with the community.  
**0:38:59-0:39:06:**  It goes beyond farming.  And this is what's fascinating with what you've created there.  Well, okay.  
**0:39:06-0:39:24:**  Maybe now is the time to talk about agroforestry and to look at your systems of how you're  integrating turkeys and fruit trees and also asparagus in between fruit trees.  So it would be amazing to start with the turkeys and to tell us a bit about how your, I mean,  
**0:39:24-0:39:33:**  tell us a bit about how it works out in practice, how you're integrating the turkeys, you know,  what are they eating there?  How are you managing them?  
**0:39:33-0:39:38:**  If you could describe that system, it would be great.  Yeah.  Yeah.  
**0:39:38-0:39:54:**  The system is sort of based on something that we experienced when working with Mark Shepard  in Wisconsin, New Forest Farm.  And he had two acres of asparagus that was alley cropped between his chestnut trees,  
**0:39:54-0:40:02:**  these sort of hybrid chestnut trees.  Turns out chestnuts were probably a better bet for the application than apples.  But at our site, we wanted to grow fruit.  
**0:40:02-0:40:15:**  It was a good fruit growing site that was an interest and a market.  And so have chosen apples.  So our system is semi-dwarf rows of apples that are probably spaced roughly about 70  
**0:40:15-0:40:27:**  feet apart, 65 to 70 feet.  So that's quite a wide alley.  And those alleys contain the asparagus in five row beds.  
**0:40:27-0:40:45:**  So there's these two acres of asparagus spread out across a larger amount of acreage that  also contains semi-dwarf apple trees, peaches and pears.  And those alleys are also where the turkeys graze.  
**0:40:45-0:40:58:**  So there's kind of three elements there that are related to the income streams and sort  of cash flow and business side of the farm.  There's that fruit crop, there's the asparagus crop, and then there's the livestock, the  
**0:40:58-0:41:06:**  turkeys.  The asparagus grows in a living cover, which at one point was better managed and it was  actually like a planted cover crop.  
**0:41:06-0:41:23:**  It is now sort of a perennial forage that is a mix of legumes and broad leaves and grasses.  And so that's the food source for, well, part of the food source for the turkeys, obviously  they eat a ton of grain and so there's a grain input.  
**0:41:23-0:41:34:**  But the turkeys are both an energy driver of the system.  They're a pest control element to the system.  They do help with disease suppression to some, which I could get into.  
**0:41:34-0:41:42:**  And they are a short term cash flow thing.  So that's one of our biggest hurdles too, right?  When we're talking, we're interested in perennials.  
**0:41:42-0:41:56:**  Perennials often have not the greatest business models associated with them early on.  The cash flow is often a struggle and semi-dwarf apple trees are somewhere in the middle of  those, that long-lived perennial plan.  
**0:41:56-0:42:07:**  The apple trees probably are like more of like a seven year trajectory before you're  really having some harvestable and saleable yields.  The asparagus is much sooner.  
**0:42:07-0:42:15:**  It's in that three year range.  The turkeys are a six month turnaround typically of cash flow.  So have that other layer in the system.  
**0:42:15-0:42:29:**  Not only are they a driver of those biology and support the trees, they also help the  business model work from year one.  So not that necessarily worked well for us from year one or that we cash flowed positively  
**0:42:29-0:42:45:**  in year one or two, but it could for someone who knew more than we did getting started.  So you rotate the turkeys using netting, right?  Electric netting, is that correct?  
**0:42:45-0:42:54:**  So what does your rotation look like?  How often do you move them?  Yeah, I guess starting with the turkeys do start in a brooder, like in a barn setting.  
**0:42:54-0:43:08:**  So just filling out my organic certification recently, that's the confined animal step,  which is where these birds are all in one little spot in a brooder, staying safe, going  from one week old to three weeks old at three weeks or three and a half weeks.  
**0:43:08-0:43:21:**  They go out onto pasture in the form of a chicken tractor, essentially like a polyface  Joel Salatin style chicken tractor system.  So there's several of those.  
**0:43:21-0:43:37:**  There's four are used right now for 250 turkeys.  So those turkeys are spread between four tractors that are run down the alleys of those fruit  trees, typically under the drip line, kind of closer to the tree at that time.  
**0:43:37-0:43:49:**  We do have to be careful with all of our turkey management that we're adhering to the organic  standard of, for a fruit tree crop, it's 90 days of fresh manure being introduced into  the system.  
**0:43:49-0:44:08:**  So you can't put down say fresh manure, like either hand applied or by having an animal  there within 90 days of harvest of a crop that is grown on a tree.  So that's a key piece that would be better in the future for us to design around more  
**0:44:08-0:44:19:**  very specifically about when turkeys could be there when they can't.  But typically that allows us early summer to introduce them to the trees or post harvest  cleanup to the trees.  
**0:44:19-0:44:36:**  Otherwise they are totally in the alleys between the trees, which is that 60 to 70 foot alley  cropping area where the asparagus is.  Hopefully I'm doing a decent job explaining it because it is a very physical system to  
**0:44:36-0:44:48:**  envision how the trees are planted.  But so just to confirm something you're playing between placing them, the turkeys very close  to the trees in the chicken tractors, Salitan style chicken tractors vs placing them in  
**0:44:48-0:44:58:**  the middle, kind of grazing on top of or around the asparagus, or that would be after the  asparagus have been harvested.  So after April, and they would just be so you're playing with this and that enables  
**0:44:58-0:45:09:**  you to kind of be in control of this organic certification standard, right?  They can be they can be in this middle lane whilst the apples are being harvested, for  example.  
**0:45:09-0:45:12:**  Yeah, exactly.  Yeah.  Okay, nice.  
**0:45:12-0:45:21:**  So they're essentially in a different field.  They're in an area where harvest crew is not at all engaged in if you fence them in appropriately  into the alley.  
**0:45:21-0:45:38:**  But they can be let under the drip line because really the most influence on the tree is gained  from letting them under the drip line of the tree where they can help decompose leaves,  apple leaves, they can help decompose fruit, they can work around the soil.  
**0:45:38-0:45:51:**  And the trunk line is an effective area for them to work.  They will eat insects, they will eat rodents.  We do have rodent problems in New York State with trees, particularly voles.  
**0:45:51-0:46:04:**  I don't know if you have them where you are, but they're a huge problem in New York.  Little rodents that like to girdle fruit trees and kill trees for seemingly no reason, but  I'm sure they have a good reason.  
**0:46:04-0:46:17:**  Just for fun, you know, just to piss off the farmer.  But I mean, all of these things, I definitely want to get into them, of course.  But just to keep going with the understanding of the systems, we have a good idea of what  
**0:46:17-0:46:29:**  it looks like and then we'll break these down a bit step by step with each one.  So from brooder, brooder, three weeks they go into those Cherokee tractors as we call  them.  
**0:46:29-0:46:44:**  And then usually three to seven weeks of age, they're in the tractor because they're often  small and we have predation and they're difficult, very difficult to fence at small sizes.  So three to six weeks, three to seven, they go out into a day range system after that.  
**0:46:44-0:47:01:**  So that's where the netting comes in.  And they live in a mobile roost system that we built years ago that is still functional.  I saw like a blurry picture one time of something that someone had taken at Polyface Farm here  
**0:47:01-0:47:10:**  in America and it was a turkey roost thing.  I was like, that's genius.  And we tried to build one that immediately blew over and broke and we rebuilt it a second  
**0:47:10-0:47:18:**  time and it totally works now.  We make it differently now, but now there's some sounds like there's some great plans  online that people can just follow.  
**0:47:18-0:47:29:**  So we just we still use that.  We call it the turkey ark.  It's like a rolling roost system so it can be pulled with horses or a tractor.  
**0:47:29-0:47:45:**  And it's about 14 feet wide and 24 feet long, I think.  But it fits its 250 full sized turkeys is maybe pushing it for that ark system.  We added some extra roosts this past year, but I think we're trying to find that healthy  
**0:47:45-0:48:06:**  batch size of infrastructure that matches the turkey size that we need for both the  health of the flock and marketing purposes and ecological impact and 250 birds in a batch  seems to be a sweet spot we're finding our system is capable of fitting.  
**0:48:06-0:48:22:**  And I think that batch size or flock size is kind of important when thinking about how  much animal impact you're trying to have in how much time.  So with apples, particularly horticultural intensive crops like that, there's a few  
**0:48:22-0:48:36:**  windows when you can get in to introduce your animals and you need to have enough impact.  You need to have enough density of animals to come in and do a significant amount of  disruption or impact and then you need to pull them out and they have to go somewhere  
**0:48:36-0:48:42:**  else.  If you have too few animals, it's maybe not the most beneficial.  Yeah, that's really interesting.  
**0:48:42-0:48:50:**  When you say you have a small window, you have small windows of opportunity to integrate  the animals in the fruit systems.  Could you elaborate a bit on that?  
**0:48:50-0:48:59:**  What sets the limits?  Could you just explain why you say that?  Yeah, so the asparagus has a broader window.  
**0:48:59-0:49:16:**  Like you said, really after harvest and then the ferns are growing over the early summer  and kind of are maturing by mid to late summer and can handle animals in there because the  animals trump them down and trample them almost like they would pasture.  
**0:49:16-0:49:37:**  So the later in the season they get on the asparagus, the better.  The fruit trees, on the other hand, the animals could go in there early on in the spring.  We often have a management challenge in that apples are in our climate, humid, wet.  
**0:49:37-0:49:48:**  Fruit trees are horticulturally really intensive in our area and challenging to grow.  We have a lot of pest and disease problems.  So we have a spray program we use in the spring.  
**0:49:48-0:50:03:**  So we're bringing a tractor through there with a sprayer and that is a conflict between  livestock being right in that same zone.  So we've learned to work with the timing on that.  
**0:50:03-0:50:15:**  We've sprayed anywhere from two times in a season, which is too few really.  We've had some problems and up to like 15 times in a season when we've had severe problems  related to mismanagement to recover from problems.  
**0:50:15-0:50:25:**  So we're finding that apples are much more horticulturally intensive than we originally  thought.  So that's defined some of the system, which is one reason I would be very particular about  
**0:50:25-0:50:42:**  designing with apples in the future in our climate.  And so the windows are set by the management needs of intervening in the system plus the  harvesting, which is you need to be out 90 days, you said before.  
**0:50:42-0:50:52:**  Yeah, exactly.  OK, so that's what sets the kind of the window.  Yeah, between spray, kind of intensive spray time and then harvest time.  
**0:50:52-0:50:58:**  There is a early season window for us.  It's like June, July.  And then you can come in.  
**0:50:58-0:51:11:**  Apples start getting harvested in September and October.  So you can come in maybe late September, October and November to have animals that are coming  in as sort of a cleanup effort, which has a lot of labor reduction and ecological value  
**0:51:11-0:51:19:**  to us to have the animals come at the end of the season to.  OK, nice.  So that's really interesting.  
**0:51:19-0:51:29:**  And now let's start you start to mention many things here, many words, little sentences  that need to be dug in through.  This is why we're here.  
**0:51:29-0:51:38:**  So let me tell us a bit about this.  Tell us a bit about let's start with the leaves and the and the decomposition.  We know that in our and fruit culture, one of the problems is leaves that stay for too  
**0:51:38-0:51:44:**  long that can spread disease onto the trees.  So we want to have fast decomposition.  Right.  
**0:51:44-0:51:54:**  Just setting the scene here.  So tell us, how do the turkeys help with this?  Yeah, we manage the turkeys in kind of on the same mob grazing mentality that people  
**0:51:54-0:52:01:**  will graze cattle.  So high density of animals in a small amount of space that typically move one every one  to two days.  
**0:52:01-0:52:16:**  So depending on the forage quality, they are the paddock size that we set up with the fencing  is designed for a one to two day rotation.  The denser it is, the more impact they they have.  
**0:52:16-0:52:31:**  And we want that effect where where the birds once where they just left often looks to the  maybe the untrained eye looks like kind of like a disaster, like all of the grass has  been eaten down or tramped down into that map on the ground.  
**0:52:31-0:52:42:**  There's a blanket of manure everywhere.  There's some patches of bare soil where they've been scratching or messing with their water  and making a bare patch or something.  
**0:52:42-0:52:51:**  So there's there's a disruption that's happening.  They don't go back to those areas usually at all.  And if anything, there will be a second impact from turkeys later on in the year.  
**0:52:51-0:53:06:**  But usually it's a one once a year, but sometimes it's twice.  So it's a long rest period and a high impact kind of like you would with cows.  And that seems to do things like periodically keep the grass really short right up under  
**0:53:06-0:53:22:**  the trunk line, which is a labor intensive task to do with human power or requires very  expensive machinery to mow like that.  And it also has the benefit of matting the grass down instead of fully mowing it.  
**0:53:22-0:53:35:**  So you can get a better diversity of plants, maybe a little more protection on the soil.  And that blanket of manure combined with matting the grass down helps to decompose that leaf  litter more readily.  
**0:53:35-0:53:42:**  Which that, yeah, like you mentioned, leaf litter is a great harbor for disease, particularly  scab.  Yeah.  
**0:53:42-0:53:52:**  OK, nice.  And I read a study about this actually, that they were integrating poultry into forests  and they were seeing a much faster decomposition rate of the litter, which may be positive  
**0:53:52-0:54:00:**  or negative.  And, you know, it depends on the context.  I'm not saying in the forest it was necessarily a good thing, but definitely in this context,  
**0:54:00-0:54:06:**  I mean, this is something you're talking about that's also backed by science and that people  are monitoring in other contexts.  So that's really interesting.  
**0:54:06-0:54:18:**  It's probably something reliable that we can, you know, something that we can rely on as  a technique.  Yeah, because people also recommend spreading nitrogen based fertilizers as a decomposing  
**0:54:18-0:54:24:**  agent if you're not using animals.  Yeah.  OK.  
**0:54:24-0:54:37:**  So what about, you know, you started mentioning now the grasses and the weeding.  I mean, what I'm thinking in my head, you know, with the system that you described is  that if the turkeys, they intervene in an area underneath the apple trees, for example,  
**0:54:37-0:54:48:**  to clear it for the harvest, to keep things clean, et cetera.  But they have a 90 day period where they need to be out.  Well, the grass would have sprouted back, right, by that time and it would already be,  
**0:54:48-0:54:58:**  you know, relatively tall and need to be mowed again, right?  Is that correct?  Yeah, depending on the rainfall of the season, we definitely have to do some mowing.  
**0:54:58-0:55:12:**  And since we do a U-pick as well, like you definitely need to do a pre-harvest mowing  that's pretty tight in order to foot traffic, whether it's employees or customers.  So there is a mowing there.  
**0:55:12-0:55:19:**  Sometimes it's a little ragtag of a mowing.  The turkeys do a very thorough job.  It's usually not ragged at all.  
**0:55:19-0:55:29:**  It's pretty homogenous and they really, if they're at the right density, will do a very  detailed job.  Sometimes we'll do a quick pass of mowing with the tractor, but won't bother with the  
**0:55:29-0:55:39:**  tree, the row middles, as we call them, like between the trees.  That's the more labor intensive area to get with the hand work.  Are the turkeys having an impact on weeding as well?  
**0:55:39-0:55:50:**  For example, if they intervene at that window, you know, for example, around the springtime  or late spring, when there starts to be a bit of a competition, depending on your climate,  right?  
**0:55:50-0:55:56:**  But this, I don't know how it works exactly, but maybe on some years in your climate, it's  a challenge.  You start to have competition between the trees and the grasses.  
**0:55:56-0:56:09:**  Have you used the turkeys as a tool to manage the grasses and to give them a bit of a shock?  Is it a weeding tool as well for you?  Yeah, yeah, it absolutely can be.  
**0:56:09-0:56:23:**  Getting the right amount of animals to the right acreage and totally replacing our mowing  hasn't happened, but we do have understory control.  In our system, it's a perennial ground cover, so it's not really so much weeds as it is  
**0:56:23-0:56:42:**  just like the competition of understory, which we typically, with our apple management practice,  like to let it grow to what looks like a first hay cutting size.  So quite tall and kind of with the idea that it's going to add value to the soil, it is  
**0:56:42-0:56:55:**  going to trap fungal diseases more at a ground level.  So we do sort of an early June mowing is our first mowing when someone might cut hay around  here.  
**0:56:55-0:57:04:**  So we think that one adds value and we try to cut the ground cover loosely and lay it  down.  But later in the season, the turkeys will kind of pulse through and keep ground cover  
**0:57:04-0:57:17:**  managed for us at different levels as well as introducing that fertility, which I've  found, we took a year off from doing turkeys one year and really noticing impact from our  system.  
**0:57:17-0:57:30:**  Maybe our soil types and the ground cover competition really benefits from having some  energy nitrogen introduced into the system, which is, you know, in this context is largely  at least 70% of their diet is grain.  
**0:57:30-0:57:43:**  So they're getting that from, you know, that's where the energy is coming from for our system  is imported grain.  So you're not fertilizing with other imports of manure or any other, I mean, you're organic,  
**0:57:43-0:57:51:**  so you're not going to be bringing mineral nitrogen, but your nitrogen applications comes  from the turkeys solely.  Is that is that correct?  
**0:57:51-0:57:59:**  Yeah.  Yep.  We do some micronutrient foliar applications and we're fixing up an old row mulcher and  
**0:57:59-0:58:16:**  that's been a valuable tool.  So we have access to great affordable hardwood bark mulch and wood chips so that over time  can be a really great carbon nitrogen in like fertilizing input to the system, which also  
**0:58:16-0:58:28:**  is great for habitat of insects and seems to be a fun thing for the turkeys to kind  of dust bathe themselves in.  So wood chips are a powerful or bark mulch is a powerful input to the system too.  
**0:58:28-0:58:41:**  That brings up for me the idea of are you not worried that of excess nitrogen, you know,  and brought into the system by the turkeys?  Is that a problem that you've perceived in the past?  
**0:58:41-0:58:54:**  We've thought about it being a problem and usually experienced that we need more nitrogen  than or energy than we've had.  Our peaches have suffered a little bit from being low lower input.  
**0:58:54-0:59:03:**  They could definitely they probably could use some more supplementary compost or manures  besides just one pulse of turkeys.  And then our apple varieties.  
**0:59:03-0:59:19:**  One of the big keys with apples that would be the future generations of this farm hopefully  will be better off is assessing which root stocks and scion would match with what soil  type to create the perfect vigor of a tree.  
**0:59:19-0:59:34:**  So a tree that has like a balanced calm growth habit and fruiting habit that takes a minimal  amount of nitrogen inputs and so we found trees that were way too vigorous that needed  very little nitrogen and were way too big and we had to remove those trees or graft  
**0:59:34-0:59:48:**  them and we have ones that have totally rented out that have been too small and didn't have  a good combination of root stock and scion for our soil type.  So that's been a nuance that is definitely a multi-generational project.  
**0:59:48-0:59:54:**  For sure.  Hopefully that makes sense.  That's kind of a vague reading book.  
**0:59:54-1:00:12:**  I think it would make sense for somebody that knows about food culture.  I'm specializing myself in food culture and so for me I would ask you thousands of questions  about especially food culture but the problem is that would require another podcast that  
**1:00:12-1:00:24:**  have to start another podcast called fruit growing or something.  But this is about the forestry.  So let's talk about what you mentioned about pest control.  
**1:00:24-1:00:36:**  I'm really curious to know more about how the birds are having an impact on pests and  you also mentioned diseases.  So also maybe you can I mean we've talked a bit about it now with the leaves and etc.  
**1:00:36-1:00:47:**  but has this come from observations like all of your own observations to be able to see  that you know you've had a significant decline or increase in things with the animals?  I'd love to know to get into this topic.  
**1:00:47-1:01:01:**  Yeah it definitely is coming from observation.  We don't have I don't have any one I can talk to about raising turkeys in an orchard really.  I don't know anyone around here who does it so I would love to get more input from other  
**1:01:01-1:01:11:**  people.  I've heard you know some anecdotal things about chickens and we used to raise some geese  around here and I've talked to some other folks about geese but turkeys have their own  
**1:01:11-1:01:21:**  unique habits as well.  I think chickens would also do really well for a lot of the purposes that we're after  in some ways even better because they have more of a scratching habit than turkeys.  
**1:01:21-1:01:34:**  Turkeys don't so much scratch at the ground but turkeys are larger than chickens and that's  why one reason we like them a lot so their impact is greater.  They're heavier and they're like four times the size of a chicken and their impact is  
**1:01:34-1:01:48:**  just that much greater and their appetite that much greater.  So yeah I mentioned it before but apples in our climate have a ton of insect and pest  and disease problems.  
**1:01:48-1:01:58:**  It's one of the more seems like one of the more horticulturally challenging places to  grow them definitely farther southern US like down to North Carolina it's extremely challenging  in some regards.  
**1:01:58-1:02:18:**  So any help we can get is great because there's a wide array of spray applications you can  do for organics but horticultural practices seem to be much preferred.  So the turkeys have the benefit of cleaning up fruit drops and helping decompose fruit  
**1:02:18-1:02:39:**  drops is one big benefit and those leaf drops that decomposing action is really helpful.  So they are sometimes consuming the fruit or if not just sort of like pecking on it,  stomping on it, layering manure on it and decomposing it and also finding insects that  
**1:02:39-1:02:56:**  are in it if it's a drop because there was maybe a curculio sting or larva of some sort  inside that fruit.  They are messing, they're sort of ravenously working around the base of a trunk of a tree  
**1:02:56-1:03:09:**  and are pulling insects that might be coming down from the tree and harboring in the soil.  They're able to feed on those.  They don't have any really impact on say, impacts of insects that fly from the tree  
**1:03:09-1:03:27:**  to a hedgerow and have their life cycle and fly back but they do some with the disruption  of the fruit drops and the late season kind of leftover harvest drops and then that decomposing  of soil, of leaf litter on the soil which harbors a lot of diseases in our area but  
**1:03:27-1:03:51:**  I mentioned apple scab is a large one and I'll butcher the name of this one but Marcininia.  Blotch is this emerging, very defoliating, challenging leaf pathogen that helps if you  can decompose and get rid of leaf litter and so animals, nitrogen, all that help to break  
**1:03:51-1:04:00:**  that down.  What happened when you didn't include the turkeys?  Did you notice like apart from the nitrogen thing and the vigor thing that you talked  
**1:04:00-1:04:11:**  about, did you notice differences in pests?  Yeah, I know insect front, I wish I could say that I definitely saw a difference when  we didn't have the turkeys in there.  
**1:04:11-1:04:25:**  The nitrogen was the more standout issue from areas that didn't get the impact.  The voles are a standout issue where it's very clear where there's vole activity.  They're a much bigger animal to follow what they're doing.  
**1:04:25-1:04:42:**  They're in their vole trails and their habits and they're girdling of trees and the areas  they have impact.  So that's very clear but we haven't done enough trialing to decisively say curculio pressure  
**1:04:42-1:05:01:**  was much less or maybe some of the moth pressures were much less because there was this impact.  I would have to be more scientific about it I guess and do some controls and see if it's  so anecdotally I can say for sure but just seeing the action that they have on the understory  
**1:05:01-1:05:19:**  and the fruit drops and leaf drops, those are practices that I have encouraged as growers  to do and the fact that you can get animals to do them for you makes you feel like okay  they are having an impact that I'm otherwise sort of should be obligated to go do myself.  
**1:05:19-1:05:39:**  So you've really noticed that the turkeys help you in terms of management costs.  There's like an over yielding management efficiency if we can compare to the over yielding poly  culture concepts where you put two cultures together and overall in some contexts and  
**1:05:39-1:05:50:**  in certain conditions you can get a higher production of biomass for example which is  something we typically talk about in agroforestry but we can compare that to the management  costs.  
**1:05:50-1:06:05:**  This is very interesting to hear and I'm curious to know more about it.  Anything that those turkeys are doing that we would otherwise have in our management  plan for apples is a reduction in hourly labor costs.  
**1:06:05-1:06:19:**  Everything we do on the farm gets paid hourly.  I used to do a lot of free unpaid labor and now everything is paid and has at least a  $1 an hour US dollar kind of price tag to it.  
**1:06:19-1:06:35:**  So and oftentimes more if there's equipment involved, the tractor costs are higher and  opportunity cost is another thing and so the costs are quite high with human intervention.  It's like our highest cost in the whole farm and business across the board, a third of  
**1:06:35-1:06:48:**  all of our expenses are labor related.  So anything an animal will do just by the nature of its existence is awesome and it's  saving us energy and effort and expense.  
**1:06:48-1:07:05:**  So we would have to be mowing tightly around those trees which is labor intensive.  We would have to be spreading more fertilizer and wood chips and that gets done within the  one hour of daily chores that go into the turkey rotation and there's value derived  
**1:07:05-1:07:18:**  from that and on the sort of turkey yield side too that pays for all that labor.  So it makes both budgets look more appealing.  And whilst creating value for you, right?  
**1:07:18-1:07:27:**  Yeah.  I mean economic value as well, like a product that you can sell.  Okay, that's super interesting.  
**1:07:27-1:07:42:**  And for me, you talked about chicken and scratching and that the turkey scratch less and you said  that if they were scratching more, it could be more beneficial.  Now that may seem counterintuitive for some and especially in context where you have,  
**1:07:42-1:07:58:**  for example, lots of mulch set around your trees to control the weed pressure, which  is very common technique, especially in the agro-ecological world.  And so I'm curious to know why you mentioned that scratching could be more beneficial for  
**1:07:58-1:08:06:**  your context.  Right, right.  Yeah, the system they're in right now doesn't have, there's haphazard mulch, but not mulch  
**1:08:06-1:08:18:**  that would be, is no longer for weed suppression right around the trunk.  We used to, when the early stages of tree growth, we did have mulch like that and maybe  I would be a little annoyed if the animals totally scratched it away from the base of  
**1:08:18-1:08:28:**  a young tree.  I should say that turkeys are big enough that they will kill young trees.  So it's not something for, it's not something for two year old trees.  
**1:08:28-1:08:37:**  They'll, especially in like a dry year, they'll try to peck at the bark of young trees.  Young trees have like tender buds and tender bark.  It's delicious.  
**1:08:37-1:08:48:**  And they will go after those so they can't be fenced into those until that tree starts  to get a little more juvenile and has real branches and has some real bark that isn't  super tender.  
**1:08:48-1:08:57:**  You need to put tree guards in this case.  Yeah, even with the tree guard, a turkey is tall enough that it will eat above the tree  guard when it's in its later stages of life.  
**1:08:57-1:09:05:**  The turkey is pretty big and it will eat above a tree guard if it's a tiny, like one to two  year old tree.  I wouldn't put them in there.  
**1:09:05-1:09:14:**  If you grow a really good three year old tree, I would put them in there.  A tree that maybe is close to standing six feet tall and has some branches.  Okay.  
**1:09:14-1:09:17:**  Okay.  That's very interesting.  Yeah.  
**1:09:17-1:09:28:**  So mulch has been part of the system early on.  We have dwarf orchards as well.  So we have orchards that are on trellis that have mulch underneath them routinely.  
**1:09:28-1:09:38:**  And we haven't done too much trials with the turkeys in there.  They do scratch that.  Chickens would probably scratch it more, but the desirable part of scratching like you  
**1:09:38-1:09:52:**  had asked is I think you get the enhanced insect control benefit.  It's also more of a decomposing action too.  When they're stirring up litter underneath the trees, they're burying leaves and they're  
**1:09:52-1:10:02:**  kind of blanking and creating their own composting layer.  But they are going after insects more readily, which might be hiding under tufts of grass  or in the top layer of the soil.  
**1:10:02-1:10:19:**  They're able to use their talons and get in there and open it up and get after them.  So chickens seem like they're a little more adept.  They're less like Godzilla and more like velociraptors or something and are able to get after those  
**1:10:19-1:10:23:**  insects more agilely.  Okay.  Interesting.  
**1:10:23-1:10:30:**  All right.  That's really interesting.  So again, it shows that depending on your context, depending on your system, that would  
**1:10:30-1:10:38:**  be or not an interesting feature to have more scratching or less.  Again, it always goes back to this.  So it depends on your context.  
**1:10:38-1:10:52:**  I know on our farm in Greece, we would not want to have that because everything's mulched  kind of closely because of this humidity problem and we're trying to conserve as much as possible.  And so we would be really pissed off if some chicken went in there and just scratched everything  
**1:10:52-1:11:00:**  all over the place and spread out kind of that buffer layer from temperatures and humidity  loss.  Right.  
**1:11:00-1:11:15:**  Yeah, we were geared up to have a 500 or 1000 bird egg layer flock two years ago, but had  to, at least things were too complex, we had to decide not to go down that road.  We thought it'd be very desirable to have them as part of the farm for those reasons.  
**1:11:15-1:11:31:**  But we pulled the plug on that project before we got started.  Maybe some.  So we've talked a lot about the benefits of the turkeys and what about some of the key  
**1:11:31-1:11:46:**  challenges of the turkeys?  I mean, have you seen impacts from the turkeys that you have, you know, that you'd have to  manage or that created some labour costs for you or things that you would rather not have  
**1:11:46-1:11:56:**  happened?  How does the turkey create some kind of challenge beyond, I mean, we've talked already about  the management cost of the management challenge of having the turkeys and the spraying happen  
**1:11:56-1:12:05:**  at the same time, which is a bit, you know, creates a limit.  But beyond that, what other problems have you and challenges have you experienced with  them in the orchard?  
**1:12:05-1:12:19:**  Yeah, the introduction of raw manures, like we've mentioned something we have to be thoughtful  of and it's been somewhat limiting sometimes is getting them around the trees at the right  time.  
**1:12:19-1:12:33:**  And you can only typically turkeys actually do herd fairly well.  Like you can group them up, not in a fence, and you can walk them with four or five people  into a whole nother, you know, walk them a half a mile away if you really wanted to,  
**1:12:33-1:12:39:**  which is different than chickens.  It's a little harder to do that, like put them in a group and push them with like sort  of a human energy.  
**1:12:39-1:12:52:**  So but they are limited a little bit in how they can move around the farm.  So you have to have this timing really good of like where can they be with the right impact  at the right time.  
**1:12:52-1:13:09:**  The turkeys themselves, I guess, for challenges with them, a big breakthrough came when we  put together that turkey arc system, that rolling roost system that the polyface farm  had figured out.  
**1:13:09-1:13:20:**  That would dramatically reduce the effort of taking care of the turkeys from protecting  them from predation.  So they in that roost system, they climb up to it at night and roost high like they want  
**1:13:20-1:13:32:**  to do naturally.  And then they come down in the morning whenever they're ready to versus having to be out there  in the morning first thing to let them out of a coop or get them, stuff them into a coop  
**1:13:32-1:13:41:**  that they don't want to go into at night.  So that would happen anywhere within the orchard or not.  But that was a large breakthrough is having that arc system for turkeys.  
**1:13:41-1:13:58:**  It's really key to their pasture health and safety.  And then damage to young trees, I guess, is one thing that we've learned and seeing how  they will, what size tree is OK for a turkey to be around and introducing them to the dwarf  
**1:13:58-1:14:05:**  orchard.  We're noticing that they will, if the forage isn't rotated quickly enough, they will go  after low hanging branches.  
**1:14:05-1:14:17:**  They're tall enough that they can get the bottom layer of trellised branches.  And that's a bummer.  So some interaction with the leaves and buds is to be expected.  
**1:14:17-1:14:28:**  But if they were left too long in a dwarf orchard, the trees are much more vulnerable  than semi-dwarf.  And chickens would not have that issue as much because they're just physically so much  
**1:14:28-1:14:40:**  shorter.  The turkey neck is quite long and they can reach quite high if they're bored.  I think we've covered a bit the turkey out one.  
**1:14:40-1:14:55:**  We could go into much more detail, but you've brought up some really interesting considerations  and some really interesting different aspects.  One of the things that I'm curious to know about is, do you think, based on your experience,  
**1:14:55-1:15:05:**  that we could scale these kind of systems?  A farmer that has, you know, where we're working, where I'm working at the moment with 10 hectares  and he's got lots of these issues as well, he's trying to manage for pests and disease  
**1:15:05-1:15:18:**  problems, he's trying to manage the decomposition of his litter.  He's managing all of this mechanically and with sprays, which is huge labour costs.  If a farmer like this wanted to implement such a system, do you think it's possible?  
**1:15:18-1:15:29:**  And I'd also like us to focus a bit on the mechanisation here as well.  How would that impact the mechanisation based on your experience?  How scalable is this?  
**1:15:29-1:15:45:**  I think absolutely scalable in my experience.  We're trying to scale it a little more over time, taking a slow approach because we're  first generation farmers and perennials are both expensive and time consuming and you  
**1:15:45-1:15:56:**  want to make sure you do them right.  I've definitely, this spring actually tore out a couple of acres of trees I planted eight  years prior and feeling like I'd done the wrong thing and had to kind of tear out the  
**1:15:56-1:16:11:**  juvenile several hundred trees that were not the right thing.  So we're taking a slower approach to scaling now, but I think people with a lot more experience  than we have could scale faster or larger.  
**1:16:11-1:16:32:**  One thing I've been talking with some of our staff about is orchards and apples in particular.  I don't know if they're the best suited for scaling because it's definitely a, because  of their horticultural intensity and orchard, we are very demanding of what we expect from  
**1:16:32-1:16:45:**  an orchard.  We want these clonal trees to live in close proximity to each other in very uniform plantings  and produce like with all these human needs on them to be either yielding at a certain  
**1:16:45-1:17:03:**  level, branching a certain way, just like a very demanding system from where they maybe  have originated from and were in evolutionary terms maybe asking too much of them too soon  and just asking for a lot of like labor and input costs and challenges with putting, packing  
**1:17:03-1:17:17:**  these trees in here per acre.  So I think one of the best opportunities with these trees and maybe a lot of trees in farm  systems is to, particularly ones that have pest and disease problems is to alley crop  
**1:17:17-1:17:36:**  and is to space them really far apart and to have more of a hedgerow edge effect happening  with these tree crops so they can scale over a larger landscape.  I think they just have to be in the right density to each other and not to reduce like  
**1:17:36-1:17:56:**  these kind of heavy industrial inputs that are often required when you pack a bunch of  these trees in the same space, if that makes any sense.  And then I think the infrastructure for harvesting and mechanizing the production of apples is  
**1:17:56-1:18:12:**  all there and these industries have a ton of the, you know, all the right equipment  and harvesting modalities and stuff figured out.  So relying on those is, seems totally doable.  
**1:18:12-1:18:28:**  But when trees are at lower densities, your efficiency and use of that equipment and cost  of land is higher.  So there's all these sort of things that maybe go negative on your spreadsheet and your budget  
**1:18:28-1:18:39:**  for a plan.  But I think it's outweighed by what you were talking about, that over yielding aspect of  a system as a whole, if you can manage the complexity.  
**1:18:39-1:18:50:**  And I think keeping the complexity as low as possible when you start is the best.  I certainly need to keep it low and so much to learn still.  But like three elements, that's a lot of elements.  
**1:18:50-1:19:04:**  There's a lot of interactions in those elements.  So two elements like tree and alley crop kind of system, that's plenty to figure out the  nuance of each of those crops themselves and then how they interact.  
**1:19:04-1:19:19:**  And I would say that would allow it to be more scalable if you start with simplicity  and maybe not starting with the most horticulturally intensive crops to interact with each other.  Yeah, yeah, makes sense.  
**1:19:19-1:19:27:**  What about the turkey elements?  What about scaling with the turkey element?  Do you think that integrating turkeys in the way that you've been doing, is that something  
**1:19:27-1:19:43:**  that we could, you know, scale up to larger?  Yeah, so is this, you know, as the orchard grows in size, also the turkey flock grows  in size and all the other kind of management practices based on mechanization as they also  
**1:19:43-1:19:51:**  evolve with the growing orchard.  Is that something that you think is scalable?  It has to be done by a small scale farmer.  
**1:19:51-1:20:10:**  I think it can be scalable in size, but I think it does need to scale with people.  I think I've mentioned, I guess, polyface behind a couple of times already, but I would  mention them again as a place that's showing scaling, small scale poultry production that  
**1:20:10-1:20:28:**  still has a high level of contact, of human contact in the system where instead of one  person managing more and more and more birds, it's often having that right size flock, that  healthy size flock and one person managing a reasonable amount of those flocks across  
**1:20:28-1:20:42:**  the right amount of landscape.  And then if you need to grow from there, another person coming in to manage a similar size  healthy unit and not trying to scale that like flock size or unit size is the way that  
**1:20:42-1:20:54:**  that could grow.  So I think you could have, I think it has been proven that you can have really efficient  production of, it's not inefficient to produce poultry this way.  
**1:20:54-1:21:09:**  There is a higher cost to the customer oftentimes than industrial processed products, but we  know that you're paying more of the true cost there.  There's less hidden costs than you do get with industrialized poultry production.  
**1:21:09-1:21:27:**  That just is such a failing system that a scalable alternative where it comes with more  true costs is totally appealing, I think, to most folks now.  One of the things we're seeing where we're working is people integrating sheep.  
**1:21:27-1:21:43:**  And so there's a farmer that has some sheep and that will place them in between vineyards  and within not orchards, but more in between the vineyards and on the cover crops of broadacre  crops, which in Switzerland is quite small areas.  
**1:21:43-1:21:54:**  It's not very, very large.  And there's been some interesting integrations there with two people managing it because  one person is professional in sheep and the other person is professional in trees or vineyards  
**1:21:54-1:22:04:**  or broadacre.  And so the broadacre farmer doesn't have to start learning how to manage sheep, which  can be complex as you're saying at scale.  
**1:22:04-1:22:17:**  And so it's kind of like the sheep farmer benefits from the cover crop and the broadacre  farmer benefits from nutrient cycling from the sheep in his cover crop.  And so there's a mutual benefit there that also happens to be funded by the government  
**1:22:17-1:22:23:**  partly, which motivates people to do it, which needs to be mentioned.  But yeah, that's fantastic.  Yeah, yeah.  
**1:22:23-1:22:39:**  You know, so that could be something interesting to do with turkeys as well.  But anyways, I think we've covered a lot of different aspects of your farm and the turkey  agroforestry.  
**1:22:39-1:22:58:**  We didn't manage to get into the asparagus so much, but we had to focus because otherwise  we would have not been able to reach the depth that was necessary for the turkey integration.  So yeah, thank you so much, Garrett, for sharing your story and sharing your experience and  
**1:22:58-1:23:01:**  knowledge here.  It's really appreciated.  Yeah, absolutely.  
**1:23:01-1:23:11:**  Yeah, I appreciate the work you guys are doing.  It's awesome to hear these stories of other people.  I got to hear a couple of stories of people who are right nearby that have been fascinating,  
**1:23:11-1:23:18:**  people who are almost my neighbors here.  And the Finger Lakes and yeah, love the work you guys are doing.  Happy to participate.  
**1:23:18-1:23:32:**  Thanks for asking me.  If you've made it this far, I'd like to invite you to consider supporting us.  We run the podcast after our day jobs and assume all the running costs.  
**1:23:32-1:23:43:**  Any small contribution would help us to keep going with the show.  It's very easy to do.  Just head to our website under the support us tab and page is a gumroad app that enables  
**1:23:43-1:24:08:**  you to make payments online.  So thanks a lot for considering us and we look forward seeing you next time.  