---
title: 19 Planting Trees To Build Capital And Reach Conservation Goals With Rowan Reid
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2021-04-20)  

**0:00:00-0:00:16:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:23-0:00:27:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  these challenges.  
**0:00:33-0:00:38:**  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Hello and welcome to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:00:48-0:00:56:**  I'm your host Dimitri and today we interviewed Rowan Reed from Bambra Agroforestry Farm.  Wood production is considered one of the pillars of agroforestry where we often talk about  intercropping poplars with corn crop for example.  
**0:01:06-0:01:12:**  Poplar being sold as a wood product, a timber product in the market.  Today we were able to interview Rowan and get some of his...  Today interviewing Rowan we tapped into some of his 30 years of experience in research,  
**0:01:25-0:01:29:**  academics and farming.  Rowan believes that there are opportunities for all farmers to plant trees and that they  can benefit their lands in terms of ecosystem services and they can benefit their farm economy  
**0:01:40-0:01:43:**  with high quality wood.  This interview helps us understand why and how farmers should use these trees on their  landscape.  
**0:01:48-0:01:50:**  What is the right scale?  Where to plant the trees on the landscape?  What to expect in terms of financial return and how does risk come into play?  
**0:01:57-0:02:02:**  We address here some of the key strategic considerations but if you want to find out  more you have to look at Rowan's book, Heartwood the Art and Science of Growing Trees for Conservation  and Profit and you can find the link in the interview description below.  
**0:02:12-0:02:14:**  So we hope you enjoy.  So hello Rowan, welcome on the podcast.  Well hi Dimitri, thanks for inviting me on, that's excellent, thank you.  
**0:02:21-0:02:27:**  Cool, Rowan it would be really great to start with a bit of your background.  Okay, for those who know accents, they might pick up on Australian and our property is  in the southern part of Australia which I think is about on the 37th latitude so for  
**0:02:42-0:02:48:**  those who are up in the north it might be equivalent to California and across to Paris  or that sort of level.  My background, I'm a forest scientist and I studied forest science and went on to work  
**0:02:56-0:03:02:**  at Melbourne University as a senior lecturer lecturing in agroforestry for 20 years but  I left there 10 years ago to return to the farm that my family and I set up back in 1987  and that's mainly what I do.  
**0:03:12-0:03:18:**  I work on a farm that produces timber and has animals grazing and we call it the Bamber  Agroforestry Farm and I use it for educational purposes, to running tours, producing our  own timber for various projects and my own research and learning about trees and how  
**0:03:32-0:03:36:**  they fit into the farming systems.  Okay nice, could you tell us a bit more about Bamber Agroforestry Farm, what trees do you  produce, what scale are you working at, where is it located in terms of what's the soil  
**0:03:45-0:03:48:**  and climate context you're in?  Well in the Australian context it's a very small farm, 42 hectares in size.  Back in 1987 when we purchased the property it was originally part of a dairy farm so  
**0:04:00-0:04:04:**  it had, it was just the paddocks really, it had no buildings on it other than the hay  shed, no internal fences really, it was highly degraded, long water courses, there was a  little bit of remnant vegetation.  
**0:04:14-0:04:20:**  The climate in this area is very temperate, we have winter rainfall and increasingly hot  summers.  And for those who watch the bushfires that often occur in Australia, we have possibly  
**0:04:26-0:04:31:**  one of the worst regions in the world for bushfires, so our summers can be hot and dry  and very windy with low humidity winds and that for tree growing puts a lot of stress  on the species that you plant.  
**0:04:41-0:04:48:**  We don't do any watering of course, that's far too expensive, so we grow about 70 different  species for high quality timber.  They're both Australian native species, North American species, European species and increasingly  
**0:04:58-0:05:00:**  subtropical species.  I believe our temperature has increased by about one degree in the 30 years we've been  here and drought stress is increasing, even if the rainfall stays the same, increasing  
**0:05:13-0:05:15:**  temperatures put a lot more drought stress on the trees.  So on the farm now we've integrated those 70 species, primarily planted them for soil  conservation, shelter, biodiversity, aesthetics and fire protection, but we manage all those  
**0:05:29-0:05:35:**  trees for timber and where we have grazing it's like a parkland where we graze between  the trees and the main purpose for grazing on this property, we use sheep, is to control  the fire hazard and also to control the weed growth.  
**0:05:47-0:05:52:**  Exotic weeds like blackberry, if you fence an area out they go rampant, so grazing with  sheep helps me manage the forestry component.  Other people in the area farm, plant trees and their dominant interest is the agriculture  
**0:06:03-0:06:05:**  and their trees support the agriculture.  For me it's really the grazing component supporting the forestry component.  How many, out of curiosity, how many sheep are you grazing on your 42 hectares?  
**0:06:17-0:06:25:**  Well originally for the first 20 years or so I owned 400 weathers, sheep just for wool,  but now my neighbour runs 250 breeding ewes on the property.  That's because I travel overseas and around the country before COVID a lot and I don't  
**0:06:35-0:06:40:**  have the time to manage the sheep and it's almost a direct neighbour who's utilising  the property for breeding ewes.  It's a great lambing farm she tells me because it's very well sheltered.  
**0:06:48-0:06:54:**  The sheep certainly benefit from the acorns and the prunings that are provided in autumn  and winter and because of my interest in agroforestry I'm obviously very interested in those agricultural  benefits that I'm able to deliver.  
**0:07:04-0:07:10:**  The return from that for me is adjustment income that comes from the sheep.  Rowan I was curious, before you took over the farm were they also producing timber on  the farm or was it just an open pasture?  
**0:07:20-0:07:24:**  What were the practices before you took over?  Well when I took over back in 1987 almost no farmers would be involved in timber production.  So no there was no timber production on this farm or any of the neighbouring farms really.  
**0:07:38-0:07:43:**  There were some remnant trees that had come up after the Second World War, natural regrowth  when there was not enough labour around to control the control the regrowth, just eucalypts,  but none of that was managed.  
**0:07:51-0:07:57:**  Part of my interest in setting it up was actually to make forestry, the production of timber  but also the management of trees on farms attractive to farmers because as a forester  I saw a great opportunity for trees to contribute to improving land management but also improving  
**0:08:10-0:08:15:**  animal welfare and agricultural productivity on the family farm.  So no, forestry is not very common, it's not like Scandinavia or Eastern Europe where many  families have been involved in forestry for a long period of time.  
**0:08:27-0:08:34:**  Almost no farmers back in the 80s were involved in timber production and with my family been  involved with farming for over 100 years, sheep farming and dairy farming and my interest  in forestry I just wanted to bring those together and explore that opportunity for mutual benefit  
**0:08:46-0:08:47:**  really.  Okay, and you say that you started to see benefits, potential benefits of including  the trees on farms and I'm curious as to where that came from, where did you get this experience,  
**0:09:00-0:09:03:**  where did that come from?  Well I think back when I was studying in Forest Scientist, as a Forest Scientist there was  a growing interest in what we call land care in Australia, the involvement of farmers and  
**0:09:14-0:09:20:**  their neighbours in the active management of the land to control land degradation, soil  erosion what we call dry land salinity problems here, loss of biodiversity, these things were  being recognised back in the early 1980s as serious environmental issues as they certainly  
**0:09:33-0:09:35:**  are in Australia.  If you look at the Australian landscape since colonisation and the removal of the indigenous  people and their land management practices, we've had a dramatic extinction rate of plants  
**0:09:49-0:09:56:**  and native animals from the rural landscape and to my conservation minded friends who  tell me about the blockades in the forest and why they want to stop logging of native  forest, I say to them that the real environmental issue in Australia is not happening at the  
**0:10:07-0:10:13:**  forest blockade, it's occurring at the family farm front gate and that's confronting for  a lot of people because the conservation movement will not go out and protest against farmers  but I don't see it as a protest against farmers, I see it a need to work with the farming community  
**0:10:25-0:10:32:**  to find ways that we can restore the landscape while retaining its productivity and so there  was sort of nothing new in that except for the fact that most people involved in conservation  on farming land would see it as a practice that involves fencing out some degraded land,  
**0:10:44-0:10:50:**  locking it up effectively and letting nature take its course.  I say that with inverted commas because I get frustrated at that term and my real concern  is getting people to actively manage the vegetation that they plant and to also explore how the  
**0:11:06-0:11:12:**  act of cutting down a tree can be good for the environmental outcomes and I'd like to  explore that in this podcast because where trees are needed in the agricultural landscape,  whether it's for conservation or shelter and if we have 5 or 10 or 15 percent of the farm  
**0:11:25-0:11:31:**  planted to trees, if it's done well and strategically and well targeted, it's not going to reduce  agricultural production, it's actually going to reduce the risks of dramatic stock losses  or severe soil erosion in those big storm events or in those heat waves or cold patches.  
**0:11:46-0:11:51:**  So we're not talking about replacing agriculture at all, we're trying to work out what the  most effective way to fit trees first of all into the farming landscape and then secondly  and this is the part that I spend most of my time working on, how can you actually actively  
**0:12:03-0:12:11:**  manage those trees for a commercial outcome and it could be timber, other people in our  area produce native foods, native flowers, some people are in nut production, my focus  on this farm tends to be timber because it's something that fits more neatly with less  
**0:12:25-0:12:32:**  intensive agricultural systems such as grazing. Intensive nut production and bush food production  and flower production is tending towards horticultural activities and needs a lot more active management  than the multiple use of a forest for timber as one of its products.  
**0:12:44-0:12:50:**  Okay that's a fantastic introduction, that gives us a lot to unpack and actually that  leads on very nicely to one of the key topics that we wanted to talk about and that's one  of the things you really specialize in which is producing high quality timber. So you've  
**0:13:05-0:13:11:**  written this fantastic book called Heartwood where you discuss in a lot more detail how  you produce high quality timber for many different species but it would be really good if you  could tell us now on the podcast a bit of a summary of why are you focusing on this  
**0:13:21-0:13:27:**  high quality timber and how do you do so as well, what are the kind of the silvicultural  management practices that you have to put into place throughout the life cycle of the  tree to reach that high quality? Okay so it goes right back to what I was talking about  
**0:13:38-0:13:43:**  for that multi-purpose design. Take the eroded creek that runs through the center of our  property. If I'm going to plant trees to control soil degradation, improve biodiversity, provide  shelter to adjacent paddocks, in this case I fenced out the creek and I planted a range  
**0:13:54-0:14:02:**  of species. So the first silvicultural decision I had to make was if I want timber to be one  of the suite of products that I produce from this planting along the creek, what species  should I plant? I wanted it to be native species because of its place in the landscape and  
**0:14:14-0:14:20:**  the biodiversity values so I didn't plant any introduced species but I didn't necessarily  just plant what grows naturally in this location. So I used a range of Australian native species,  some from this region, some from the tropics, subtropical regions because of climate change  
**0:14:36-0:14:42:**  and I incorporated those into the planting. So the first silvicultural step was plant  a range of species so that I could set the forest up so it not only produced the environmental  values but had the opportunity or the base from which to work from to start managing  
**0:14:55-0:15:02:**  that intensively for high quality. Now the point about high quality is really high value.  Now if you're going to harvest a conventional plantation for timber, you can use economy  of scale, large scale clear felling to harvest thousands of trees in one day using a large  
**0:15:17-0:15:22:**  machinery, clear fill the whole site, load up the truck, send it away and where that  is done for chipwood in our area, the individual trees might be worth between $5 and $10 per  tree. Now I'm not going to be able to efficiently and economically and viably harvest a tree  
**0:15:38-0:15:44:**  if it's only worth $5 or $10 if I'm only taking out one or two trees from a particular site,  if I'm using a chainsaw and a farm tractor to do the extraction work and I haven't got  a complete load for a log truck. So I have to look very differently. I have to make the  
**0:15:54-0:16:01:**  individual tree worth hundreds of dollars and that's been our aim from the start. Have  a tree that's, what do I need to do in terms of management of the individual trees to make  them worth more than $100 so that I can come in and say yes today I'm going to take one  
**0:16:12-0:16:18:**  tree and that one tree with a chainsaw and a logging winch on the tractor and a front  end loader, I can extract that log and now we take that log up to a sawmill, we mill  it, put the timber in a kiln and dry it and get hundreds of dollars value for that timber.  
**0:16:30-0:16:35:**  So what is it that can make that tree more valuable? Now the first thing is obviously  size, the volume of that tree. So what we do is we space our trees to promote diameter  growth. So thinning is very important in the forest. So we thin down where we grow trees  
**0:16:50-0:16:56:**  out in the past in paddocks. I describe it as a parkland not a plantation. Between our  hardwoods like the eucalypts and even the English oak there'll be more than 10 meters  between the trees after they've been managed for a few years and thinned down to their  
**0:17:06-0:17:11:**  final spacing. Now thinning gives me diameter growth and we're being able to retrieve trees  like eucalypts, poplars, redwoods in approaching 80, 90 centimeters in diameter in 30 years  and that's by giving them space. But thinning alone is not going to give you value if you  
**0:17:26-0:17:32:**  don't prune because if you thin but don't prune the branches off, all the branches will  do is get larger and larger and they'll destroy your wood quality. Large branches, large knots  in the timber. So we thin and prune and pruning involves removing the branches off the lower  
**0:17:44-0:17:50:**  part of the stem going up as high as 8 meters in some species, mostly about 6 but specialty  species maybe only 4 or 5 meters up the tree and by removing those lower branches as the  tree grows usually in the first 10 years or so of growth, we can then by thinning concentrate  
**0:18:05-0:18:11:**  growth on a stem that is straight. We don't retain through our thinning, we cull all the  crooked trees. We select the straight trees of the best species that aren't disease free  and we put growth on a straight stem over a period of time and do rapid growth by having  
**0:18:26-0:18:32:**  wide spacing in diameter. Now in the creek system I described, we have a range of species.  So our dominant species which is the fast growing eucalypts, they've been thinned down  to a distance between them of 10 and 15 meters. Between them I'm actually growing high value  
**0:18:44-0:18:49:**  rainforest type species, shade tolerant trees that I'm also thinning and pruning which will  take over the space once I've removed the over story of eucalypt trees. So when you're  doing thinning, you can have mixed age classes because you have more space between your dominant  
**0:19:01-0:19:07:**  trees but the younger age class or the lower age class must be more shade tolerant because  they've got to grow below a canopy. So we can't grow eucalypts. They're sun loving species.  You can't grow eucalypts under eucalypts but you can grow a lot of rainforest species that  
**0:19:18-0:19:23:**  actually grow quite well in the shade and when I take the eucalypts out as they approach  now 80, 90 almost a meter in diameter, I'm selectively removing those. I don't end up  with a clear paddock or a clear spot because I've already got younger trees coming up to  
**0:19:36-0:19:44:**  take their spot. So high quality is about making the whole system viable because timber  is not the primary purpose of the planting. If timber was the primary purpose, then you  do large scale block plantings and get scale, economies of scale. But most farmers can't  
**0:19:56-0:20:01:**  afford to put 10 hectares under one species in a large monoculture. They actually don't  want to do that because it's highly risky economically to plant trees for only one purpose.  But if you've got a multi-purpose plantation, it's really focused on trying to ensure that  
**0:20:14-0:20:22:**  the extraction of value, in this case timber, is viable despite the fact that you don't  have the economies of scale and the access issues and other values that you might have  in a dedicated timber plot. So we need to do forestry better than large scale timber  
**0:20:33-0:20:39:**  producers because they have economies of scale. We have to have quality in terms of our standing  timber and that's mainly achieved through silvicultural management and we also have  to have a value chain. Now unfortunately there's not much opportunity for me to sell logs off  
**0:20:53-0:21:00:**  the farm now because there's no sawmills that would take it in our area. So until we can  get many, many farmers involved, the processing will also be relatively small scale and that  suits our small scale low volume harvesting at this stage. But in 20 or 30 years time  
**0:21:14-0:21:19:**  I anticipate that we'll have sawmills in the area that are taking logs from a number of  farms and the sawmill will achieve relative economies of scale to have high quality processing  equipment but that doesn't mean that the farm has to revert back to large scale monocultures  
**0:21:32-0:21:38:**  or clear felling in order to attain viability if they're focused their effort on high quality  silviculture. And that is something that farmers can do with manual tools at a very easy to  do silvicultural. You can use a chainsaw and your ladders and pruners. You can do it in  
**0:21:52-0:21:57:**  winter when there's not much other work, when it's safe to do so. One of the reasons we  prune in winter is because we have many tiger snakes in summer so we sort of don't like  to be looking up into the trees too much in summer. So I do all the pruning in winter.  
**0:22:08-0:22:15:**  It's a manual job but if it's well done and well timed it may only take about five minutes  per tree and over a period of years it might only be 15 or 20 minutes work to turn a tree  that would only have been suitable for firewood into something that's now a high quality timber  
**0:22:28-0:22:34:**  tree that can be selectively harvested and be viable to harvest. That's not going to  be the case with 100% of the trees I prune. Some may get damaged in the wind, some may  have insect attack, there'll be other reasons but we'll have a high proportion of the trees  
**0:22:44-0:22:51:**  that we manage will reach over time a very high value standing log and that's what we're  creating.  That's very interesting. Some of the listeners may be quite surprised that you can get, I  
**0:22:57-0:23:03:**  mean you can turn a profit and maybe you should actually correct me if that's wrong but you  know can you turn a profit with little scale, kind of like more artisanal harvesting techniques  like a chainsaw and a tractor as you mentioned on high quality timber. Does the profit come  
**0:23:16-0:23:22:**  is it monetary or is it also that the profit comes from the other conservation and ecosystem  benefits that the tree provides? I mean can you break even at least with on an economic  level on a monetary level by harvesting trees in this way?  
**0:23:32-0:23:40:**  Yeah that economics is really interesting isn't it? I'm fascinated by trying to understand  how we evaluate systems. Now with this multi-purpose system one of the most important points is  that the timber as a product does not need to pay for the fences, for the trees, for  
**0:23:57-0:24:04:**  the planting and it doesn't even have to pay for the time that the tree takes to grow because  we talked earlier about 10 or 15 percent of the farm has to be planted to trees for other  reasons so I can I challenge the forest economists and say you've spent all your work over many  
**0:24:20-0:24:27:**  many decades trying to grow trees faster, trying to get economies of scale, trying to  get low cost money to invest in forestry and I say to them that now because our interest  rates are now about two percent and people still aren't planting trees for timber. The  
**0:24:40-0:24:45:**  problem with growing trees for timber is it is imperative and it takes a long period of  time so I don't care whether you get your money at two percent or ten percent in terms  of discount rate, it's still going to be a long investment and I think a lot of farmers  
**0:24:58-0:25:05:**  realize that, that it's highly risky. So when we plant our own trees and when I talk with  farmers I have to keep pointing out we're not planting trees for timber, we're planting  trees because we want trees for some other reason. All we're doing is spending a small  
**0:25:14-0:25:20:**  amount of investment as I said in selecting species that doesn't necessarily cost anymore  in managing the tree, the pruning and thinning and that might ultimately work out in the  order of twenty or thirty or forty dollars per tree Australian dollars. Let's talk in  
**0:25:33-0:25:41:**  hours it might be half an hour's work in terms of thinning around a tree pruning it up. Now  the timber that's produced only has to pay for that little bit of management and if you  want the time you take having spent that money waiting for the trees to grow but only on  
**0:25:54-0:26:01:**  a small capital investment in terms of time. So when we do the harvest you have to remember  that we're only saying, we're really asking the question now that I've done that work,  I've spent that money, is it viable to extract that tree and process it without even giving  
**0:26:14-0:26:19:**  any consideration to all the time and effort and money you spent in the past planting the  tree because you wanted the trees anyway. So when we go to do the harvest I'm looking  at trees that are 80 centimetres in diameter up until the first branch they have two cubic  
**0:26:32-0:26:39:**  metres of log from that two cubic metres of log I can mill out one cubic metre of timber  if that is a softwood the softwood timber in Australia would be worth once it's dry  and it's very easy to dry our native species in the order of $1,000 per cubic metre wholesale  
**0:26:53-0:26:58:**  and if it was a hardwood and the timber dries well and I say that because some of the species  are a bit little difficult to dry well it may be worth $2,000 per metre cubed as a very  conservative price. So ultimately I've been looking and the economics is something you  
**0:27:10-0:27:15:**  obviously do in your head every time you cut a tree down and mill it up but I know pretty  well now because we're building a house and I have to either buy timber or produce my  own that if I go out and cut down a good straight pine tree I will in within a day's work produce  
**0:27:28-0:27:34:**  $1,000 worth of timber that I can use that will save me going to buy that timber. If  I do a eucalypt I could save $2,000 in it for a day's work going to cut that tree down  mill it up put it in the kiln and obviously I've got to wait for it to dry but then unpack  
**0:27:46-0:27:53:**  the kiln and sort the timber and do that. So economically it becomes an asset on the  farm that gives me the opportunity to generate a reward for time and work on the farm, save  me buying timber in and ultimately sell timber out. We do sell a small amount of timber for  
**0:28:06-0:28:12:**  furniture production. The price we sell is much higher than $2,000 per cubic metre because  people are taking small lots of select timber and I've got no doubt that that's paying for  the process as well.  
**0:28:19-0:28:25:**  I was really saying with regard to the way we think about economics you don't plant trees  for timber to put food on the table and feed your family. It simply takes too long and  it's too risky. You graze stock to generate an annual income. You go to work to generate  
**0:28:36-0:28:42:**  a cash flow and get an income. You don't plant trees for timber to get income because as  the landholder you have to wait but as a landholder you have an opportunity for over the period  that you own your property and for many people in generational farms they might own the property  
**0:28:56-0:29:04:**  for 30 or 40 years. You have an opportunity to use trees to support your farming system,  improve the capital value of your farm and provide an opportunity for yourselves or your  children or future owners to be able to get direct employment on the farm harvesting timber  
**0:29:18-0:29:21:**  or selling timber from your property.  So timber as a farm asset is really a capital asset and we did this experiment with some  land valuation of the property. I got my property valued and the valuer said it was worth 30  
**0:29:36-0:29:42:**  cent more because of the way that I'd grown the trees across the property and because  by having the trees managed it provided future owners with a diversified income source potentially.  Now it made me realize that I've made more money from trees because of the higher capital  
**0:29:55-0:30:02:**  value of the farm than I probably ever will through selling timber but selling timber  is something I can do without undermining the capital value of the farm because selective  harvesting, strategic management means that I'm always continuously creaming off value  
**0:30:15-0:30:21:**  out of the forest rather than eating into the capital of the property by doing large  clear felling operations. In that respect it's more like a European native forest that's  been managed for generations than a more recent industrial monoculture pine plantation or  
**0:30:34-0:30:42:**  sichter spruce plantation. It's really going back to long-term multi-purpose forestry systems  that we used to talk about in Europe and North America and Australia in the 40s and 50s before  the industrialization of forestry during the 60s whether it was really just about dedicated  
**0:30:54-0:30:59:**  land for timber production and nothing else and that type of forestry is not attractive  to farmers and I know in Europe and North America it's not really attractive to local  communities despite the employment it may generate because they perceive it as competition  
**0:31:11-0:31:16:**  for land, displacement of people out of the community whereas I really want to see forestry  used as a tool of the agricultural community to benefit them and so I'm exploring ways  that we can do that. One aspect is high quality, the other one is integration and multi-purpose  
**0:31:29-0:31:35:**  and the other one is producing products that aren't available anymore and therefore attracting  higher prices.  Wow, fantastic. Rowan there's too many things to talk about here that you're bringing up  
**0:31:42-0:31:48:**  but I mean for me of course I'm more focused on the European context and that's the context  I'm more familiar with and as you said you know there's a perception of competition between  with trees. Farmers see them as competing for light and you look at the you know kind  
**0:32:00-0:32:06:**  of continental European context and it's there is this challenge of light there on the farm  and that's a big part of the agroforestry research looking at how you know how to how  to what are the what are the relationships of facilitation vs competition of the trees  
**0:32:14-0:32:19:**  with crops and etc. When you look at farmers for example in some regions of France which  have a hundred to hundred hectares and they have hedge systems how can trees or what would  you say to farmers that would like to integrate trees on their land but they're worried about  
**0:32:29-0:32:33:**  this competition, they're worried about this light effect, they're worried about the long  term investment. I'm sure you're going it's kind of a bit repeating itself from what you  had mentioned already but I would like to ask this question explicitly because I think  
**0:32:42-0:32:45:**  for from a farmer's perspective this really needs to be dealt with. There are farmers  that are of course and I really understandably hesitating to put trees on their farm and  so and again looking at this European context there's hedges around there's some you know  
**0:32:55-0:32:59:**  it's quite some areas are quite wood it's got quite a lot of woodland but not so much  but there's a value for timber here there's not a lot of high quality timber we actually  bring it in from the United States most of the time from native forests or from all the  
**0:33:07-0:33:13:**  forests so what would you say to them? Well I can I can I be a little bit controversial  and I'm getting old I've of course I first took on agroforestry back in 1985 before I  even had a farm. I've lectured in agroforestry for many years at university had many postgrad  
**0:33:26-0:33:31:**  students and I set up a community group with farmers down here called the Otway Agroforestry  Network which is the largest group of its kind with more than 150 farmers who are planting  trees for many benefits on their property. Now I have that introduction because I don't  
**0:33:47-0:33:54:**  like the way that agroforestry is being researched and extended in Europe and North America and  it pertains exactly to what you said with regard to trying to work out if there's a  perfect combination of trees and crops in a high value paddock. Now farmers are right  
**0:34:09-0:34:15:**  to be very concerned let's take the classic agroforestry research trial and I was in France  last year or the year before COVID for the Agroforestry Congress and I saw lots of photographs  I didn't actually go to the site where timber trees are planted integrated with a wheat  
**0:34:29-0:34:36:**  crop and you've got cropping and timber produced from the same paddock. Now first of all that  paddock if it was in Australia and was suitable for cropping would be the last place that  a farmer would plant trees because what they need to do to be viable in agriculture we  
**0:34:47-0:34:54:**  don't have the subsidies that you have in Europe they have to have to be very flexible  in their crop production options and they need to be therefore adaptable in what species  they plant how they manage it and the way they crop and the machinery they use. So if  
**0:35:07-0:35:12:**  you've got land that is stable land that is suitable for cropping that would be the last  place a farmer would plant timber trees even if the research showed you that at a particular  point in time let's say 10 years that the trees were producing a certain amount of timber  
**0:35:25-0:35:30:**  the crop looked like it was benefiting from having those trees everybody knows that that  point will come and go and the trees will get bigger and the competition will intensify  and cropping which is a high input land use if you start losing some of the productivity  
**0:35:48-0:35:56:**  of that crop off the top for the same cost of planting, caring, harvesting you're actually  eating into your profit margins and you just said that there's farmers with hedgerows well  that's a classic example let's get out of the cropping paddocks and work with the farmers  
**0:36:07-0:36:13:**  where they want trees where they need trees in the landscape and I think a lot of my concern  comes from the fact that agricultural research and agroforestry research has been based on  the plot the paddock and it hasn't been at the landscape scale but if you look at the  
**0:36:25-0:36:32:**  rural landscape the whole farm adjoining farms villages there are many many areas on that  land maybe some of it even collectively owned and I'm talking about examples from Africa  where I've worked where you don't have to plant a tree in any way that it competes with  
**0:36:44-0:36:48:**  agricultural production because there are so many other sites in the landscape that  need trees or are very poor for agriculture they could be steep land eroded water courses  as I said highly erodible sites that aren't suitable for cropping and the great thing  
**0:37:01-0:37:07:**  about grazing compared to cropping is the grazing can be done at a low intensity but  still be economical for example you might have two hectares of land that's grazed with  stock rather than one hectare and you can spread your trees over the two hectares the  
**0:37:17-0:37:23:**  stock can move they can harvest all the forage you don't have that fixed cost associated  per hectare of planting a crop so I traveled around Europe and I saw some very high value  trees in gardens I saw trees along water courses roadsides plots of trees that farmers had  
**0:37:38-0:37:44:**  put in unproductive land and I saw their highly productive cropping land and I thought to  myself why is agroforestry research trying to get trees onto the most valuable agricultural  land in some cases it might be important in terms of leaching taking some soil from deep  
**0:37:57-0:38:03:**  down extracting water from depth of rising water tables to make the site suitable for  cropping but most sites that are suitable for cropping I believe are the last places  the farmer would want to plant trees and nor should they and I think the agroforestry research  
**0:38:13-0:38:19:**  has to now move to expecting looking at the whole landscape and saying where the low-hanging  fruit where are the easy places to integrate the trees and this comes back to a concern  I have with the way agroforestry is presented more generally it tends to be presented as  
**0:38:30-0:38:38:**  a range of options systems combinations I call them recipes you know such as you plant  trees that in row spacings of 20 meters and you plant four trees every four meters within  the rows and you plant this species and you managers and such and I know this generates  
**0:38:49-0:38:55:**  some lovely photographs but these systems these off-the-shelf packages which gets so  much research and then get an analyzed by economists and said to be goods quality systems  that farmers should adopt are not appropriate for every farmer and they don't use what I  
**0:39:08-0:39:15:**  actually like which is a article that was in the first copy of the Journal of Agroforestry  Systems it was about diagnosis and design it was about looking at the people the landscapes  the markets the economy and the tax system and diagnosing what it is that it's required  
**0:39:31-0:39:38:**  and where the opportunities lie then designing agroforestry systems that neatly match the  needs and aspirations and the markets opportunities of those individual landholders in their communities  and if you take that approach every farm will look different every agroforestry system should  
**0:39:52-0:39:58:**  look different because it should be designed to suit the different people and their different  farming systems and their different landscapes the research on can be very very detailed  it can help the decision-making process but it should not start generating options that  
**0:40:11-0:40:16:**  could be adopted or rejected by landholders and I told you about the 150 farmers we have  in this area who are members of the agroforestry system agroforestry network every farm looks  different every farms planting a slightly different mix of species in a slightly different  
**0:40:30-0:40:38:**  way a lot of them are managing and them intensively in the way I described but the diversity of  agroforestry systems that we see in our area simply reflects the diversity of people who  live in the area and the way they farm the land and that's what excites me about good  
**0:40:51-0:40:57:**  agroforestry design and that's what worries me about so much of the research that students  want to do research stations are doing where they think there is some optimal combination  of trees and agriculture that we just need to work out and then we can get a subsidy  
**0:41:08-0:41:15:**  for it and promote it to farmers and to my mind after 40 years of working in agroforestry  I'm really concerned that this is what it's come to and we need to go right back to the  roots and say agroforestry is about making trees work for each individual farm and that  
**0:41:31-0:41:36:**  farm may actually plant trees in a block they may spread them through their crop they may  only spread them in hedgerows they may put them along the creek they may manage them  for different products they may plant mixtures or not but they will be different and that's  
**0:41:46-0:41:52:**  the exciting thing about agroforestry and the competition that you described with crops  is obvious trees in particularly in the temperate regions compete with the crops that we plant  in temperate regions largely because sunlight is such an important significant factors on  
**0:42:05-0:42:12:**  almost all sites and root competition and surface rooting just makes cropping really  difficult with our machinery in the tropics where manual labor is used where high rainfall  events damage crops and extract soil where there's leaching of nutrients where there's  
**0:42:24-0:42:31:**  a shortage of nutrients and therefore the trees can have a big impact by dropping litter  and where manual labor is used for the harvesting yes there is much greater opportunity to mix  trees with cropping systems but I can't see it happening very much in the industrialized  
**0:42:43-0:42:50:**  world where we use machinery and other you know and the economies are quite different  in terms of the marketing so I hope people through my introduction can see that we were  leading to a different view of what agroforestry might be and I know that there's a lot of  
**0:43:02-0:43:11:**  great people working in systems design landscape systems and more the ecology side of tree  growing in the agricultural landscape who I think are the ones who are really exploring  how we can start looking at sophisticated integration of forestry and trees into the  
**0:43:25-0:43:30:**  agricultural landscape I hope that suits your podcast Dimitri thanks for that  well it's definitely as you said controversial but that's I mean we started this podcast  not because we wanted to you know prove this already pre-made idea of agroforestry no we're  
**0:43:44-0:43:49:**  here because we really want to find out the nuance of agroforestry there's a lot of chat  out there about you know how amazing trees on the landscape how you know everybody needs  to plant trees and you know there's a big hype it's a agroforestry and a lot of agroecology  
**0:43:57-0:44:01:**  actually it seems to be creating a bubble you know it's like it's growing it's growing  there's a lot of marketing around it a lot of communication around it but behind what  we found was lacking was a bit of like hardcore nuance of you know is it really beneficial  
**0:44:10-0:44:15:**  in all contexts how so for and as you mentioned now for each farmer it'll be different there'll  be different reasons and so what you're saying now is exactly what we're looking for that's  kind of like the you know it's the little golden I have the word in French it's like  
**0:44:26-0:44:29:**  a little golden nugget that we're looking for because it's this it's like how can we  nuance this conversation and actually be like okay wait it's not always like this and wait  there's actually some we can we can look at trees in a different way and so this is for  
**0:44:38-0:44:42:**  me absolutely fascinating but the next idea that you know something that was coming to  mind now is is in that case we need to find a way to be able to convince farmers that  they need trees not because the government this is what's happening in France and especially  
**0:44:50-0:44:55:**  in Switzerland where I was working just now it's you know the the government is funding  a lot for agroforestry for basically planting trees on landscapes and so the what the people  what the farmers are doing they're just planting they're taking very good agricultural soil  
**0:45:04-0:45:11:**  and they're planting on 8 by 10 meters they're filling up their soils their their their fields  with with trees that are funded but I mean funded it's like contracts on 10 years where  they get a significant amount of money and so it's it's and that seems to be a completely  
**0:45:21-0:45:26:**  perverse relationship with the tree right because it's completely directed and incentivized  by so so for me the next question for you is how in that case with your experience because  you're not just an academic you're not just a farmer but you're also a communicator and  
**0:45:35-0:45:41:**  an educator and you're you're working on building communities of people that want to plant trees  and I invite everybody to go check out more of Rowan's work on that and other podcasts  on him where they delve more into this topic and also of course Rowan's book but how do  
**0:45:50-0:45:54:**  you then manage to convince farmers that they need trees on their landscape and to find  the little the the hedges or the riparian zones or or the the gardens or the zones or  whatever may look like to plant them. Yeah this is this is it isn't it it's a it's it's  
**0:46:06-0:46:12:**  whether you it's it's two mindsets to my mind to my view now first of all let's take the  European EU subsidies out of the equation and imagine imagine some of you an environment  where farmers get no subsidy for their agricultural crops no subsidy for their milk production  
**0:46:27-0:46:33:**  and no subsidies for their their beef and their sheep and no subsidy for their for planting  trees or a very small subsidy available for some farmers for tree planting for environmental  reasons that's the Australian context and probably similar in New Zealand and maybe  
**0:46:44-0:46:50:**  it's a little bit where Britain the UK might be heading after Brexit but given as you said  the perverse impact of the subsidy programs where where in our environment we start from  from scratch farmer motivations if you like now clearly if I worked for government or  
**0:47:04-0:47:11:**  industry I might have particular motivations about reasons why I want farmers to grow more  trees I might I might be a conservationist working for for a biodiversity group or I  might be from the water authority and I'm concerned about water quality coming off land  
**0:47:22-0:47:30:**  these are the many stakeholders in our community who want for their particular reason get farmers  to plant more trees carbon biodiversity water quality animal welfare timber production each  of those stakeholders has a particular outcome they want and they want to encourage lots  
**0:47:43-0:47:51:**  of farmers to do it and in some cases they have the ability to raise money and then subsidize  or do a joint venture or a lease arrangement with landholders where the landholders provide  the land or they come to the project because of the incentive being provided now that's  
**0:48:04-0:48:12:**  fine I'm all for people having their particular motivations but what has really been the challenge  in the agricultural landscape in the Western world and even in in the developing world  is that it's the farmer and their family who make decisions about how that land is going  
**0:48:23-0:48:29:**  to be managed so they are ultimately the ones who decide whether a tree gets planted and  why that tree get tree is going to be planted so it's it's comes from one perspective I've  got a particular interest I want to encourage a farmer to plant trees because I'm a stakeholder  
**0:48:42-0:48:49:**  and the other interest is I'm a landholder why do I want trees on my property now we've  had to as a community group of farmers we are naturally focused on benefiting our membership  benefiting ourselves as landholders we plant trees because we want trees in the landscape  
**0:49:03-0:49:10:**  and I've traveled around the world in Africa Indonesia Vanuatu Chile North America and  around Europe and the UK I go on to hundreds of farms and admittedly I go on to farms where  farmers are interested in tree growing but I meet many farmers who haven't planted trees  
**0:49:23-0:49:29:**  and I talk to them about I often start by saying just just forget timber production  just forget conservation for a moment do you see any opportunity where planting a few trees  on your property could benefit you and it might be a little bit of fodder production  
**0:49:41-0:49:47:**  it might be beautification of the entrance of the property it might simply be shelter  belts and hedgerows and I say okay let's start with those let's start with your problems  and your aspirations and the great thing about tree growing is we have I like to say we have  
**0:49:59-0:50:07:**  a suite of colors in terms of species and we have a whole range of different paintbrushes  and spatulas and techniques that we can use to put those colors into the landscape and  we can put them together in any sort of combination using any artistic style that we want and  
**0:50:20-0:50:27:**  the great thing about that is that there's very few farms where it wouldn't benefit to  have some trees planted in some way and if we work with the landholders from that perspective  first of all we'll get the momentum building and you start farmers invariably start small  
**0:50:41-0:50:46:**  because of the risks and they do a few plantings then you work with them over a period of time  now we do this in our community group we have a mentoring service we actually get a bit  of government funding that would otherwise be used to provide incentives to pay for trees  
**0:50:57-0:51:04:**  and fences we as a community group are quite unusual we use that money to train and pay  farmers to mentor other landholders tree growers who are mentoring other tree growers and by  mentoring we can do it over years in fact we do it over we've been doing it for 15 years  
**0:51:15-0:51:21:**  now and we do it over a number of landholders who own a particular patch of patch of land  and by mentoring over time you can build confidence knowledge and support networks so farmers  become more sophisticated and start planting more trees over time and that's why when people  
**0:51:34-0:51:40:**  come through this landscape drive around our region here they say gee there's a lot of  trees planted over the last 20 years and we point out that that's because we did the groundwork  farmers were gaining motivation and confidence they're seeing other landholders build their  
**0:51:50-0:51:56:**  confidence and tree growing just becomes part of the natural farming landscape use in this  area and as I said starting small is not necessarily a problem being diverse is has it in terms  of activities that has its advantages and what can be greater than having a technology  
**0:52:10-0:52:16:**  or an idea which is agroforestry that uses trees in the agricultural landscape which  is so adaptable almost every farmer in your landscape can do something and that's where  we start getting adoption where I travel to other regions where agroforestry is presented  
**0:52:28-0:52:35:**  as just being a suite of different options you have to drive hundreds of kilometers between  farms to see examples I can take you next door and then to the farm after that they  won't look like the plantings I have on my farm but they will be using the same diagnosis  
**0:52:48-0:52:55:**  design and the same technology to create a picture on their landscape and like we say  in Australia your your bare land is like a canvas and you can write your history on the  landscape with trees it's like being an artist and seeing it that way your skills will grow  
**0:53:06-0:53:11:**  with you over time and you'll create something very special for yourself and your family  and by doing so you will encourage your neighbor to do something differently as well and that's  what really excites us and as a community group and certainly what motivates me to keep  
**0:53:22-0:53:29:**  in the education to to to provide science to underpin and support decision making to  get farmers to network with each other with industry groups with stakeholders with carbon  buyers with with anyone in the community and build those relationships then see if we can  
**0:53:39-0:53:46:**  start developing what I'd say is real markets real values for trees that aren't based on  on government subsidies or and well wishes of of of politicians who who are just trying  to get a few trees in the ground to get re-elected in some in some areas so there's there's lots  
**0:54:00-0:54:06:**  in that again and it's if people want to think about what do we need to do to agroforestry  to make it attractive to every farmer we certainly have to start with the farmer and ask them  what they need and see whether we can as I like to say the key if you're a forester is  
**0:54:21-0:54:26:**  we've got to change the way we do forestry to make it attractive to farmers we do not  need to change the farmers you know if you go to a farmer and say I don't like your attitude  you know you're not planting trees that's pretty offensive but if you go to the farmer  
**0:54:37-0:54:41:**  and say what's concerning you you know why do why haven't you got any trees on the farm  are you worried about exposure for your stock and soil erosion and they say yeah of course  I'm worried but I don't know where to start and I say okay we're going to put you in touch  
**0:54:49-0:54:53:**  with another landholder who's got a similar problem to you and he's he's come up with  some ideas or another farmer she's got some goods good thoughts on this and they're going  to help you make a decision that suits you that is a much more effective way to do community  
**0:55:03-0:55:07:**  development work than handing out subsidies for only a short period of time and which  we know will be for forests that get neglected I drove I drove through southern France and  northern Spain a couple of years ago and I saw a lot of poplar plantations they're all  
**0:55:19-0:55:26:**  about the same age they all were planted at the same stocking rate and I immediately knew  that that was obviously a government subsidy program to promote poplar growing because  if it wasn't subsidised the farmers would have adapted it to suit them but because it  
**0:55:39-0:55:45:**  was subsidised and I had a particular best type of forest in mind farmers had to make  a choice I take the money on and I do what they're telling me to do or I don't do anything  at all so every planting looks the same and as soon as you drive through a landscape and  
**0:55:55-0:56:00:**  notice every planting looks the same you know there's a subsidy program behind it and you  certainly know that the people involved have not spoken to the landholders about what they  want and what their aspirations are and what their needs are and that's the key that we're  
**0:56:11-0:56:17:**  now seeing after 30 years of agroforestry extension and development in most countries  we're seeing the difference between extension that's about community development and integrating  and changing forestry to suit landholders and what I can argue is the most common approach  
**0:56:30-0:56:34:**  we have a good forestry idea those damn farmers won't do it we've got to subsidise it we've  got to regulate it and get them to adopt and force them to do it or entice them to do it  with the subsidies and you won't get engagement you won't get farmers sharing with enthusiasm  
**0:56:46-0:56:51:**  their knowledge with their neighbour and you won't get the neighbour planting trees because  they say well I'm not going to plant trees till someone gives me money to plant them  in this area we get farmers planting trees because the neighbours were doing it and they  
**0:57:03-0:57:08:**  said gee if the neighbour thinks there's money in this I'm going to do it because they know  the farmers spent their own money doing it it's a very different model and I would argue  that its impact is going to have generational impact rather than these short-term little  
**0:57:19-0:57:28:**  plots in the landscape that we see that reflect changing fashions in government policies.  The problem Rowan is not that you've come up with some controversial you know not ideas  but some controversial concepts the problem is that you have actually made most of my  
**0:57:39-0:57:47:**  questions redundant because it's so but I'm still going to try and go for some of my questions  let's see what we what report is you managed to give to them because I do think that there  are some of the concerns that are that are that people have in the agroforestry world  
**0:58:00-0:58:05:**  or that farmers have in with regards to agroforestry so let's still try to go through them but  taking into account that they may be a bit redundant because of you know this other approach  this is completely different approach to looking at agroforestry well completely I would be  
**0:58:16-0:58:20:**  careful to say completely different and to not be offensive to other approaches etc but  at least there is something we have to admit that there's something quite unique with this  this the approach to putting trees on the landscape that you've described right now  
**0:58:28-0:58:35:**  so one of the ones that you just talked about now is the factor of risk and on the other  podcast that I listened to you were talking a lot about the fact that planting trees is  quite risky and that that's why we should be careful by of considering trees just for  
**0:58:46-0:58:51:**  profit in terms of monetary profits because of the fact that they can be quite risky to  climate conditions so for example a storm or this or that the climate change as well  creating problems so I mean and also you can understand farmers becoming a bit risk averse  
**0:59:03-0:59:07:**  because of one the subsidy system which kind of has a big impact but two the fact that  you know farmers are not having a very easy time at the moment and they are struggling  to innovate because of the financial condition which is not creating a mindset which wants  
**0:59:17-0:59:24:**  to go for innovation and new things so what would you say to that how do you how do you  convince a farmer who's very much concerned about investing in something that he's not  familiar with and that's risky how would you deal with that scenario?  
**0:59:34-0:59:43:**  Yeah I'm glad you've raised risk because it's obvious I guess and there's two ways of looking  at it your farmers can say I'm not going to plant trees because it's financially risky  or lacks flexibility or I could have a cyclone we've just had a cyclone this week in Western  
**0:59:53-0:59:59:**  Australia part of Australia we could have floods we just had floods in New South Wales  around Sydney this year or we could have a bushfire now these are things that happen  all the time in the Australian context and right around the world those environmental  
**1:00:08-1:00:14:**  risks economic risks and there's also a sovereign risk and that's when you might grow trees  for 30 or 40 years and then someone for some reason might change the regulations change  the planning rules and say you can't cut those trees down for timber because they are now  
**1:00:27-1:00:31:**  valued by the wider community for their carbon or for their biodiversity or just because  they look good and funnily enough we've had a couple of examples of that just on our property  so what I the way I want to emphasize risk is let's talk about it and we have this I  
**1:00:45-1:00:49:**  set up a program called the Australian Master Tree Grower Program and we're running another  one this week the first one after COVID we have a group of 25 farmers in a particular  location and we spend a day a week with them talking about trees and visiting their property  
**1:00:59-1:01:04:**  and exploring the science and the markets and stuff like that and one thing we do in  that cause is we encourage people to talk about the risks and the uncertainties that  they see and we say these are given the risk is is is we know the risk more than we know  
**1:01:17-1:01:23:**  the benefits in the in the sense of growing trees so let's see how we can design our systems  to minimize the risk and the obvious way is as I've described plant trees for many different  purposes plant trees because you want trees or aesthetics or environmental reasons or  
**1:01:36-1:01:43:**  something like that always plant so that the timber or the economic return is really a  bonus on top of the fact that you wanted trees anyway now as we go right back and repeat  again that I don't believe there's any farm that couldn't have five percent tree cover  
**1:01:53-1:02:00:**  and if we had five or ten percent tree cover across our rural landscape there would be  thousands of thousands of hectares of trees providing biodiversity carbon water quality  timber production a whole suite of different benefits so I think we can achieve scale without  
**1:02:13-1:02:22:**  exposing individual family farms to risk by marrying that small scale risk averse initial  activities where farmers build up their confidence over time so we've had farmers who start with  a few hundred trees ten years later their confidence is built their designing and their  
**1:02:35-1:02:40:**  management skills have improved so they're confident that they can manage the risks and  they plant thousands of trees every year as a result of that so risk is not only something  that's real it's something that can be managed and something that you can reduce in terms  
**1:02:52-1:02:58:**  of your degree of exposure to it and the great thing about forestry is it can be used to  address some of the risks and the obvious ones risk of exposure to heat and cold stress  for your farm animals the risk of massive soil erosion on steep slopes or long water  
**1:03:14-1:03:21:**  courses and these are the risks that farmers face every year and say as soon as I grow  trees start growing trees that risk will go a very very good friend of mine Andrew Stewart  and his wife Jill are on a family farm just over the hill from me he's an agricultural  
**1:03:33-1:03:40:**  scientist a fifth generation farmer he only plants trees to reduce the risk in fact I  took a video out one day and I filmed him in the paddocks he just spoke to the camera  and he said something that I described in the book that I've never heard any farmer  
**1:03:49-1:03:56:**  say before he said planting trees is part of my risk management strategy in fact he  said that waiting 30 or 40 years for the trees to grow wasn't a problem for him because the  trees that he was planting were already doing jobs for the farm were already reducing the  
**1:04:10-1:04:18:**  risk and they provided an opportunity for him to pass on the farm to the next generation  that not only had reduced risks of exposure soil erosion but also had the opportunity  to come from producing income from the timber on top of that and he described it so beautifully  
**1:04:30-1:04:36:**  that it taught me that when we talk about growing trees on farms we have to talk about  the risks and we have to accept it as a given and we have to incorporate risk into the design  process if someone says it's no point planting any trees then I you know not even one on  
**1:04:50-1:04:55:**  their property I suspect they haven't come to terms with the risks that they face by  not having any trees on the property so that every tree your plant should be reducing risk  rather than increasing it and conventional forestry the idea of putting in a block of  
**1:05:07-1:05:11:**  trees just for timber you know that block of poplars in France or the block of block  of pines or or something like that if it's only done for timber you are increasing risk  burden on the farming family not reducing it and that's when people get nervous so what  
**1:05:25-1:05:31:**  we do is talk really it's very change the way we design the systems to reduce risk start  small and try to reduce their perception of risk by building confidence over time by being  part of a community by having a mentor by by introducing them to the markets by showing  
**1:05:44-1:05:49:**  them the skills and how easy it is to do some of the tree management we described every  step of the way is really about building confidence and managing risks so I just think it's absolutely  crucial crucial I think it's overlooked by academics who aren't the ones generally who  
**1:06:01-1:06:07:**  are putting their own land and money on the line when it comes to tree growing and economists  try to put a cost on risk but it's very difficult because you might find that your whole  farm gets burnt one year or you have a disease or something or you know as I said when I  
**1:06:21-1:06:25:**  planted trees there were four sawmills in the area that I thought would take the logs  they've all gone because the government stopped doing native forest logging in our region  so the sawmills left the area so risk is just it's just there you know and certainly you  
**1:06:40-1:06:45:**  don't want to ignore it but you you can benefit it from it by using the trees to reduce the  risks that farmers are already experiencing and making sure you're not introducing any  new ones or not new ones that they're they're they're not willing to take on because it  
**1:06:56-1:07:02:**  does involve new skills it does involve new products for me this is what it brings up  it's the fact that all of the risk is also very much correlated with knowledge and experience  knowledge of how to plant the trees where to plant the trees experience of how to manage  
**1:07:12-1:07:16:**  them and this is something that farmers also have to learn this whole new set of skills  in order to learn forestry and agroforestry in order for it to be successful and less  risky operation on their farm right yeah exactly so these this involve new skills many farmers  
**1:07:30-1:07:38:**  have never even planted a tree let alone pruned one or or ever been to a sawmill so so again  that's exactly what we do our mentors often you know the idea of mentoring we as i said  we we use our government funding that would be used to subsidize trees we've argued to  
**1:07:52-1:07:58:**  to our agencies please give us the money we're going to use it to get farm train farmers  to talk to each other because everyone who's worked in rural communities knows that there  are different sources of knowledge and one of the most important soil sources of knowledge  
**1:08:09-1:08:15:**  is farmers that you respect within your community because you know they're dealing with similar  crops similar animals similar climate issues and and similar soils and you look at them  you watch what they're doing you often talk to them then you adapt their their systems  
**1:08:26-1:08:34:**  to suit you then you get other sources of information in agriculture agriculture advisors  the the the the wool brokers the people who buy your products you talk to them about what  their market specifications are so you gather information from different sources we're trying  
**1:08:45-1:08:51:**  to do the same thing with the farmers by having a network of landholders who can support each  other so that our landholders have got mentors and they attend field days and and other group  activities and they feel like you know i'm i'm at the for example i'm at the tree planting  
**1:09:03-1:09:08:**  stage they say i'm not ready to learn about how to market the timber or how to prune the  timber or fell the trees i just want to learn how to plant so what we do with that person  a mentor or one or two mentors would go and spend two hours planting trees with that land  
**1:09:20-1:09:26:**  holder on their property and then they'd say okay you know we've been chatting about trees  how to plant them are you confident now we'll leave and you can carry on or you can pay  a contractor now you know how the contractor should be doing it and stuff like that so  
**1:09:38-1:09:45:**  we build confidence through traditional ways that landholders gain information and confidence  through a information network of trusted mentors the people who they see are similar to us  peers we call them peer mentors people who are similar in some respects and then we link  
**1:09:59-1:10:05:**  those people in with specialist advisors whether they've been government or research or the  market or the industry or something else when they've got particular questions but importantly  we often interplay between the landholder and the researcher or the industry to improve  
**1:10:17-1:10:23:**  the quality of that communication so that it's more it's presented in a way that it's  more appropriate and suitable to that landholders needs and aspirations so yes it is it's a  difficult skill to learn because it's different things over many years and it's different  
**1:10:35-1:10:40:**  things for different species and you might have to change what you're doing if a if a  disease comes in or suddenly you've had a windstorm and how am I going to suddenly rehabilitate  my trees what pruning do I do now that I've I've lost some tops out of some of them and  
**1:10:51-1:10:57:**  stuff like that well we can do that by providing mentoring shift and from the peers and other  people with experience in that area to support them and we can build up confidence over a  period of time in our community so yes we acknowledge that that is one of the big problems  
**1:11:08-1:11:14:**  we treat it not by handing out pamphlets and and books saying this is how you do it but  by having trusted peers that they can talk to and show their problem to and get locally  appropriate advice about what they should be doing or could be doing to manage that  
**1:11:26-1:11:32:**  particular problem at the time that they need that answer they don't get the full book about  how to plant how to prune how to harvest and say this is your manual just go and do it  know the community provides the support manual at a timely in a timely way I think it's something  
**1:11:44-1:11:51:**  that probably used to happen in good rural extension or in in the local village vets  in the past where people used to say no now I've got a problem with my animals who you  know and they go to a trusted farmer or to the local village fair toy in the agricultural  
**1:12:01-1:12:07:**  officer who was able to mentor and support over a period of time but we've lost all that  in the developing world of the developed world it's all gone back to agencies big big ivory  towers at universities and research centres farmers don't have access and they don't speak  
**1:12:19-1:12:27:**  the same language as those people so we need to reinvent the local village support networks  that traditionally provided farmers with the knowledge and you're in France and we know  the enormous amount long history of skills that farmers have developed in each region  
**1:12:38-1:12:43:**  to produce very high quality crops that are unique to a particular location that have  a market advantage because of that and that has come over time and I'd like to see the  same thing happen with forestry so it becomes locally appropriate locally specialised and  
**1:12:54-1:13:00:**  supported by a local network of landholders and that's through engagement a lot over a  long period of time something that politicians aren't very good at because they generally  in Australia only provide funding for three years because that's the election cycle we  
**1:13:10-1:13:17:**  have but if you have a strong community group is able to tap in to commercial money and  also public money and and argues succinctly that this is what we need in our community  if you want what you want you've got to support us to help farmers achieve what they want  
**1:13:30-1:13:35:**  and it's really exciting where that works and I've seen that in development work in  in Africa and and the Pacific Islands and it's the same model if we want to induce reintroduce  forestry into a developing developed landscape as well  
**1:13:46-1:13:57:**  Nice, very interesting. I wanted to go into a few technical slightly more technical aspects  one of them is the fact that it's also associated with the risk I imagine but you planted 70  species and this is something that we talk a lot about in this podcast it's the idea  
**1:14:08-1:14:14:**  of diversity and I'm curious to know why you planted such a huge diversity and how does  that integrate everything that we've discussed now you know the strategies around getting  farmers to plant trees in a safe way in a way that benefits their land and conservation  
**1:14:26-1:14:31:**  whatever needs that they have identified after going through this process you described  Yes and I keep introducing new species every year there's a few reasons first of all the  risk one is obvious when we initially planted trees I picked out my favorite 10 species  
**1:14:46-1:14:53:**  based on the expert advice and my own experience and about three of those species I will not  plant again because they cannot deal with climate change as we're experiencing it on  the farm so there there's an obvious one if you're going to plant trees that are going  
**1:15:04-1:15:11:**  to stay in the landscape for a long period of time the risks of not all of them producing  the products or the values or even surviving are very real so if you put all your eggs  in one basket two species of trees you're more likely to have total failure than someone  
**1:15:23-1:15:30:**  who spends who plants a diversity of species having said that the more species you plant  the more complicated the system and the less chance is that you'll have lots of the best  ones because you're actually going to increase the probability that some of them will fail  
**1:15:42-1:15:48:**  by having a wide range of species so there's a positives and negatives about having a range  of different species the second point is that some species can work in combination and I  talked about the shade tolerant trees growing under the sun loving trees before so there's  
**1:16:01-1:16:10:**  clearly an opportunity there as we see in nature all the time woodlands and forest areas  invariably are dominated by some large sun loving species that poke their head out the  top but there's a niche in amongst those that you can have lots of other species so why  
**1:16:23-1:16:29:**  wouldn't you have a range of species in a system particularly where you're not grazing  or cropping under the trees and where you have that opportunity to have other species  so we can grow oaks that I'm looking at out the window we can grow them underneath eucalypts  
**1:16:38-1:16:44:**  now that's an exotic species under a native species for me and you can have many combinations  like that the third reason I plant a high diversity of species is that it is the way  that I learn or despite being an academic or because I'm an academic I do learn enormous  
**1:16:59-1:17:06:**  amount from research publications and books but I'm learning other people's observations  based on their experience I can stop with that and say well they're the experts I will  learn from them or I can say I am potentially the expert in my landscape addressing my problems  
**1:17:22-1:17:28:**  so unless I try lots of different things and then learn from those experiences I will be  missing out on the opportunity to be my own expert and what we've found here we've developed  some different planting combinations different sorts of tree guards and I've learnt things  
**1:17:42-1:17:47:**  about particular species that weren't in the books because those issues weren't important  to the people who wrote those books or journals take for example the fact that the Coast Redwood  from California has a ligna tuber it's a large woody bulbous tuber that grows underneath  
**1:18:00-1:18:08:**  the ground that is probably an evolutionary adaption for the seedling as it develops when  the top of the tree was likely to be browsed off or burnt in a fire and this is going back  thousands of years when it adapted so it spends the first few years with a ligna tuber as  
**1:18:19-1:18:25:**  it turns out I could I know I didn't find that out in a book I found it by looking at  the trees that I actually had in my nursery going out into the paddock and digging up  trees and I noticed they had ligna tubers and then I was able to develop a question  
**1:18:34-1:18:39:**  and ask that question of the research and I found out that why it has a ligna tuber  and when it was first identified so research on farm research can be done at a very simple  scale by anyone you don't need a PhD to be a researcher it's observation interpretation  
**1:18:54-1:19:02:**  developing a question then the research component is really about who you ask the question now  I talked about the mentors I'm a mentor for many farmers and they ask me questions about  trees based on their observations I learned from that and they learn from that and they  
**1:19:13-1:19:20:**  build up so having many species become a learning experience for your whole community as well  as just yourself and it also becomes a risk management option and it also becomes something  to maintain your enthusiasm and your interest in tree growing and that for me because I'm  
**1:19:33-1:19:38:**  just I'm passionate about learning about trees the more I plant the more I learn through  my own observations the more questions it raises and the more that I can ask other people  and search out the literature to answer those questions in some fashion.  
**1:19:48-1:19:56:**  On Massey farm the farm that we started in 2017 we live in southern Greece in an area  that is extremely windy in an area that is has very like a very extreme rainfall pattern  with around 600 millimeters in the winter and then pretty much nothing for six months  
**1:20:09-1:20:14:**  of the year it's quite extreme there's a certain microclimate in that in that valley because  sometimes summer storms arrive in many parts of Greece but in this area they arrive very  very little and you know when I'm thinking about the trees there and the oaks and how  
**1:20:27-1:20:31:**  how quickly they grow and you know everything is kind of shrubby over there apart from some  species which maybe is going to be a part of the answer of my question but is growing  high quality wood timber for for for of course for conservation but also to have something  
**1:20:45-1:20:52:**  to to sell or to build capital to build the land capital is it is it adapted to all contexts  are there places like the one I've described right now in Greece where it's just not really  adapted and we've got to think about planting trees only for conservation and not many other  
**1:21:03-1:21:05:**  reasons.  Yeah I know the challenges you've described much of the Australian landscape really in  that we do we do get reliable winter rains in our temperate areas but if the spring rains  
**1:21:19-1:21:25:**  fail and you're going into a hot dry summer it can be very severe most of our landscape  because it was cleared of trees like in Greece and and exposed for a long period of time  like in Greece you've you've got soil erosion you've got shallow soils you've got exposure  
**1:21:38-1:21:44:**  you've got difficult rainfall yes you can't just walk into these landscapes and expect  trees to that you you plant to to grow like they would in a in a beautiful forest which  was sheltered from the wind and so identifying some of those challenges first of all and  
**1:21:56-1:22:03:**  saying as we do the first step that many farmers might have to take is actually plant their  shelter belts then look at sacrificing some of those trees that are exposed because their  role is to shelter other trees in that planting that will grow straighter and perform better  
**1:22:14-1:22:17:**  because they're less exposed to the environment.  With regard to to rainfall and and dryness particularly of course trees grow at different  rates in different landscapes having said that it's really their height growth which  
**1:22:31-1:22:39:**  will be more more severely impacted by exposure and dry weather so in in in most landscapes  the tallest trees in the world grow in the nice moist wet forest close to the coast where  the humidity is high because growing trees tall is about lifting water a long way up  
**1:22:50-1:22:56:**  the tree so as you move to the drier landscapes your trees will grow shorter and the more  exposed they are in that landscape the shorter they will grow again and that's because almost  all species are susceptible to that exposure of that growing tip and the difficulty of  
**1:23:07-1:23:10:**  lifting water up in a very dry environment.  There are exceptions to that there are some pine species that can grow quite tall in an  exposed landscape and I think of things like the Norfolk pine from a Norfolk island in  
**1:23:23-1:23:29:**  the Pacific which is commonly planted around the coast in Australia and overseas as a way  of marking the harbour entrances because back in the days where people didn't have GPS and  satellite the fishermen would go out and it would be very difficult to see the port they  
**1:23:41-1:23:45:**  were looking for a tall tree that they could plant at the port that would grow tall despite  the exposure to salt winds and extreme weather and this Norfolk island pine is extraordinary  it can grow 30, 40, 50 metres in a landscape where all the native trees only get to 10  
**1:23:59-1:24:05:**  or 15 metres tall and they use that because they can see it from a distance and aim back  to head to port in some fashion.  So there are some examples but for most of us in most landscapes the trees will need  
**1:24:13-1:24:21:**  some shelter so technically the way to deal with that is initially plant a very dense  planting even do direct seeding in exposed landscapes have wide belts of planting and  plant the trees so they mutually shelter each other and then once they're sheltering each  
**1:24:32-1:24:39:**  other and they're growing quite well you can slowly thin them down to the wider spacing  so that they can then start putting on the diameter growth so you can manipulate the  environment to get the trees growing taller and you may use some fast growing shrubby  
**1:24:51-1:24:58:**  species as sacrificial shelter then they can be cut out for firewood or other products  or even just we use a nitrogen fixing tree here one of the wattles that grows very quickly  it's very shrubby it's not a good timber tree it's malformed particularly on exposed sites  
**1:25:11-1:25:16:**  but it produces a good firewood so you can grow it quickly cut it out and in the meantime  it's provided shelter for your other trees and they'll get up to five or six metres around  so your trees will grow quite straight around that and then you thin down and start growing  
**1:25:26-1:25:31:**  those trees on and once the tree is well established you mightn't grow too much taller in height  but once you've achieved height growth in good stem form by thinning you can promote  diameter growth because the diameter growth of a tree is not related so much to climate  
**1:25:43-1:25:48:**  because it's more opportunistic it's not about lifting water to great heights it's simply  about taking advantage of the rainfall when it's available and the light and the temperature  when it's available to put on growth and if the trees aren't competing with their neighbours  
**1:25:59-1:26:04:**  they can put on growth and when the drought comes each summer they'll just stop growing  and when they're there so it's more opportunistic growth in diameter but height growth is tricky  because one dry season can set the tree back at the top and a year's height growth can  
**1:26:14-1:26:19:**  be lost simply because of that difficulty of lifting water to a very dry environment  so yep lots of different environments finding species that don't have to grow that tall  to be very high value we have some very lovely desert craft woods the trees might only have  
**1:26:31-1:26:35:**  to reach 20 or 30 centimetres in diameter they might only be five or six metres tall  but the wood of some of these timber the timber of some of these species is so highly valued  for craft wood and wood turning that you don't have to always produce a very tall tree with  
**1:26:46-1:26:51:**  a straight log in it to have something of value so exploring what those local specialty  timber markets might be for carving woodworking and other other other activities that don't  require long timber links and you might find a a couple of species that can survive in  
**1:27:04-1:27:09:**  that climate don't necessarily grow to be 30 metres tall but can still produce high  value over a period of time good luck with that we've actually yeah we'll need some luck  but also some good we haven't yet planted for for planted for timber production and  
**1:27:25-1:27:30:**  we haven't thought about them for for speciality markets etc in terms of their wood we've planted  most of our trees for windbreaks hedges biomass production trying to you know use them at  the service of the soil and and the fruit trees as I described earlier on where we're  
**1:27:40-1:27:46:**  working more with fruit and nut drops so we're really using the trees for as a supportive  system as the infrastructure that will hopefully nurse and care for some quality fruit production  for us to you know get some economic benefit from but actually in our region we've observed  
**1:28:02-1:28:08:**  some some and on our land we've been the tree that surprised us the most is cypress the  cypress they're growing they're three years old and they're already about two and a half  three meters some of them in in where the soil is a bit better of course in the areas  
**1:28:19-1:28:23:**  where the soils are worse they're not so tall but still they're some of the fastest growing  on our land which is surprising of course they're not as fast as the eucalyptuses that  we've planted we've planted eucalyptus camaldolensis I can't remember the name is it red gum yeah  
**1:28:33-1:28:39:**  and I don't know about the value of that word but red gum yeah so they do they grow really  well and in the region actually when you go to Greece there's some of the biggest trees  in Greece because they're planted quite wildly in cities in villages and they actually prune  
**1:28:49-1:28:53:**  them very hard in some areas but they get I've already seen some in Athens that are  there are maybe two meters one and a half meter wide in diameter and so it's a so we  plant we planted those as well let's see what what happens to them but we've observed some  
**1:29:03-1:29:08:**  of these cypresses in the valleys they they get to 25 meters for a Greek context which  is kind of surprising so we've started thinking a bit that they may be we may start thinking  about them as a you know as a long very long-term investment where we we can produce some wood  
**1:29:18-1:29:23:**  so it's also about planting lots of things and seeing what's gonna as you said seeing  what's gonna react and how how the trees behave yes you mentioned the cypress cypress is another  species that that many of the species within the group of cypresses they they protect the  
**1:29:37-1:29:44:**  small buds from exposure so you know in Italy the the the tall slender cypress trees growing  on top of hills they don't need the mutual shelter of a forest around them to grow tall  and so that is another yeah where the cypresses grow and many of the cypresses produce naturally  
**1:29:57-1:30:04:**  durable timber which is very useful it has a you know scented timber and if that's the  case it's a very useful timber to use on farm because it's very easy to mill those softwood  species and dry the timber and it can be used in so many applications around a farm where  
**1:30:16-1:30:20:**  it's exposed to the weather even if it's not in the ground it can be used for shed building  and siding for the sheds and and rails and stuff like that and this is the timber that  the farmers are when they've got no access to wood are forced to go and buy either steel  
**1:30:33-1:30:38:**  or or cement products where they could be using their own wood and as I said before  that the easiest way to make money from timber is to stop buying it and use your own because  you're getting the full on farm delivered value of that product rather than you know  
**1:30:51-1:30:56:**  the retail delivered value rather than and selling it you only get the wholesale value  or the retail value and stuff like that so always look for those local opportunities  and as you know obviously it reduces risk if you're the market and and firewood is the  
**1:31:08-1:31:14:**  obvious one that so many of farmers use use firewood and if you have to buy firewood or  you buy gas or oil to heat your house if you're producing your own firewood and firewood is  just a byproduct of growing trees for anything you know firewood is produced from our thinnings  
**1:31:27-1:31:33:**  from our prunings from from our the trees that die anyhow it's so easy to produce firewood  and so easy to process it that we can we can produce on our farm for our own use we probably  go through about five or ten tons of firewood per year if I had to buy that in it would  
**1:31:45-1:31:50:**  be two hundred dollars a ton so you know there's a there's a couple of thousand dollars just  made because I didn't have to buy firewood and didn't have to turn on the electric heater  and so these on-farm products are the starting point and then you build on top of those to  
**1:32:02-1:32:07:**  to look at those opportunities that work in your particular region but that that brings  up the question for me of of you know in your context in Bamborough Agroforestry farm you  know what were the tree species attributes that you were looking for in a specific species  
**1:32:19-1:32:22:**  so what were the attributes that you were looking for for your farm when you were choosing  the species what what was it exactly what were the characteristics that for you defined  if it was worth planting or trying out or not yeah that's really interesting because  
**1:32:36-1:32:40:**  I am interested in timber so you know let's let's acknowledge first of all that if I'm  planting for biodiversity they'd probably be native species or flowering or or a shelter  belt it's got to be something that actually grows in the exposed site but if I think about  
**1:32:51-1:32:58:**  timber as a product some of the attributes that I'm now more interested in I used to  as a young forester we're all interested in the trees that grow the fattest the fastest  and that's not always the best option as a as a land holder I often laugh that I planted  
**1:33:10-1:33:17:**  the trees when I was 25 and 30 years old I was young fit and strong but I was carrying  a seedling round in my hand and now I'm approaching 60 and I'm carrying a chainsaw and I've got  logs that are two two ton in weight and I'm lifting these heavy beams it's sort of perverse  
**1:33:29-1:33:36:**  it should be the other way around so if you think about that what what are the sort of  attributes of a timber that might suit me as I get older but also suit the next generation  and I'm moving to a certain number of characteristics first of all natural durability of timber  
**1:33:49-1:33:55:**  we just described it for the Cyprus the red gum for example you mentioned eucalyptus camalgillensis  is one of 800 eucalyptus species but not all eucalyptus produce a durable wood that can  resist rotten termites in the ground red gum is extraordinary we have a range of other  
**1:34:06-1:34:12:**  ones so I now prefer to plant trees that may be slower growing if they produce wood that  is naturally durable because naturally durable wood whether it can be used in the ground  or even just outside has much more versatility in terms of its markets can be sold to everyone  
**1:34:25-1:34:31:**  from used on farm to your neighbor to the person down the road and because it's often  used outside it doesn't have to be you know fully fully kiln dried and other sort of furniture  great the next characteristic I'm looking for is more for that specialty furniture market  
**1:34:43-1:34:51:**  it is is timbers that have spectacular color or grain in the wood now as Europeans you're  familiar with the oak ray cells that you see in oak and chestnut these ray cells are spectacular  when you get them on the quarter sawn face of a timber board because the Europeans came  
**1:35:05-1:35:10:**  and settled in Australia they started chopping down trees and the native trees and then they  noticed that some of them actually had very predominant ray cells just like the oak and  we have a gravia a native species which called silky oak because it has a beautiful timber  
**1:35:22-1:35:28:**  with a lovely ray cell we have shea oaks and they were called shea oaks because of the  wind the noise of the wind makes when it goes through the leaves is shh and the oak grain  so those common names are actually a good indicator of some of the species I look at  
**1:35:39-1:35:45:**  and say why did the settlers call this an oak timber it must have a good grain in it  and then I go and look at the grain and then I start planting trees that have this wood  characteristics good color or no color blonde timbers that are durable dark timbers the  
**1:35:56-1:36:01:**  red timbers and different colors and stuff like that and then these ray cells and characteristics  so I'm moving towards trying to produce a range of specially timbers because they're  naturally durable have a beautiful grain structure have a color that's not available elsewhere  
**1:36:14-1:36:22:**  so that I can market off the farm a range of timbers so to match a range of different  needs of the market it's more like having a craft shop that has 30 different species  in it rather than going to a timber yard that only sells two species you know softwood or  
**1:36:34-1:36:40:**  or hardwood and so I'm thinking especially forestry in the future is where someone might  drive a couple hundred kilometers to visit my farm because there's nowhere else that  they can buy that particular timber that they need to make a an arrow or a bow or a piece  
**1:36:52-1:37:00:**  of craft or especially antique fix a bit some antique furniture or or do some extraordinary  piece of art or just or build a vegetable garden with something without chemicals treated  in the wood and they're the sort of things I think about in the future partly to celebrate  
**1:37:11-1:37:16:**  the diversity of of timber because I don't know if it's the same for you but you go into  the timber yard here and they really only have two species in the yard and it's all  cut for framing timber and and you know you don't really have that choice and if I'm going  
**1:37:28-1:37:33:**  to compete with those big production timber yards I've got to have something special and  that special can come through the inherent characteristics of so many different species  that have beautiful grain color durability or some other attribute to the wood.  
**1:37:44-1:37:51:**  That's very interesting Rowan I have one last question to ask you and I would feel very  guilty if I didn't because I think it's very important and after that we'll close the interview  because it's been a while and I don't want to be too I don't exaggerate too much with  
**1:38:03-1:38:11:**  your time just slightly and so the next question for me is really about scale and yeah and  you know that what is the right scale for a farmer how because of course there's problems  of mechanization that we discussed which will influence that you know with limited mechanization  
**1:38:22-1:38:28:**  and specialized machinery available to a farmer there is a question of the cost of harvesting  and etc but there's also a question of the of the selling of the selling opportunities  so you know how what are the distribution channels and how much can they accept and  
**1:38:37-1:38:42:**  then of course there's the activity of the farmer and who is also a farmer and who wants  to manage all of these things and so who may have more or less time for his wood plantation  you know how do you go about with a farmer defining the right scale and what are the  
**1:38:51-1:38:58:**  biggest limits to scaling what's the role of mechanization yeah now that's an excellent  question it works on two levels first of all there is a strong adage in Australian farming  get big or get out and that's to do with all types of farming so my brother was a dairy  
**1:39:10-1:39:18:**  farmer he had back in the 80s and he milked 70 cows and that was a small but a reasonable  sized family farm for a dairy farm farms these days dairy farms have a thousand cows and  big rotary dairies and and and they're run all by one family and just to be commercial  
**1:39:32-1:39:39:**  they've got to have scale and economies that come with that and the same thing is obvious  in in so many aspects and it's forestry is no different of course you can produce one  tree of very high value that is worth cutting down but if you have a thousand or two thousand  
**1:39:51-1:39:59:**  or ten thousand of those same trees your opportunities to have lower costs of production because  of the economies of scale efficiencies that come with harvesting the opportunity to use  the waste product from harvesting and get a market for that and have access to bigger  
**1:40:14-1:40:22:**  buyers is clear but it's not necessarily the only way to do it so I'll describe what we  have here and then and then use some examples this currently and it's not the best best  situation we're very small scale partly because we have too many species and different planting  
**1:40:35-1:40:41:**  arrangements and it's only a 100 acre or 40 hectare farm and we've also got other areas  of grazing and other activities but we have a 100 horsepower tractor and I've got a European  logging winch on the tractor I think it comes from Slovenia with a PTO driven a remote controlled  
**1:40:57-1:41:03:**  winch with an 80 meter 70 or 80 meter cable on it and I've got a chainsaw so I can go  to any tree on our area even on patches of steep land I could fill that tree with a chainsaw  and use the logging winch to guide the tree to where I want it to fall and that's good  
**1:41:15-1:41:21:**  because it reduces the damage to other neighboring trees I can use the winch to pull that log  out and use the tractor to drag the log out across the paddocks and up into you know my  collection area in my case most of the logs go to the sawmill I have a small portable  
**1:41:34-1:41:41:**  sawmill that comes from North America called the Norwood band sawmill I would like a bigger  mill I would like a more efficient less manual mill but that's all I can afford and I think  that is worth about twenty thousand dollars with the equipment that I've got on it and  
**1:41:53-1:41:58:**  that allows me to process the log using the front end loader to turn the log load it and  unload it the timber then it goes into a solar kiln the solar kiln is like a poly house it  holds about 16 cubic meters of timber stacked out for drying it uses the sun's energy for  
**1:42:15-1:42:23:**  heat but it has a computer program and electricity to drive the fans and that allows me to dry  it is slow but slow is sometimes good when you're drying timber to reduce the risks of  some of the drying problems and it's got limited capacity and out of that then I can move timber  
**1:42:34-1:42:39:**  into a shed and I'd like a bigger shed so like all farms you would like things to be  a little bit bigger but it allows me to do small timber processing on the farm and value  adding is one way to offset the lack of economies of scale I have in the forest for example  
**1:42:55-1:43:01:**  if I harvest one tree there's no sawmill that wants to buy one log but if I process that  log I can sell the timber to a whole range of other people who only want some timber  and so if you're able to with the species you've got the equipment and the networks  
**1:43:11-1:43:16:**  you've got to do some value adding that is the easiest way to overcome the problems of  scale but back in the forest scale as we started this conversation can be overcome a little  bit by quality now I'm just recalling because you're over in Europe I went to some of the  
**1:43:31-1:43:37:**  I go to many of the old gardens in Europe I love visiting the gardens and just outside  some of the castle gardens you go into the sort of what used to be the production forest  area I imagine and there were some castles in France that the gardens weren't so interesting  
**1:43:48-1:43:54:**  they were a bit too ornate and fancy but a couple of hundred meters out where none of  the guests would really go I'd walk out into the little forest the woodlands around the  castle and in one place I saw these spectacular oak trees and beautiful black walnut trees  
**1:44:05-1:44:13:**  that have been obviously planted managed for timber over maybe a century and so and I'm  thinking those trees are clearly valuable enough to fell mill even on site and dry that  timber and only take one tree because those trees are so much in demand as you said and  
**1:44:28-1:44:34:**  the timber and be well managed are the efficiencies of milling and much better if you're having  a nice round straight log that's been pruned in some fashion and you can overcome so many  of those problems by getting quality and I think of French farmers again who have made  
**1:44:48-1:44:56:**  small scale production systems work because the emphasis is not on the volume they produce  it's not on producing a commodity it's producing a product that is has a quality and I'm sure  there's a French term to do with the difference between a commodity product and a product  
**1:45:11-1:45:17:**  that you can sell to the local Baker or sell to the local pork ham dealer or something  like that that has something of quality from that particular region.  It means as I said before that the way we do forestry has to change but I'd really like  
**1:45:28-1:45:35:**  to see forestry work at a small scale the way artisan agriculture is working so well  around the world and for it to support through that even a tourism industry where people  would come to an area to admire the furniture made in that area from species grown on farms  
**1:45:48-1:45:53:**  in that area by farmers and their families who have been managing it for generations.  It wouldn't that be a lovely future to envisage where forestry became part of that farming  landscape and became part of that what the community saw their described their landscape  
**1:46:08-1:46:13:**  they described their landscape and their community and they might even talk about the trees as  being part of that description as well and that would be a beautiful way to think about  the future of forestry in what is a world where everything else is turned into commodities  
**1:46:24-1:46:29:**  and people are looking for something which is truly natural truly unique and through  that they're about they're prepared to pay for it and reward those who have actually  taken the initiative and the care to produce those things of high value over a long period  
**1:46:39-1:46:45:**  of time and maybe that's a good way to leave it with that promising future for forestry  at a small scale.  That's a fantastic way to finish the interview and thank you so much Rowan for giving me  
**1:46:54-1:46:58:**  two hours nearly of your time.  Really appreciate it.  This interview was fascinating and I know it will be very much appreciated by our listeners.  
**1:47:03-1:47:06:**  Thank you so much for listening and making it this far.  We are curious what did you wish we had asked Rowan?  Let us know on our website so we can build an understanding of what key questions you  
**1:47:12-1:47:14:**  have in order to ask our next guests.  So see you next time.  