<script src="https://cdn.podlove.org/web-player/embed.js"></script>
    <script>
        document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', function () {
          if (document.readyState === 'interactive' || document.readyState === 'complete') {
            podlovePlayer('#player', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast/2-innovative-agroforestry-systems-on-a-diversified-csa-farm-with-matteo-mazzola.json', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast/config.json').then(registerExternalEvents('player'))
          }
        })
  </script>---
title: 2 Innovative Agroforestry Systems On A Diversified Csa Farm With Matteo Mazzola
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2020-08-12)  

**0:00:00-0:00:26:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:26-0:00:36:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  these challenges.  
**0:00:36-0:00:50:**  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Hi everyone, welcome back to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:00:50-0:01:22:**  Today we're delighted to have with us Matteo Mazzola from Myside Farm.  Today we received finally the genetic core of our future sheep flock, actually not flock  but herd, because we got our male, which is a blue-faced lister, a young boy of four months  
**0:01:22-0:01:46:**  old, and it's very, for all the English farmers, it's a very normal breed, like you find it  everywhere, it's basically the most used male breed which is used in England, but in Italy  I think there are possibly four or five of these, animals of this breed.  
**0:01:46-0:02:07:**  And that's very important because with the male we are going to change the genetics to  direct, to orientate the genetics of the whole herd and it's a very important day.  It was very expensive, it's a very funny animal and so we got one blue-faced lister and one  
**0:02:07-0:02:28:**  textile female, that's going to be for another project.  Also with the animals, which are going to be the core of the whole system, the element  of activation, of potentiation, of the dynamic elements also for the agroforestry systems.  
**0:02:28-0:02:49:**  So it's very important to work out an important plan from an ecological point of view, so  you need to choose the right breeds, you need to choose, actually you need to choose the  right species, you need to choose then the right breed, or the right breeds, and then  
**0:02:49-0:03:07:**  you need to understand the numbers connected to how the season changes, how the pasture  changes, if one year is more dry or one year is more wet, again you will change the numbers  and the behaviour of the animals.  
**0:03:07-0:03:24:**  So we are basically now in the process of trying to find the compatibility between our  landscape, our microclimate, the type of animals that we are choosing and the way we want to  manage them.  
**0:03:24-0:03:53:**  The objectives are mainly two.  One is to speed up the regeneration and the maintenance process of our ecosystem, agroecosystem.  And the second one is to have another, a new produce to sell for our clients on our market.  
**0:03:53-0:04:12:**  And did this sheep come all the way from England?  It was sent to a live animal from there, or you found it closer to home?  No, luckily there are a few enlightened Italians, which they did the work for me a few years  
**0:04:12-0:04:33:**  ago.  So we got the son of English animals, but again he was born in Italy.  So I will, with the COVID issue, everything sort of stopped, like the import and export  
**0:04:33-0:04:51:**  of animals slowed down a lot.  But I will possibly at the end of summer try to get more animals from England because we  have a precise idea of what we want, not just the breeds, but also the genetic lines of  
**0:04:51-0:05:02:**  every single breed.  That's something that we'll definitely want to get into during this podcast, understand  a bit more about the decisions and why you're choosing these breeds.  
**0:05:02-0:05:18:**  But what we like to do at the beginning is to understand a bit the context of the farm  and so that we can present our listeners an image of what it looks like at I SIDE.  So do you think you could tell us a bit about who are the key players on the farm and who's  
**0:05:18-0:05:39:**  working there at the moment?  Yeah, basically the farm is managed by my partner Paola, by me, by Jessica, which is  our colleague and friend since nearly four years.  
**0:05:39-0:05:57:**  And then we are helped by volunteers, which are interested in spending a few weeks or  months at our farm to learn a little bit more and to check how is the system that we are  creating.  
**0:05:57-0:06:18:**  And yeah, plus a few local people that come here and there during the week, one or two  days just to help us because they like the project.  Not necessarily interested in deeply understanding everything which is behind the regenerative  
**0:06:18-0:06:35:**  agriculture and agroforestry and so on.  But still they play possibly the most important role, which is like supporting us when a big  portion of the community don't understand yet what we are doing or actually also tries  
**0:06:35-0:06:52:**  to create problems.  And so on a typical day, how many people are working in the field?  It really changes a lot.  
**0:06:52-0:07:07:**  It changes a lot because we are not a farm, we are a building site.  So it can be one person, it can be 10 people.  So it really changes.  
**0:07:07-0:07:29:**  There are too many things which make up our farm.  There is the family layer, there is the relationship layer, there is the bureaucracy layer, there  is the customer-client layer, there is the experimentation research and the demonstration  
**0:07:29-0:07:42:**  layer.  There is the productive of course, the agronomic layer and really is very complex and we are  very young farm.  
**0:07:42-0:07:52:**  Many things are working, many other ones we already abandoned them, many we are changing  them.  How do you even have the time to talk to us, Matteo?  
**0:07:52-0:08:10:**  Because you're beautiful people.  Because for us it's very important to do what we can to support well-structured projects  like yours.  
**0:08:10-0:08:26:**  It's because either we don't have the capacity or the time to organize, to give more equal  to what we are doing.  Because of course it's not our job.  
**0:08:26-0:08:47:**  Our job is to be in the field, to observe, to get feedback from the systems and to change  them and to have the flexibility and the resources in order to completely change the system.  Because then when I consult or I give courses, I don't want to tell them what it could be  
**0:08:47-0:09:15:**  if I tell them, look, with this soil, this climate is like this or has been like this.  And then from there on we can start, we can continue with more precise planning, with  more precise protocols either for disease management or water management or soil fertility  
**0:09:15-0:09:30:**  or any brick of the system.  So, yeah.  Could you tell us a bit about what are you producing on the farm at the moment?  
**0:09:30-0:09:40:**  What are you selling and where to or who to?  Yeah.  Again, this is changing all the time because we are setting the system.  
**0:09:40-0:10:01:**  Basically every place has its own identity, social identity and cultural identity.  So it already has changed a lot since the beginning here, but even more from the farm  I was managing a few kilometers away from here, far from here, is completely different.  
**0:10:01-0:10:17:**  So we are selling, we have a CSA.  I think now we have around 80 families which are on our CSA.  And then we sell to I think five restaurants.  
**0:10:17-0:10:36:**  And we have extra boxes like veg and fruit boxes that we are selling to people that don't  want to join the CSA.  And then we have, which is becoming a quite interesting economic part of our project,  
**0:10:36-0:11:01:**  which is this small trust market that we have just at the entrance of the property where  we just place bags with the price and the weight of the produce.  And people just leave their money, which is quite normal to find this type of selling  
**0:11:01-0:11:11:**  system in the north of Europe or in Australia, in places where I've been.  But here it's just like everybody look at us and say, what?  Are you crazy?  
**0:11:11-0:11:21:**  Aren't they stealing everything?  Yeah, many times it happens.  But again, this is for us, for us has been very important to do something like that,  
**0:11:21-0:11:40:**  to build trust and to show something completely different than they are used to, to the people  that are living here, to the people from here.  So it was amazing, it was very important also the answer of the mayor to what we did and  
**0:11:40-0:11:56:**  to the people that really like, people that are leaving messages inside the money box,  which is of course is open and someone can take the money as it happens sometimes or  as it happens many times, people are leaving more money than we are asking.  
**0:11:56-0:12:15:**  I remember when I was there, you were saying that there was more money in the box usually  than what was expected with the amount of produce on the shelf, right?  So people were probably enjoying this kind of trusting and leaving a bit of a tip in  
**0:12:15-0:12:18:**  a way.  Yeah.  Is that still the case there?  
**0:12:18-0:12:33:**  It is, it is.  Now we, it starts to be an interesting, as I was saying, economic future because really  we are starting to pay off our rents, like for our houses, thanks to that market.  
**0:12:33-0:12:54:**  So it's increasing more and more, more people know it, more people want to support us, more  people through that are understanding that behind that gate, there is a farm, people  didn't know it because we didn't have time to advertise our presence and many local people  
**0:12:54-0:13:14:**  were speaking, were saying bad things about us because they don't even knew us, they just  listened to people that had interest on our land and so it's very therapeutical, that  market, very therapeutical for many people in different ways.  
**0:13:14-0:13:40:**  So yeah, we sell vegetables, we sell fruits, we have olive oil, eggs, the honey, I mean  we have bees but now they're managed by one of our friends which is, let's say, external  to the farm but still producing the honey from our land and then we started a few months  
**0:13:40-0:14:06:**  ago producing edible medicinal mushrooms and we have a small nursery where we produce multifunctional  plants for agroforestry systems and then I'm sure I'm forgetting, ah we have berries, many,  many berries and possibly something else which I forget now.  
**0:14:06-0:14:25:**  What about the sheep, what are you planning on doing with the sheep on the land?  The sheep is, at the moment we have meat sheep, so we just started a few months ago so it  will take some time to have the produce the next year and basically the sheep we want  
**0:14:25-0:14:47:**  to work on a particular quality of meat because in Italy, sheep meat at least in north is  not much known, not much used and yeah we want to work on the quality, like on the taste,  on the experience that people are not used to and this is one thing.  
**0:14:47-0:15:21:**  Not working with lambs but with adults and then we have some ideas for the hool, we would  like to make organic pillows with the hool and then again one very important part is  like selling alive animals, so the genetic and for this we work on producing mules, so  
**0:15:21-0:15:48:**  that means like hybrids between the blue-faced lister and other breeds and then we'll see  maybe also to start at some point to sell like pure breeds which are not really known  or present in Italy because we can have a strong eco about new things in Italy because  
**0:15:48-0:16:12:**  many people know us, many people trust us, no debt behind a new project, there is lots  of study, lots of research, lots of trials, lots of money that we have been spending in  order to arrive to something very solid, I don't know how to say in English, very...  
**0:16:12-0:16:27:**  Sure.  Maybe you could explain to us a bit what the land is like in terms of or what your context  there is like in terms of the climate, the soil, to have an idea or a picture of what  
**0:16:27-0:16:46:**  it all looks like.  Yeah, basically we are just in front of Lake Iseo which is a glacial lake, very pretty  and the farm is located on the...  
**0:16:46-0:17:17:**  I don't know how to say in English, I think it's the moranic deposits of the glacier.  Basically in few thousands of years or even more of glacier activity moving sediment,  moving soil, rocks, sand and seals and clay, basically our farm is on 80 meters, around  
**0:17:17-0:17:44:**  80 meters deep glacier sediment which come from mainly, it comes from Balcomonica valley  which is a very diverse valley from geological point of view, is where the acidic Alps meet  the limey and the alkaline Alps so you can find granite, you can find flintstone, you  
**0:17:44-0:18:05:**  can find limestone, you can find gypsum, you can find all sorts of stones.  I counted around 13 different minerals in our soil.  So does that mean it's very rich in its very fertile soil, is that what it means?  
**0:18:05-0:18:34:**  It's very rich in certain elements, very poor in other elements.  It's not alluvial soil, so basically an alluvial soil is the sum of many moranic or many non-alluvial  soil, we have many excesses like copper, like zinc, like calcium, like magnesium, we have  
**0:18:34-0:18:57:**  them in very high quantities.  But still it's very interesting and the interesting thing is that the moranic deposits, they were  left by the glacier on the side of a mountain which gets to 1500 meters in height and that  
**0:18:57-0:19:28:**  mountain on the top is still not deposited from the glacier but is like gypsum, sorry,  is dolomite which gives some of the characteristics of our soil.  And the property is basically developing on 70 meters of altitude and is around 60,000  
**0:19:28-0:19:53:**  square meters, so 6 hectares around.  And what can I say, we have a mountain, sorry, a water spring which is very important for  us because it runs I think around 20 to 40,000 liters of water per day but of a very alkaline  
**0:19:53-0:20:12:**  water with very high active calcium, active lime inside, so it's very interesting to be  working with that water.  And from microclimate point of view, we are in front of a lake but at the beginning of  
**0:20:12-0:20:37:**  the valley of the lake that created the lake, there are glaciers so temperature can be not  extremely low but still we have winters with low temperatures and very hot summers.  It can get to 40 degrees and in the winter, in the last year not really but it can get  
**0:20:37-0:20:55:**  to minus 15, minus 10 but normally it would be around zero or a little bit below.  Of course climate is changing, it's increasing the temperature but still more or less this  is about the microclimate.  
**0:20:55-0:21:15:**  We have around 800 to 1,000 millimeters of rain per year with peaks of 1,200 or 700 millimeters  in the driest seasons.  Yeah Matteo, we thought before we go into really exploring the detail of how you're  
**0:21:15-0:21:29:**  managing the systems, maybe you could start explaining the different agroforestry systems  you have on the farm.  It's a very diverse farm from a morphology point of view.  
**0:21:29-0:21:51:**  We have billions of different niches and we have huge diversity of, especially of grasses  and forbs and herbaceous plants.  This makes things very interesting but very difficult together with the soil which is  
**0:21:51-0:22:06:**  not, it's changing, every meter of soil is changing.  So on one line of peaches you will see huge differences in health and production and plant  behavior.  
**0:22:06-0:22:29:**  So the thing, I have to start from not really the system but why we are implementing so  many different systems.  I do consultancies, I do courses and I like to experiment and research in order to have  
**0:22:29-0:22:55:**  informations, material that can be spread, that can be given to farmers, not just to  become more regenerative, more organic, but also to go faster in the transition for a  more regenerative agriculture.  
**0:22:55-0:23:13:**  And at the same time, for us it's very important, maybe even more than the regenerative agriculture  part, is that it has to be economically viable.  Either the implementation but also the outcome.  
**0:23:13-0:23:41:**  So we are trying to understand by implementing so many systems, first what grows well locally  because we would like to create a wave of interest from the concept but also from economical  perspective.  
**0:23:41-0:24:01:**  We would like to have people that surround us that start to do similar or the same things  in order to become stronger in the market and maybe to have a nice produce from Sulzano  that we don't produce just in few hundreds of kilos but it can be a few thousands and  
**0:24:01-0:24:21:**  to get maybe also to bigger cities.  So we started with a quite big olive growth especially for these areas, it's big because  it's more than 250 trees with some trees which are quite big yielding.  
**0:24:21-0:24:39:**  We are in the north of Italy so it's not really the best place for olives to grow but still  we have some trees which are yielding up to 130 kilos of olives per year, so quite big  trees.  
**0:24:39-0:25:01:**  And then we had to interact at the beginning with those trees.  To me the olive growth together with the pasture underneath it is already a system.  We can't and we don't want to work too much in complexifying the olive growth system because  
**0:25:01-0:25:19:**  for two reasons.  First on our latitude we are already needing to prune the trees in order to have more light  to come from the center, from the middle of the tree because there is a lack of light  
**0:25:19-0:25:40:**  in certain months of the year.  Especially then connected also to average moisture during the year is an evergreen tree  so during the coldest month you want the air flow, it keeps on flowing otherwise we have  
**0:25:40-0:26:07:**  many, many, many fungi and bacterial diseases and this already tells you, ok, we can't play  too much with top canopy or emergent trees which grows above the olive tree.  We are doing few experiments but still I think it will be not the direction we will be taking  
**0:26:07-0:26:22:**  with the olive trees.  The second most important thing with olive trees is that you need to put nets on the  ground so you can't really mess up with bushes and too many trees underneath the trees because  
**0:26:22-0:26:39:**  otherwise when you go to harvest the olives it takes too long to harvest them and we should  sell the olive oil for too much, too expensive and people wouldn't buy it.  We are already selling it for a lot because in this area it costs a lot, like between  
**0:26:39-0:26:59:**  18 and 25 euros per litre when in the south of Italy, in Basilicata, which quality is  also higher than ours, they are selling it for 4-6 euros a litre.  So you're still able to sell that olive oil then even if it's not competitive with better  
**0:26:59-0:27:15:**  olive oil from the south you still have a local customer?  Yeah, we sell it all no problem, we could have even more because people either like  to buy local or like our project and then they want to support us.  
**0:27:15-0:27:40:**  Most of the olive oil goes to family members, friends and close customers because really  we are producing between 300 and 750 litres of oil per year so it's not a lot.  Just our family I think uses 60-70 litres per year, maybe even more so it's not much.  
**0:27:40-0:27:58:**  It will be increasing because the trees were abandoned and we are managing them in order  to have an increased production.  When we want to manage the system in a very simple way, at least from a plant species  
**0:27:58-0:28:15:**  point of view, the diversity comes in the pasture and the pasture has to be managed  by animals then the increasing value from a functional biodiversity point of view is  brought by the animals and their activity.  
**0:28:15-0:28:36:**  The sheep and the olive tree if they are well managed is a beautiful relation, they work  very well together, extremely well together.  That's great and I think we'll come back a bit later to really the interactions between  
**0:28:36-0:28:52:**  trees and animals and that's something we're really interested in.  But just to continue our overview then, you also I think understand and associate vegetables  with trees and just finishing our little virtual tour of your tree systems.  
**0:28:52-0:29:15:**  The second most important system, at least by now, is the fruit orchard.  It's a really experimental orchard from many points of view because we have 88 fruit tree  varieties which is a bit of a nightmare from one point of view but very interesting from  
**0:29:15-0:29:34:**  an observation point of view and the learning curve point of view.  We have planted the most used known species, peaches, apricots, apples, pears, plums, figs  and table grape.  
**0:29:34-0:29:55:**  We planted the orchard on a keyline pattern in order to show and observe also the effect  also on a small bit of land because we are talking about less than a hectare orchard.  I think it's around 7,000 square meters if I'm right.  
**0:29:55-0:30:24:**  We have monoculture line which means that on one tree line we have the same species  but every four trees it changes varieties so we have this pattern of starting with the  earliest flowering, actually the earliest fruiting varieties and going forward the latest  
**0:30:24-0:30:36:**  fruiting varieties.  And then we have for every species we created different experimental consortiums with other  trees.  
**0:30:36-0:30:57:**  For example with the plums on one line, we have two lines of plums, on one line we have  planted of course the plums, in between the plums we have two quite closely planted pollonias  which I don't remember what's the name in English.  
**0:30:57-0:31:16:**  There we go.  So pollonias, we have pollonias planted from seeds but also three hybrid varieties in order  to check the behavior and the management and the resistance to the climate.  
**0:31:16-0:31:45:**  And then between one plum and the other then we will have the pollonias in the middle between  the trees and then under the pollonias and between the plums we have gooseberries, it's  like the bush layer and then on, because it's on a slight slope on the upper part we planted  
**0:31:45-0:32:20:**  a consortium of every one meter, sort of it will be an edge.  So we planted mulberries, willows and some elderberries and different let's say wild  trees which will be kept like bushes in order to have proteins, minerals or those biochemical  
**0:32:20-0:32:44:**  elements that the grazing animals can't find on the pasture.  Then we are increasing dramatically the amount of active roots in the free tree lines but  keeping those trees very young all the time like sort of either coppicing or very low  
**0:32:44-0:33:03:**  pollarding system.  In order, every time that the animals pass from that area they have their choice, pre-choice  like tree fodder and they will eat whatever they will need.  
**0:33:03-0:33:18:**  So they will eat the leaves, they will eat the twigs and then when it will be needed  we will go and cut and re-nuate those branches.  Do you want me to tell you other examples of consortiums?  
**0:33:18-0:33:33:**  I think it already gives us quite a good idea of the, as the conversation keeps going we  can maybe explain them when needed, some other consortiums but already here there's a lot  of questions that come up with what you've said.  
**0:33:33-0:33:41:**  Why are you integrating paulownias in the orchard for example?  What's the purpose there?  What's the role of the paulownia?  
**0:33:41-0:34:01:**  Well behind it there is a little bit of a mental disease which is that disease that  all of the agroforestry and regenerative agriculture farmers have which is like I want to grow  biomass, I want to grow biomass.  
**0:34:01-0:34:19:**  We don't even know why, I mean of course we know why but it's something that comes out  very natural like if you see a mound of wood chips on the side of the road you're already  thinking oh wow I have to come here and take it to my farm.  
**0:34:19-0:34:36:**  Yeah it's a sort of a cleptomania of biomass.  The paulownias is one of the fastest growing trees in this climate and this year we have  seen it like in two and a half months they reached four meters high and now while I'm  
**0:34:36-0:34:59:**  speaking probably they are growing five six centimeters so they're just amazing.  So production of biomass local like on C2 and then a very important feature is which  we already experimented in the last three weeks with two strong hail events that has  
**0:34:59-0:35:18:**  ruined many different crops we have especially the apples.  After the paulownias, the paulownias were destroyed like they are full of holes, the  tips of the paulownias were broken but the trees that were already protected by them  
**0:35:18-0:35:37:**  they didn't have any problems.  So they did reach a quite high level I'm thinking to have them growing at least to seven eight  meters and to unbranch them so to prune all the bottom branches and to keep this protective  
**0:35:37-0:35:58:**  cap at the top at seven eight meters height it could be that we go even higher because  we want light to penetrate through but we also want to create this protective layer.  Are you worried about the shade and how that will look?  
**0:35:58-0:36:12:**  I've been there I've seen the paulownias so I know that they're located in between fruit  trees so maybe that needs to be clear for the listeners.  What are you expecting the shade how are you expecting the shade created by the paulownia  
**0:36:12-0:36:33:**  to impact the different fruit trees that you have in the orchard?  To me that's not a problem it's like if there is too much shade you understand it because  the trees depending the species either they will curve they will move their branches new  
**0:36:33-0:36:55:**  branches toward the light so you already understand that there is too much shade or they will  make darker leaves or bigger leaves and then you understand you have to observe if what  is the extent to which that particular species can tolerate the shade if there is too much  
**0:36:55-0:37:24:**  shade you just prune more more branches or you just you just cut like polar the tree  in the more sensible periods normally during summertime for any crop here the sun is too  strong yeah so it's very important by the summer to reach a good protection.  
**0:37:24-0:37:48:**  Paulownia that is unpruned it will reduce also the size of the leaves the first year  they're huge they are there we have some leaves which are like 60 centimeters in diameter  they're really a roof but while the tree gets older the trees are becoming smaller and more  
**0:37:48-0:38:18:**  light passes through so I'm not concerned again of early shade which is the most damaging  especially to flowering trees and to the first important enlarging of the fruits the paulownia  is a c4 is the only c4 tree that we have around here so it wakes up very late during this  
**0:38:18-0:38:40:**  during the season so meanwhile all the fruit trees have already fruited the paulownia is  still there which is still sleeping so that's that's it doesn't concern me.  Okay and going back to what you were to the the functions of the paulownia I also expect  
**0:38:40-0:38:55:**  that you know by pruning the paulownia on the sides you're gonna be able to sell the  wood at some point no is that something that you you're hoping to do are you hoping to  leave it there and to and to act as a support to the fruit trees around?  
**0:38:55-0:39:25:**  Is what I want to do like of course the what we can't do is to apply is to fully apply  the the syntropic principles of sort of rhythmic forest falling in order to restart the the  succession process because this will take many years and of course a lack of a lack  
**0:39:25-0:39:49:**  of production for for certain periods but we can play with different crops so maybe  now the paulownia is not growing meanwhile we will be planting another silvicultural  crop like woods woods crop and when the paulownia will be ready to be cut will be already have  
**0:39:49-0:40:11:**  another tree that will grow at the same height so eventually that's the idea to grow the  wood that we're using the farm to build stuff to build the the barns to build all sorts  of things that we are building right now and we have to buy the wood we want to grow fast  
**0:40:11-0:40:30:**  wood on our farm and there are many ideas also with the paulownia woods but we can speak  later or another time if you want to.  Maybe I was thinking of staying on the paulownia kind of track here but looking going below  
**0:40:30-0:40:48:**  the soil what are you expecting to happen on on the soil level with the roots and just  elaborate a bit more like one of the the typical concerns that would arise here because if  we understand correctly you've got on the tree line you have fruit trees in between  
**0:40:48-0:41:02:**  you have paulownias you could also you will also integrate some other trees there and  you also have berries underneath right what do you you know some people may be can may  be concerned by competition for example so what would you what would you say to what  
**0:41:02-0:41:24:**  what do you have to say about the whole root aspect and and competition factor?  I have to admit that this is something too complex to be sure to say oh it's like this  I mean nobody really knows well the soil especially when you are applying agroecological principles  
**0:41:24-0:41:53:**  and and you are sort of letting yourself accepting all the all the diversity and all the possibilities  that that a natural system brings with it so I don't know what will will be happening  with the roots of course we have very powerful tools which are pruning branches but also  
**0:41:53-0:42:19:**  pruning roots to reduce or to stimulate the activity of of the trees and the only problem  then because we already said that the shade it can be managed with the with the pruning  or the correct management the only problem then it will it will be possibly the the fertilization  
**0:42:19-0:42:44:**  and and the lack of nutrients for the fruit trees or or or the berries or the poll onions  which are trees that that require a huge amount of nutrients we already have set drip irrigation  system and also the possibility to to use rain rain irrigation so we use already every  
**0:42:44-0:43:08:**  time that we irrigate something especially the vegetables because of fruit trees we don't  really irrigate them but every time that arrives water the water is is is with a sort of fertilizer  so we use a lot how do you call them macerates like macerations ferments yeah not really  
**0:43:08-0:43:35:**  ferments but it's more like we we we chuck leaves from dynamic accumulators or just crops  in the in the water they they decompose in the in the water and when the water is is  it gets colored we we dilute that water into the irrigation water and so every time that  
**0:43:35-0:43:56:**  we irrigate the trees and the plants they they get nutrients this is the simplest thing  but then of course we have many many other different produce that we use to stimulate  to to to bring the nutrients which are difficult for the trees to get in quantity and in quality  
**0:43:56-0:44:22:**  so through water via gravity we spend very little time nearly no energy effort to to  bring a lot of nutrients to the trees then if there are not enough nutrients because  there are too many trees then we will be bringing them through a fertiligation system but in  
**0:44:22-0:44:39:**  your experience on the farm with all the different experiments that you have could could you  say that as could you say could you generalize that planting densely hasn't impacted performance  or has impacted performance no because we the the first year we grew together with the  
**0:44:39-0:45:05:**  trees the vegetables so on the tree lines on this let's say 60 to 80 centimeters wide  fruit trees beds we we we planted vegetables and I mean we produce good vegetables and  and and and the trees they grew more than we expected very very fast very robust actually  
**0:45:05-0:45:30:**  we we had too much fertility too much nitrogen from organic matter release we have a sandy  loam soil so the organic matter it just like burns in like like the wood in a stove and  it releases a lot and and also we have been mulching with with the grass that grows between  
**0:45:30-0:45:55:**  the fruit trees lines which again I should have stopped the second year and started to  be using wood chips or to plant more herbaceous layer to cover the soil which is what we will  be doing the next winter we already reproduced lots of herbaceous layer plants to do that  
**0:45:55-0:46:21:**  then no I I can I can answer on most of the crops we didn't have absolutely any of of  those competition problems maybe is important to study the whole issue of allopathy because  for example where we I knew it but I don't know too many things to do I forgot when we  
**0:46:21-0:46:46:**  were planting that when we put table grape we have two lines of table grape on the right  line on the south line we we placed we transplanted parsley very densely planted parsley under  the the grape and parsley has an extremely strong allopathy effect on on many plants  
**0:46:46-0:47:06:**  and those grapes for that year they didn't grow I mean their cousins on on the on the  left side they grew from a very small plant like we planted like 20 centimeter long twig  and the first year we had on some plants like nine meters growth on the ones with parsley  
**0:47:06-0:47:24:**  we had like 60 70 centimeter growth with small leaves a little bit yellowish then we we took  away the parsley and the next year they just grew like like crazy that shows how you know  it's important to carefully choose the species that you put together right you can't just  
**0:47:24-0:47:44:**  put anything with anything or could you totally no no no I mean you should plant anything  and then with that soil you will observe what crops they are they are damaging or they are  stopping or or they're decreasing the speed of growth of the of your commercial or your  
**0:47:44-0:48:02:**  fruit trees for example but the first year at least starting from a small experimental  plot try everything when someone tells me oh this tree you shouldn't put it with that  and I do it if someone tells me don't do it I do it because I want to see in my soil because  
**0:48:02-0:48:20:**  if I think that that tree has got certain functions that that important functions that  my system needs I will try to use it people everybody is telling me oh don't plant eucalyptus  what are you doing in the north of Italy and now we choose between those 750 species of  
**0:48:20-0:48:40:**  eucalyptus we found the three most cold resistant and we're plant we planted them and now they  are growing this year we have like four meters tall eucalyptus between between the fig trees  between the peaches and and nothing at the moment has changed if compared to the peaches  
**0:48:40-0:49:02:**  and the fig trees that don't have those eucalyptus trees so it's very important to study a lot  to go to courses to go to visit farms but then to to experiment because every single  soil will be suppressing or will be enhancing a certain characteristic of a determined species  
**0:49:02-0:49:27:**  and is it would be a pity not to try a tree just because someone told you don't don't  do that so I always tell people look do whatever you think is good for you if you have time  energy money resources do it on a small piece of your farm while you're producing organically  
**0:49:27-0:49:51:**  or organically from a conventional point of view in order to get the money that you need  to to run your operation then a small part of farmer you have to experiment I don't know  what it would be with the paulownia roots what I can do is is just to keep light coming  
**0:49:51-0:50:06:**  coming through in the amount that the trees needed and to fertilize my my crops which  produce fruits that that I need maybe I will understand that it's better to cut down the  fruit trees and to plant more paulownias to produce wood right we don't know yet  
**0:50:06-0:50:26:**  Mateo I wanted to ask just to clarify going back to this idea of you know planting vegetables  on your tree line the first year which I think is a very exciting idea you know you mentioned  that even roots were getting burnt is there did you see like a conflict between the needs  
**0:50:26-0:50:43:**  of vegetables in terms of fertility and over fertilizing trees or you know are there any  specific combinations that worked well I just want to go a bit in a few examples here because  I think it's fascinating yeah yeah I go straight forward with the we we tried many different  
**0:50:43-0:51:11:**  crops yeah I can tell you about I could speak about every single vegetable crop connected  to a particular tree species but I tell you I start from this from two crops that we planted  under the peaches fruit lines the potatoes was amazing it was perfect for many reasons  
**0:51:11-0:51:30:**  because it's good the first year and this is what I will do with the next system that  I I will be planting I will not use mulch for the first year because I want I don't  want the trees to develop a shallow root system and I'm depending of course on the crops certain  
**0:51:30-0:51:53:**  crops it will be fine I will be mulch from the first year but I would prefer to have  not bare soil but of course like maybe a crop like a vegetable crop that lets some some  sun burn the soil and the temperature to increase so the first root structure that the free  
**0:51:53-0:52:18:**  trees developed the first year which is extremely important is like the the spine of a child  I want them to grow very deep I wanted to extend where the the natural water is so the  potatoes were good because they allowed us to by also destroying when we harvest the  
**0:52:18-0:52:45:**  harvest the potatoes by destroying the superficial roots the only problem is that the potato  is is the best crop you could choose to bring verticillium fungi I don't know what is the  black rot maybe it's called in in in English anyway verticillium is the Latin name and  
**0:52:45-0:53:08:**  the potato carries it and brings it to the system and the peaches are extremely vulnerable  against this disease and not just the peaches because it's a disease that it grows on around  350 different crops and is a disease that kills the trees it can kill a very old olive  
**0:53:08-0:53:30:**  tree if there are the right conditions so when I talk about about this with the Antgosh  he told me is not the problem is not to plant the potato the problem is that the potato  should be planted on the top of the soil not under the soil so this I still have to I have  
**0:53:30-0:53:51:**  to try yeah but still in our case the line with the potatoes the peaches on that line  they are the ugliest they're still producing a lot we're trying by fertilizing them by  treating them with all sorts of preparations we are trying to keep them alive with the  
**0:53:51-0:54:13:**  sort of right pruning but still from a commercial point of view if I had decided to put potatoes  everywhere that would be would have been a big problem on the other side an amazing crop  has been corn we planted a line of corn very thick like sweet corn sweet corn in between  
**0:54:13-0:54:35:**  the lines sorry on the line in between the trees and those trees they were the most amazing  they grew like crazy and they were protected in the first year which is very important  because I imagine a small tree doesn't normally a peach tree would grow through the bushes  
**0:54:35-0:55:01:**  through the grass or protected by another tree and that was the corn was with his shape  which is like long and thin it lets the light come but still protecting leaves here and  there while the sun moves I do believe that the strong microbial activity and the huge  
**0:55:01-0:55:24:**  amount of hormones that are released continuously by this amazing C4 crop they played a very  important role into the activation of the roots of the peaches I have pictures which  are really showing what will happen there I mean we are not talking about thousands  
**0:55:24-0:55:49:**  of trees or an experiment of many hectares but still when you have let's say 15 trees  with one crop and 15 trees with another crop and you see a tendency you already have some  good answers another good crop is sweet potatoes I really like sweet potatoes because they  
**0:55:49-0:56:15:**  produce huge biomass they protect the soil during the summer and they create this how  to say big elements which are digging the strongest and the hardest of the soils like  moving stones like pumping sugars in the soil around the sweet potatoes the soil normally  
**0:56:15-0:56:42:**  is amazing is fantastic so they create when you harvest them the space for new soil to  be created they pump the soil the soil grows thanks to those to that crop I don't know  if I answered yeah that's great no that's great it's really interesting but then you  
**0:56:42-0:57:03:**  kind of prepare your tree line then plant it inside and then bring any specific fertilization  for the vegetables you kind of just fit them in the tree system and along the needs of  the trees then the tree in the fruit orchard the tree line preparation process it took  
**0:57:03-0:57:30:**  nine months where we have been cutting the grass and collecting it on the key lines so  basically we had the roots of the pasture that decomposed and left a very good and rich  soil part of the material that we added for three four times that decomposed and also  
**0:57:30-0:57:51:**  gave a good amount of nutrients and at the beginning we put a layer of five centimeters  of compost that we produced like very high carbon like 90 percent wood chips compost  very well decomposed together with the pumice rock dust to bring those minerals that we  
**0:57:51-0:58:20:**  don't have in this soil and in the whole of the trees we also we put all sorts of stimulants  like other rock dust microganism and bio are activated by a chair and the learner learner  diet and and things like that for the vegetable basically compost and and and the mulch  
**0:58:20-0:58:37:**  in looking at these more complex systems that you're creating these more complex tree lines  where you're integrating vegetables the berries the trees the paulownia i think it'd be interesting  to to to you know go over some more of the of the ways the elements interact together  
**0:58:37-0:59:02:**  yeah yeah yeah for example well the fruit trees basically they have to produce the fruits  because there is a lack of organic fruit production in the in the area so we can sell them for  a quite high price and the the berry layer which is the bush layer is a beautiful layer  
**0:59:02-0:59:25:**  to me is one of the the most fascinating and and important layers if i had to choose to  put a top canopy or an emergent tree in in a fruit orchard or a bush layer i would have  chosen the bush layer i mean bush bushes are are like are small trees or like a sort of  
**0:59:25-0:59:50:**  lignified pasture i love them because they're their roots they're marvelous they're they're  just magical every single species has as a magical root that that does one or or have  one or more ecological functions especially berries uh currents and gooseberries in in  
**0:59:50-1:00:13:**  this case they're amazing uh tree nurse they they grow they they are like an unexpressed  forest every current and every gooseberry plant is an unexpressed forest you just let  them like that and they will grow a forest the first year of planting we already had  
**1:00:13-1:00:36:**  no sorry second year when when the currents were were bigger but but also the gooseberries  under them they already started to grow maples service trees they started to grow uh what's  the name mulberries yeah um in like older raspberry systems now it is a forest it's  
**1:00:36-1:00:58:**  growing a forest so they're fine fine very thick uh root systems they just stimulate  the soil in in in in a wonderful way that no other crops manage to do so they have a  very positive interaction with the fruit trees that are above them it is is a good is a good  
**1:00:58-1:01:18:**  uh interaction between the two yeah it's like the the protection from the fruit trees is  good for the berries and the and the soil root activity and microbial activity of course  connected to the to the berries is is proper theoretical it is good for for the the fruit  
**1:01:18-1:01:40:**  tree it's just like the berry is substitute to me from what i've been observing the the  presence for example of of willow willow root system so very active very nice color all  the time growing new roots all the time new shoots all the time very active long sorry  
**1:01:40-1:02:02:**  short uh lifespan so they have to give all themselves if you imagine that from the second  year you already are in full production it's just amazing you have to imagine that these  trees these these crops they need to have an extremely complex active microbial and  
**1:02:02-1:02:25:**  root system around them because they grow a huge amount in quantity of fruits in a very  short period because they are always the first crops producing at the beginning of the year  they flower and in in in very little time they they bury fruits so they really need  
**1:02:25-1:02:43:**  to have a strong system that supports this so they are very vital to the system i do  i love the passion in your voice i literally can't wait to plant berries now you know i'm  in a climate where berries grow and i'm just getting excited and angsty on my chair just  
**1:02:43-1:03:07:**  thinking like wait when can i get out and plant these you know it's so it's so great  man in order to um how to say when when you like to plant trees when you like the berries  that you want to nearly to hug them it's like the winter is always too far because you want  
**1:03:07-1:03:29:**  to plant them all the time so we this year we we started to develop a system which is  like a it needs particular pots and a particular management but a system that allows us and  we already we're already experimenting to plant trees the whole year round so it doesn't  
**1:03:29-1:03:47:**  matter what is the season if you have a little bit of water and and you apply this system  you can plant the whole year round and and this for the people like like you and Dimitri  and me is like it's very very important because we need to plant forest all the time could  
**1:03:47-1:04:13:**  you elaborate a bit more on that uh system it's very simple it's basically we are using  these cardboard tubes it's like compressed cardboard which is open on the top and on  the bottom is is bent inside so it has a hole but on on the close to the side is uh it's  
**1:04:13-1:04:37:**  got like a sort of uh bottom yeah and you plant the whole thing it's like 25 centimeter  tall and seven eight centimeter wide so basically it's lots of soil or lots of compost inside  and then you just plant it and then what happen you don't move the roots it's not even like  
**1:04:37-1:04:57:**  root trainers that you have to open the root trainer and some sort of stress happen you  just plant this beautiful uh bullet in the soil and just give a little bit of water and  little by little the roots of the trees will grow in the bottom layer so you're already  
**1:04:57-1:05:17:**  growing trees perfect for agroforestry system where you don't want shallow root trees that  go on the cereals or on the vegetables because they will grow at the bottom of the of the  of the pot so in our case 25 centimeter deep already  
**1:05:17-1:05:38:**  we definitely need to get into that at the end and start finding out how we can build  these things come and plant some berries on my land with that and you're invited  remaining on this system that we were describing now the orchard all this complexity that you've  
**1:05:38-1:05:58:**  added in these different plants does it affect somehow the management of the system so i'm  thinking you know you've got to go in there to mow to spray to prune to harvest as well  kind of logistically or from a management perspective what's the impact there uh very  
**1:05:58-1:06:27:**  complex extremely complex especially for a european mind is too complex because we have  to work fast we have to spend little money because the produce is not valued as as it  should be so either you have a lot of passion and you work also in the night otherwise it  
**1:06:27-1:06:52:**  the system collapses we are working on the management systems that will allow us and  will allow many other farmers to run such a system or maybe leave it more simple but  in a more human human way in order not to get crazy with it so that that in order to  
**1:06:52-1:07:18:**  scale it to scale it yeah yeah exactly exactly we we sort of promote complexity we promote  problems i mean we could we could have many less problems if we would have used like copper  treatments or or pirettum treatments or many other organic toxic pesticides we we choose  
**1:07:18-1:07:43:**  not to and this already creates a lot of problems and then the system now we are observing the  system more from the biology and the ecology point of view and less from the machinery  point of view even if we are using already some particular machineries the ideal to me  
**1:07:43-1:08:09:**  is is to to use animals to use the system but i think still the biggest problem is the  lack of enough plants in the system as we already spoke many times especially with the  system at mazzi farm dimitri is that the the key in the key most of the time for many many  
**1:08:09-1:08:31:**  problems sorry to to solve many problems is to increase plant density we are lacking the  herbaceous layer because we didn't have time to yet to plant it we already have lots of  plants that we'll be planting in the winter as i said before and why we are missing it  
**1:08:31-1:08:52:**  because it is growing a lot of grass and and and lots of annual weeds and they are telling  us okay if you if you don't put something that allows the soil to to be covered by green  material we don't want the mulch the mulch is toxic to regenerate to the regeneration  
**1:08:52-1:09:16:**  process it's like a forest that is allowed to become old and and the the layer of leaves  leaves become thick because there are there are not any more animals to manage it to promote  the composition that layer not in all the climates not in all the situations but in  
**1:09:16-1:09:47:**  many cases in many wild tree consortiums what it makes the system becoming older and older  is this mulch it's just like what is is is is done by most of like permaculturists or  or many regenerative farmers is to put lots of mulch but the mulch the mulch is just like  
**1:09:47-1:10:09:**  bare soil the soil doesn't want to be covered the soil wants to have roots and eventually  some leaves on top of it it doesn't care about sterile slowly decomposing organic matter  so what we need is really to substitute the annual weeds because with lots of mulch what  
**1:10:09-1:10:38:**  happens the the most resistant plants will be the the rhizomatic with rhizomes like the  convolvulus arivensia like Artemisia vulgaris like synodondactylon like no no it doesn't  come the name anyway all those crops that have starchy roots or starchy rhizome that  
**1:10:38-1:11:03:**  manage to have the power to get through this hippie mulch and and to tell us just one thing  we need the soil is telling us that you need to cover it with green not with brown and  then we have to listen to what the soil is telling us because of course a rhizome start  
**1:11:03-1:11:22:**  to become a sort of interesting interesting crop to deal with because it grows very fast  has got a lot of energy a lot of energy I mean we have sorghum alepense that if you  don't cut it it has got these huge rhizomes and if you don't cut it in in two three weeks  
**1:11:22-1:11:48:**  it reaches like two two meters high it's a c4 beautiful biomass but very very aggressive  yeah you don't see your your apples anymore if you let it grow of course I can go and  cut it many times but I I can't I can't pay 10 people that spend their time in cutting  
**1:11:48-1:12:11:**  the grass is uneconomical when we will have someone paying us for for ecological services  yeah then I will have people cutting the grass all the time and putting it on the ground  but now is not possible yet that's something that will challenge a lot of people's understanding  
**1:12:11-1:12:34:**  I think what you just said but if you have such a if you have the need for a green living  plants on the tree line to regenerate the soil and activate the system how do you then  manage for weeding which you know this is a one of the huge problems and costs of labor  
**1:12:34-1:12:55:**  costs of of biological or ecological agriculture how would you manage that in the in this case  it all depends from the from system to system I will change strategy dramatically like in  our case what we will be planting under the system it will be because we tried it and  
**1:12:55-1:13:19:**  it is beautiful and it's working perfectly in small spots but now we already reproduce  thousands of plants of rhubarb of horseradish of of comfrey yeah there will be the three  main herbaceous layer crop which for us is not just a matter of cutting the grass and  
**1:13:19-1:13:44:**  letting there it will be a produce we can choose we can choose to harvest it and sell  it harvest it and preserve yeah like make preserves and and and jams and and so on so  they're all perennial plants as well right and so you're using plants to prevent the  
**1:13:44-1:14:06:**  weeds from growing yeah yeah we we in our experience for example either with rhubarb  and with horseradish they grow to a perfect height that stimulates the the berries to  grow a little bit a little bit taller but then nothing grows under them it's just like  
**1:14:06-1:14:39:**  rhubarb but also horseradish they're just perfect crops perfect because I could we could  choose a creepy time a creepy marjoram and all those covering herbs but they're not tall  enough and they promote the arrival of mediterranean sea for rhizomatos how to say like plants  
**1:14:39-1:15:06:**  that have rhizomes that will grow through and most of the time will will will give lots  of problems of course I can't sell I could create a market of thousands of kilos of of  marjoram dry marjoram but again is is is not so easy as maybe rhubarb or or or straddish  
**1:15:06-1:15:20:**  so the first year you would prepare your lines and you know plant the trees and you would  put vegetables the first year and only the second year start establishing more perennial  crops and your herbaceous layer or are you saying that establishing this the first year  
**1:15:20-1:15:44:**  as an alternative to potatoes or corn or the the other vegetables we mentioned it depends  what soil rich soil yeah go go straight straight with the those perennial crops perennial herbaceous  later layer if there are there's not enough fertility in the soil then start with the  
**1:15:44-1:16:06:**  annuals you you keep a shallow a shallow root layer so you don't give too many trouble to  to the young fruit trees which is in in the first year they're a little bit more delicate  and then from the second year on you will be planting perennial ones I mean now we are  
**1:16:06-1:16:28:**  entering we will be in the four year I think we are in the four year of our orchard and  we will be planting them this autumn I could have planted them before but we don't have  time super interesting so you know now we we've talked extensively of the orchards and  
**1:16:28-1:16:51:**  I was wondering if you could present to us you know your silvopasture systems that we  haven't you know touched upon yet either and yeah start again with a bit of an overview  of the systems the the species you chose and the breeds and yeah the the silvopasture systems  
**1:16:51-1:17:19:**  are still very very young and most of them we still have to plant them what we have now  at the moment planted is a is a young like two years old hazelnut orchard diamond shaped  planted with like diamond shapes or like the hexagon with four meter distance between each  
**1:17:19-1:17:41:**  tree and on the slopes because we have many slopes very steep slopes and we want to manage  them now with machinery but with animals but we also want to have a tree crops so the sheep  which are light will be managing to already we did already tryouts to deal with the with  
**1:17:41-1:18:05:**  the pasture with the hazelnut how to call them shoots yeah that are growing from from  the base that normally you have to go and cut them but the sheep will do the job the  sheep will prune the hazelnut leaves as as far as it will reach them in height and then  
**1:18:05-1:18:27:**  we'll have this beautiful sort of free flow free airflow layer at the bottom of the hazelnut  which is a crop that really needs a lot of air which is very prone to many many many  fungal and bacterial diseases so we need that we need to keep the grass low either for to  
**1:18:27-1:18:54:**  decrease the amount of moisture coming from the transpiration at the same time to reduce  water splashing and and to have clear grass when we have to harvest the hazelnuts we will  be planting I wanted to do it before top canopy in between the hazelnuts to have a little  
**1:18:54-1:19:16:**  bit of shade on the hazelnuts which are of course an edge tree if you want to produce  them otherwise they can also be in full shade but they don't produce much or they don't  produce anything and that's the hazelnut hazelnut sheep plus top layer which ideally I would  
**1:19:16-1:19:44:**  like to to have conifers like cedars like we planted we we have some Siberian night  not how do you call them Siberian pine nuts trees but they will take like ages to grow  so I don't I don't even say that we have been planting them 30 years time they will be growing  
**1:19:44-1:20:03:**  actually I have to choose but we have lots of pollonias that we we we still have to plant  so probably we start with pollonias and then we will plant cedars which are growing very  fast and they're beautiful trees and yeah for that system that's it not not much more  
**1:20:03-1:20:29:**  then we have the the walnut grove one they already have three years there they will be  growing quite tall I am preferring more and more the idea of a mono axis tree a little  bit like you do in commercial apple orchards so not vase but mono axis between the trees  
**1:20:29-1:21:00:**  we started to plant mulberries and caragon arboracians Siberian fish rub in order to  have high protein for the sheep the funny thing about the mulberry is that we will be  having a center trunk with the walnut trees spaced seven eight meters between them depending  
**1:21:00-1:21:20:**  on the on the part on the on the place where we are on the farm or on the terraces and  in between then one mulberry tree we will be growing two main or horizontal branches  at a 40 centimeter height from the ground so parallel going growing toward the walnuts  
**1:21:20-1:21:46:**  it would be then a a T a T letter with a very short leg and then from there on we will be  grow like cordons like with a grape and then every year from let's say the multiple pollard  heads on these long horizontal branches we will grow the fruiting branches we will harvest  
**1:21:46-1:22:13:**  the fruits when the fruits will be harvested sheep comes in eat the leaves we leave a resting  time leaves grows back sheep comes in second time it's very fresh high protein protein  leaves and then in the winter time we will be cutting again down to the pollard the head  
**1:22:13-1:22:42:**  every single branch let's say we will have a pollard head on the main branch every 25  30 centimeters spacing and every now and then on the length of on this four meters of cordon  we will have some cordon that will go in the ground in order to have support roots either  
**1:22:42-1:23:03:**  to keep the the the cordon at the right height at the same time to feed to feed with the  with the with the more roots the whole system great I just wanted to ask because you've  mentioned a few times you know the nutritional value of leaves and of trees so I think maybe  
**1:23:03-1:23:25:**  this is the right moment to go a bit more in depth in there and maybe you can explain  to us what is so beneficial of including fodder from trees into the the animals diet first  the animals they they doing grace on the ground so the the amount of parasite intake is really  
**1:23:25-1:23:55:**  very low secondary a perennial tree it can grow like like mulberry for example it can  grow very very extended roots system and by by that it just multiplies the amount of minerals  and the amount of biochemical produce that are are stored then in the leaves mulberry  
**1:23:55-1:24:25:**  it has it can reach six percent more protein than alfalfa wow but it's more digestible  it has got double the amount of the minerals and you don't have to plant it every four  years so it's just I see it because now managing the sheep and the donkeys and but also in  
**1:24:25-1:24:46:**  all the years of experience around the world I see that the first thing that animals will  go to eat when you move them we move them three four times a day the first thing that  will be eating it would be bush tree and tree leaves if they can if there are any if they're  
**1:24:46-1:25:12:**  reachable annual lights how to say annual weeds because there are dynamic accumulators  they are very rich in protein they are very easy to digest because no lignin no anti-nutritional  uh anti-nutritional compounds and uh and after the grass and and then yeah grass and and  
**1:25:12-1:25:36:**  forbs so it's very interesting like we we we think that the grazers they are grazers  but they're the browsers I mean the rumen evolved also to deal with lots of biochemical  anti-nutritional biochemical products that the trees and the bushes had in order to prevent  
**1:25:36-1:26:02:**  an over consumption of of of that tree then it's very important to choose the right tree  trees it's very important to have in in an alternative tree fodder system is important  to have trees with high tanning levels like for example chestnuts which are very very  
**1:26:02-1:26:28:**  digestible leaves at the same time it's very important to have elders it's very important  to have smaller amount of toxics because they're important for the animal for the for the health  of the gut system of the rumen system against parasites and following this idea we we nearly  
**1:26:28-1:26:53:**  have finished by putting down a consortium of around 10 different tree species that we  want to have on lines repeating them for every single move of the animals so every single  micropad dog where we are moving the animals being it's one day move being it three day  
**1:26:53-1:27:18:**  at three times a day move they always have to find those 10 trees that will that will  give them a free choice high nutrient high protein level high digestible sugars high  selenium high calcium and magnesium high tannins and all those very important produce that  
**1:27:18-1:27:45:**  the animals are trying to find desperately I mean we are managing animals in a very unnatural  way animals would walk for kilometers in order to have a particular mineral in order to have  a particular toxin that allows them to get rid of lysis ticks of ascaris parasite in  
**1:27:45-1:28:07:**  the in the in the guts and what we do we keep them in a small system where they can't find  they can't find what they need so in order to get what the animal needs we have to create  in every single move what the animal would find in in like a one kilometer move because  
**1:28:07-1:28:27:**  in nature animal keep on moving eat a little bit of that a little bit of that a little  bit of that and it happens that at the end of the day one herbivore ate 250 different  species can you imagine just us eating rice or eating rice and meat and butter and this  
**1:28:27-1:28:47:**  and this and that you just get so many more nutrients and so many more produce that that  that your body needs to maintain and to express the full genetics potential  I can't even imagine what this meat must taste like and I don't even know if in my life I've  
**1:28:47-1:29:01:**  been able to taste meat that has had such a good diet well maybe deer meat but do they  even have access to so much diversity when they're in the forest and the forest is often  it's managed forest where there's mostly oak and not a lot of other species because they've  
**1:29:01-1:29:21:**  been yeah selected you know what I mean so it's I don't even I wouldn't even expect deer  to have such a high mineral such a big selection of food but when you're looking at these the  animals and you know they're gonna have a mixed diet of pasture and fodder trees when  
**1:29:21-1:29:37:**  the trees grow when the system evolves what's going to be the impact on the pastures the  past you're gonna little by little kind of lose strength and it's not gonna have an impact  on the proportion that the animal of the of the of the diet of the animal no no father  
**1:29:37-1:30:02:**  and pasture do you know what I mean not at all because all those so-called trees they  will be managed as bushes so we will not let them grow in order to have high quality high  digestible fiber high protein you need to keep those trees with like one year maximum  
**1:30:02-1:30:19:**  two years old branches yeah so it's gonna look like some kind of because you also mentioned  that there was gonna be hazelnuts in some areas and and and paulownia it's gonna look  more like a savannah system with some trees growing tall and but with enough light or  
**1:30:19-1:30:49:**  going or yeah is that correct yeah yeah the the the like shade trees they are necessary  because most of the time animals they they stay under a tree yeah so like I'm not gonna  go deep into the relation between animal and and tree yeah I'm not gonna go very deep into  
**1:30:49-1:31:18:**  that because I could speak 10 years just about that that thing is one of the most exciting  and amazing thing on planet earth but remember that the cow that has got shade it will be  able to increase its own weight by 150 to 100 grams per day when a cow without shade  
**1:31:18-1:31:42:**  would not increase the weight but lose the weight yeah so shade is it's like food you  give them shade to eat because ruminants especially ruminants the animals with the with the rumen  they have to pass most or or a big part of their time ruminating so you have to give  
**1:31:42-1:32:02:**  them the right amount of food they finish the pasture they finish the trees that they  have in that small paddock they go under their tree they they they they make a good use of  what you gave them to eat yeah yeah but you need the tree shade that's very important  
**1:32:02-1:32:20:**  now we don't have trees that make shade in the whole property so we just build a movable  a movable shelter that we move on skids but eventually in few years we will be having  shade all over the place it's just amazing this relation between animals and shade it  
**1:32:20-1:32:38:**  just makes me crazy I really hope we can we can get back into that one day whether on  the podcast or you know when we come and visit to you but this is kind of it's really fascinating  stuff and yeah it's very exciting yeah I was thinking because we are constrained by time  
**1:32:38-1:32:56:**  maybe we can discuss a bit the management around you know integrating animals and trees  one aspect being you know planting the trees and protection that has to go in there and  then yeah just general interaction and you know a bit similar to what we explored in  
**1:32:56-1:33:18:**  the orchards and how that complexifies things how does that express itself in the sort of  pastoral system very complex very very very complex animals like trees yeah animal like  trees and and you want to have trees but you don't want to have animals which are eating  
**1:33:18-1:33:37:**  those trees at least while they're they're they're growing so with fruit trees we are  still trying to understand what to do but I think the the simplest thing and the most  intelligent thing if if I would go back four years time on the tree lines where we have  
**1:33:37-1:34:06:**  planted most of the trees on a free vertical axis when we are talking about like sort of  solax system on apples and and and pears and vase shape on the dropache family like plums  and peaches and and and apricots I would do everything espalier so be dimensional no natural  
**1:34:06-1:34:36:**  shape I want to produce fruits and I will have everything on on a let's say 30 40 centimeter  wide line in this way I will be managing to keep animals between the lines if if I need  and if I want all my very high fruit production on the on the on the fruit lines and the level  
**1:34:36-1:34:57:**  that of complexity or with herbaceous layer and bush layer and and top canopy layer that  I want to have but yeah like espalier is is the simplest tricep I could tell you what  you could use to protect the trunk you could have particular nets electric nets you could  
**1:34:57-1:35:23:**  spray some some produce that repoles repoles the the the animals but the simplest thing  is to change the shape of the tree and to to not not to to use too much space is this  why you're not integrating the animals into the orchard or are you integrating them there  
**1:35:23-1:35:52:**  we we are we are experimenting we are experimenting but it's okay with with with the bigger breeds  of of sheep which are fat and and and and low is not good with the donkeys so is is  is good with those sheep like sapphock like texel like blue flay blue face lyser under  
**1:35:52-1:36:13:**  the apricots under the the plums under the the peaches yeah but it's not good with the  apples because apple has got a vertical axis with very I mean you know how is make the  vertical vertical axis with the you have a one central trunk and from the bottom of the  
**1:36:13-1:36:33:**  tree you have the bottom branches which are coming out horizontally quite a lot like a  meter or meter 20 and it's just like a conifer and while you you get to the top the branches  they become shorter and shorter and you understand that if you have at the bottom at the mouth  
**1:36:33-1:36:53:**  height productive branches you can even put a net so you have to to you will have nets  which will be starting like electric nets which will be starting from the end of those  low branches that it means that you have very little space between one tree line and the  
**1:36:53-1:37:16:**  other tree line this is complex this is why I don't know for for how long we'll be keeping  the animals in that orchard but we will see we'll see Matthew I wanted to ask a quick  question well it's not a quick I mean the answer won't be quick but given in keeping  
**1:37:16-1:37:32:**  in mind that we have been taking your time for a long time how you know to what extent  does the selection of the breeds of the sheep you integrate what role does it play because  I know that certain sheep breeds are preferred in orchard management for example and since  
**1:37:32-1:37:53:**  you you started the talk talking to us about your genetics and your flock and the breeds  do you have anything to say about that I still don't have enough experience on this like  genetics is something extremely complex I don't come from a from a breeder or or or  
**1:37:53-1:38:27:**  a farming family as far as I know as far as I could observe like the the Shropshire sheep  it seems to be the the most appropriate for fruit orchards or Christmas trees operations  otherwise what I would do I would I would choose a fat low berry center animal so with  
**1:38:27-1:38:51:**  the neck it will not manage to to get to to high it will be not like we have this awesome  sheep which are like dwarf ships we just like like a little evils like amazing browsers  just they're just like goats but they they can pass through a hole like a rat and and  
**1:38:51-1:39:10:**  they will go and eat the first thing they will do they will eat the bark of your trunks  those ships where we are selling them so they are not right for our system we wanted to  try because we have we had different these but they are not appropriate then yeah I think  
**1:39:10-1:39:35:**  big and not tall but big fat wide wide wide shape sheep will be the the choice which are  very docile very calm they will not they will not go through the fence they are they are  very good animals they we never found them out the fence and now we have is quite a bit  
**1:39:35-1:39:57:**  of time that we have them and yeah not tall animals this is very important cool Matteo  you've given us so much information to for people for everybody listening to think about  analyze probably even take notes this is how detailed this your answers were so we wanted  
**1:39:57-1:40:17:**  to move to the last kind of questions that we that we ask people firstly what's the next  big projects at Isid what are you in the next few years in the medium term how are  you expecting things to change and to evolve well I think consolidating what is working  
**1:40:17-1:40:48:**  and and and rearranging the systems especially where they haven't been working properly and  hopefully not hopefully actually we just received a permit to to to build the farm structures  and I think one very important part will be to to start how to say not really a restaurant  
**1:40:48-1:41:14:**  operation but where food will be prepared and served to people in a manner that will  will give to the produce of those systems more value because the people will be eating  those produce of course that will be cooked in in our commercial kitchen that will be  
**1:41:14-1:41:40:**  eating them in complex systems and I mean there are many ideas many many things that  we we we want to develop but systems we will be planting definitely what we haven't been  managing up to now apple and pear orchard for cider making and there I still have to  
**1:41:40-1:42:07:**  understand what type of complexity we want to have because the apple orchard we have  is is a has got a very simple consortium with the the honey the honey locust in between  every apple tree and then of course the king of the kings or the queen of the queens the  
**1:42:07-1:42:34:**  chestnut which is to me the the best crop on planet earth and I will have to manage  to to plant it on very alkaline soil and and to and to to reach this beautiful glow globos  rounded shape very sexy I think is the most sexy I can imagine the sheep underneath grazing  
**1:42:34-1:42:54:**  as well it's gonna be a beautiful scene it is amazing it's amazing so yeah as you know  we'll be talking to many different farmers and people involved in agroforestry on the  podcast what kind of topics or questions would you like to hear about on the podcast and  
**1:42:54-1:43:26:**  would you like us to explore what would you be interested in listening to  anything anything failures I want to hear about failures I want to hear about what doesn't  work in a system and and then to understand how people go through the solving the solving  
**1:43:26-1:43:49:**  process I would like to hear about system that works from an economical point of view  I would like to hear about systems of not heroes but but farmers that it means that  when when farmers will be speaking it it will meaning that the system will be compatible  
**1:43:49-1:44:15:**  for the most of the landscape I like to hear more about of course the whole thing about  nutritional the nutritional subject when we are speaking about for the trees and we are  speaking about perennial perennial nuts and and animals that are growing and and grazing  
**1:44:15-1:44:45:**  under a very rich silvopasture system and I would like to hear about the ways to give  more importance from economical point of view to the ecosystem services which we are delivering  to the society which we are delivering to degraded land and and they have to be valued  
**1:44:45-1:45:13:**  because if I if I don't produce erosion if I if my soil absorbs all the water that fells  from the sky and it doesn't it doesn't create how do you say in English it doesn't increase  the amount of water of rivers and and and the water course is creating here in Italy  
**1:45:13-1:45:34:**  is always the rule every every year creating huge problems to infrastructures to to railroads  to to to cities and and so on I want to be paid for that because I put more energy I  put more resources in order to stop that erosion in order to infiltrate the that water in the  
**1:45:34-1:45:58:**  deep ground and we have to be valued not just for the quality of our produce but also for  the quality of the environment of our farms and and and and the environment that becomes  better and better thanks to our farms listen I know there's a lot of people working on  
**1:45:58-1:46:14:**  this and I did my master's thesis on payment for ecosystem services so I know a few years  ago it wasn't quite there yet but a lot of people are working on it so we'll make sure  we we go and talk to some people and understand where we're at but in any case I mean thank  
**1:46:14-1:46:31:**  you so much for your time it's been a real privilege to have all this information and  especially in the busy summer months having worked on farms ourselves we we don't take  this lightly we really understand how precious time is so thanks for allocating it to this  
**1:46:31-1:46:56:**  podcast thank you sorry for my Italian English and  from the chaotic thoughts but but it's all about complexity and complexity is chaotic  so it's also good to not understand anything or understand everything I think the the complexity  
**1:46:56-1:47:18:**  of our systems makes us makes us more complex and is important to become polycultural in  our brain rather than monoculture so thank you for the for what you're doing and have  a nice day if you've made it this far thank you so much for listening to this episode  
**1:47:18-1:47:35:**  you can find links of Mateo's farm Instagram etc below and as you may have noticed we're  just starting out here at this whole podcasting thing so we'd love to have your feedback and  you can do that by getting on our website there's also lots of other information and  
**1:47:35-1:48:04:**  other ways you can get involved so we're waiting for you there link is below and thanks again.  