<script src="https://cdn.podlove.org/web-player/embed.js"></script>
    <script>
        document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', function () {
          if (document.readyState === 'interactive' || document.readyState === 'complete') {
            podlovePlayer('#player', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast/20-investing-in-large-scale-agroforestry-with-12tree.json', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast/config.json').then(registerExternalEvents('player'))
          }
        })
  </script>---
title: 20 Investing In Large Scale Agroforestry With 12tree
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2021-05-10)  

**0:00:00-0:00:23:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:23-0:00:33:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  these challenges.  
**0:00:33-0:00:47:**  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Hi everyone and welcome back to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:00:47-0:00:59:**  I'm your host today Etienne.  Today we welcome Oliver Hanke from 123 Finance.  We wanted to have them on the show to understand what scaling agroforestry looks like in practice  
**0:00:59-0:01:12:**  and how investment in such large projects actually works.  This interview enables us to understand how 123 operates but also to zoom out a bit from  the farm scale and think about some of the questions we have to tackle if we are to scale  
**0:01:12-0:01:23:**  agroforestry.  Is there a tension between delivering a return to investors and more complex production systems?  Is agroforestry delivering the benefits they had planned for?  
**0:01:23-0:01:31:**  Oliver does a great job at answering sincerely these questions and many more.  Enjoy.  Hi Oliver, welcome to the podcast.  
**0:01:31-0:01:36:**  Hello Etienne, how are you?  I'm great, thanks.  Thanks for joining us today.  
**0:01:36-0:01:45:**  Maybe we could kick off things with an introduction of who you are and how you got involved with  123.  Of course, of course.  
**0:01:45-0:01:59:**  My name is Oliver Hanke.  I'm the chief sustainability officer and also responsible for the marketing, basically selling  the production that we have at 123.  
**0:01:59-0:02:19:**  And I've been with 123 for several years now, basically since the foundation of the company.  I was involved with the processes that led to setting up 123 and yeah, been part of a  management team ever since.  
**0:02:19-0:02:40:**  And from the background, I'm not necessarily a farmer.  I had 10 years in finance before I was in real estate business, but not as a broker,  but doing actually quantitative analysis, sort of structuring big real estate deals.  
**0:02:40-0:02:54:**  My background is more economics than agronomics, if you see what I mean.  Yeah.  Maybe you can tell us how 123 started and how did you and I know Richard, I don't know  
**0:02:54-0:03:07:**  the other teams of the management team, but how you got all interested in agroforestry  and how it all started?  As you know, it's not, I mean, it's gaining a lot of traction now, which is great to see,  
**0:03:07-0:03:20:**  but it isn't exactly a topic that was on the main investor agenda, I don't know, 10 years  ago, not even five years ago.  So it's been changing a lot.  
**0:03:20-0:03:38:**  123 has been set up at the end of 2016.  So it's a fairly young company, but it didn't come out of nowhere basically.  So we, Richard, myself, a couple of other people, we had been in the space already for  
**0:03:38-0:04:01:**  several years working for a German company and with a German company called Forest Finance,  which is all about establishing mixed sustainable forests in tropical regions.  And this is what we did already for several years, sort of raising funds from more the  
**0:04:01-0:04:17:**  private sector individuals.  I always say they did crowdfunding before crowdfunding even existed.  And that gradually moved from reforestation and afforestation projects, which of course  
**0:04:17-0:04:39:**  is super important to looking at agroforestry, how agroforestry components can be introduced  into those forestry systems, make them a bit more financially interesting and attractive.  And that led to a particular focus on cocoa.  
**0:04:39-0:04:55:**  And the objective was obviously always to scale this up to see if institutional investors  can be interested for these topics of agroforestry, sustainable forestry, regenerative agricultural  practices.  
**0:04:55-0:05:20:**  And there was a long, long hard way and it was rewarded around 2016 with winning or convincing  a group of German pension funds to establish a sustainable forestry mandate.  And that was a big success, of course, to convince an institutional investor of that  
**0:05:20-0:05:43:**  size to focus on the topic, to invest into this subject and to establish a portfolio  of projects that does it.  And on the back of these discussions, we set up 1-2-3 as a company that is dedicated to  
**0:05:43-0:06:00:**  investments into sustainable agroforestry with regenerative practices in the institutional  investor space.  But we needed a fresh setup with particular processes and that's how we set it up and  
**0:06:00-0:06:12:**  set up the company in Berlin at the time.  Could you give us an idea of the size of 1-2-3 at the moment?  I mean, how many projects are you running and in what countries?  
**0:06:12-0:06:25:**  Sure, sure, sure.  So we have, I already mentioned cocoa as one of our core competitors.  So you may guess what kind of climate zones we are active in.  
**0:06:25-0:06:44:**  So there's a strong focus on tropical and subtropical areas.  Not necessarily because it has to be in the tropics, we're just basically saying, okay,  which commodity value chains are broken.  
**0:06:44-0:07:04:**  So it's not only about regenerative agriculture, it's also about the social agenda, trying  to fix commodity value chains such as the cocoa industry.  And we found that in particular in the tropics, the social makeup of the production value  
**0:07:04-0:07:23:**  chain is very unjust, be it in cocoa, be it in coffee, be it in other crops like these.  And so what we have established now is a portfolio of 12 projects, which are predominantly in  Latin America around the tropical belt.  
**0:07:23-0:07:40:**  So we have made investments from Ecuador to Guatemala.  And we also have started in very arid zones.  So we have started an organic dates project in Morocco.  
**0:07:40-0:07:51:**  So it's the one that is not in Latin America.  And so I wouldn't say that we are focused on tropical areas, we're focused on very vulnerable  environments if you see what I mean.  
**0:07:51-0:08:10:**  In terms of size, we have so far invested into the ground about 160 million US dollars.  And we have commitments from investors at around 500 million.  So that's a great achievement.  
**0:08:10-0:08:23:**  So what that means is basically we have commitment to invest, but as you know, these systems  aren't built overnight, it takes a lot of time.  And so over the years, the money is put into the ground.  
**0:08:23-0:08:36:**  And so far, basically 160 million have been put into the ground.  What do you mean by put into the ground compared to, I mean, committed and what you've actually  spent?  
**0:08:36-0:08:51:**  Well, I mean, how does a typical agriculture project look like?  You need your farm infrastructure.  You need road access, you need processing facilities.  
**0:08:51-0:09:12:**  But obviously also you need to plant a lot.  And planting in biodiverse agroforest is neither fast nor is it cheap because you have to design,  you want one or several cash crops in the system, you want a multi-species approach.  
**0:09:12-0:09:26:**  So you're not planting everything overnight and then you get the results the next day.  It basically takes time, a lot of planning.  Some of the areas are irrigated, so you need to install irrigation systems.  
**0:09:26-0:09:41:**  You need to look at the water infrastructure, where does the water come from?  And all of this needs to be planned and designed and implemented.  And that's what I mean with put into the ground.  
**0:09:41-0:10:01:**  It is basically that the money is spoken.  So in the sense that if you have a project and you know it will cost you, I don't know,  I just say a number $30 million to develop a large farm, then that is an investment plan  
**0:10:01-0:10:10:**  that takes several years.  So that funding is secured basically.  So you can draw on that way, it's been committed.  
**0:10:10-0:10:26:**  But it's not sitting there for years to wait to be used.  So that's the difference between invested and committed basically.  So at the moment you're saying that $160 million, you're working with that money, injecting  
**0:10:26-0:10:33:**  it into different projects like it's already happening now.  Well that's been done.  It's a big achievement.  
**0:10:33-0:10:54:**  It's 12 projects and a part of that involves obviously buying land.  We don't only use land or lease land or work with cooperatives, we predominantly buy land.  And there's a whole discussion to be had around that obviously, but you acquire the land and  
**0:10:54-0:11:13:**  the first thing you do is improve the infrastructure that you have there.  So there's a lot of spending happening very fast after you start a project.  And then over the next two, three, four, five years, you establish your actual farming.  
**0:11:13-0:11:22:**  And that's how it works basically.  We'll come back to a lot of the things you said, because I think there's many fascinating  things to unpack there.  
**0:11:22-0:11:36:**  But first I wanted us to maybe take an example of one of your projects and that you kind  of walk us through that project.  You know, it's when you implemented it, its size, its productions, just that we can have  
**0:11:36-0:11:48:**  a really clear idea of what your work looks like on the ground.  Absolutely happy to do so.  I think that the best example that I can walk you through is actually our largest farm.  
**0:11:48-0:12:05:**  It's a diversified estate in Guatemala, which is called Ximel.  It's a beautiful farm which has 5,000 hectares.  So it's huge.  
**0:12:05-0:12:19:**  In difficult terrain, it's in the Altavera Pass of Guatemala.  So the altitude change on the farm ranges from, I think it's 500 meters above sea level  up to 1200 meters.  
**0:12:19-0:12:33:**  So this is not a plane where we establish something.  It's a whole three dimensional system, if you see what I mean.  You have to think about what grows where.  
**0:12:33-0:12:47:**  You have lower elevations, you have higher elevations and not every crop and not every  system is suitable to those different elevations.  It can be very hot and sticky in the low elevations.  
**0:12:47-0:12:57:**  It can be very cold and exposed in the high elevations.  And as you know, that's what regenerative agriculture is all about.  It's always site specific.  
**0:12:57-0:13:12:**  It's always about understanding where you're acting, where you're planting and not only  understanding the soil, but also obviously the climate and the extremes that you're acting  in there.  
**0:13:12-0:13:25:**  So I think this is the best example I can give you.  Every project we have is unique and different and in different environments from very wet  tropics to very dry environments.  
**0:13:25-0:13:47:**  But I think talking to Fushimelt illustrates best what we do on the ground, basically.  And digging a bit more into this example, what are the main productions already there  or that you're planning in the design?  
**0:13:47-0:14:13:**  So this place is not new.  So it's a farm that has been established in some shape for several decades already.  And half of it is forest and predominantly natural forest, but also some plantations.  
**0:14:13-0:14:28:**  And the rest is predominantly about coffee.  So originally Arabica coffee.  And when we got involved a few years ago, we looked at what can be done there.  
**0:14:28-0:14:42:**  Also what, well, first of all, what grows well in that particular environment, but also  what is Guatemala about?  What does Guatemala stand for in terms of marketable products?  
**0:14:42-0:15:10:**  And it's very good for cocoa, for coffee, for cardamom and rubber as well.  So those are the main cash crops that you will see in the farm.  You see in the higher elevations very extensive coffee plantations, Arabica coffee.  
**0:15:10-0:15:28:**  In the medium elevations, you see more robusta, you see some rubber plantations.  And in the lower elevations, you will find more cocoa and now also a bit more banana  planting.  
**0:15:28-0:15:45:**  And when I name one of those, it's always in an agroforestry system.  So a hectare always produces more than just one thing.  So we like to combine with rubber trees, culture basically with rubber trees a lot.  
**0:15:45-0:16:11:**  So what you typically see is, for example, rows of cocoa intercropped with rubber trees,  some planting or banana in between for the early shade.  In the higher elevations, you see more forestry models, you see pine combined with cardamom.  
**0:16:11-0:16:28:**  Cardamom is, for those who don't know or don't like it, it's a spice that is very much used  in the Arab and Indian world.  And funnily enough, Guatemala is the largest exporter of cardamom.  
**0:16:28-0:16:43:**  So it's a very unique environment.  It's not something that is grown in many places, but in Guatemala it is widespread and it grows  well and attracts good prices.  
**0:16:43-0:16:51:**  So yeah, that's what this farm is about basically.  Coffee, cardamom, cacao, free seeds if you want something.  Wow.  
**0:16:51-0:17:03:**  And to understand the situation when you took over the farm, what were the main problems  you were facing?  You know, what kind of solutions did you design to face these problems?  
**0:17:03-0:17:16:**  Yeah.  So I mean, there are so many dimensions to it.  You can imagine a 5,000 hectare stayed in such a difficult terrain.  
**0:17:16-0:17:33:**  It's not easy to manage.  And the previous owner family, they had already done actually a multi-generation project,  a great job at establishing first plantations.  
**0:17:33-0:17:52:**  And they had a good social agenda.  Many communities, many people actually got there to work in the farms.  The whole small villages got set up by the workers and people have been given land.  
**0:17:52-0:18:12:**  They had done a lot of work already with the indigenous, catchy communities.  And so a good groundwork was already done.  What was needed was to scale it up and to create more value from the production, which  
**0:18:12-0:18:31:**  by and large was sold locally to local traders, not exclusively.  I mean, they'd done a good job already at marketing some of the production, but there's  so much more coffee and cocoa and rubber and cardamom to be produced now that we're looking  
**0:18:31-0:18:49:**  to establish those big export relationships.  A lot of detailed work had to happen, more design in agroforestry systems, sort of how  can these biodiverse systems be optimized?  
**0:18:49-0:19:03:**  How can they produce more, whilst at the same time using less inputs?  When you took over the farm, the systems were separated, like you had forest on one side  and then cacao production on the other, or was there already some agroforestry practices  
**0:19:03-0:19:08:**  that were implemented?  There were some.  So how do you have to imagine it?  
**0:19:08-0:19:26:**  So what you see is the coffee, the arabica, you can grow it under shade, you can grow  it without shade.  And because it's such a large system, it's very hard to establish all of that under shade.  
**0:19:26-0:19:45:**  Then you have the hilltops where you really have native forest and that needs needed to  be protected and connected to each other so that you don't have like isolated hilltops,  but that the animals that live there can migrate from one place to the other.  
**0:19:45-0:20:06:**  There was some cocoa plantations, but the infrastructure wasn't so great.  And a lot of emphasis was put on designing those agroforestry systems I was talking about  to bring in more biodiversity and the whole topic of cardamom in the forest.  
**0:20:06-0:20:21:**  So basically having more of a forestry model that is enriched with spices production.  There were some test plots, let's say, but it wasn't done at scale.  And this is what we took up.  
**0:20:21-0:20:34:**  So I think a lot of good ideas were already there that were then really scaled up with  the institutional capital that I've been talking about earlier.  That's what makes it so great.  
**0:20:34-0:20:52:**  I'm not saying we invented everything that has been done there.  We have a very good team there.  But we allowed it to scale up, to professionalize more, to have different trials.  
**0:20:52-0:21:06:**  Just as an example, I've just been there, actually.  I've been there in February and they showed me a new test plot they have with pineapple.  It's actually five different crops in that system.  
**0:21:06-0:21:25:**  Pineapple, the rubber I mentioned, and banana, and cocoa, and another tree species.  So it's great to see these test plots, to see how they behave, and then to have the  ability and the available capital to scale that up if it works and it creates the benefits  
**0:21:25-0:21:36:**  that you want to see.  So just to sum up, and correct me if I'm wrong.  But at the moment, you're at a phase where you're testing different possibilities, but  
**0:21:36-0:21:51:**  still the main production system remains.  And then the plan is to, once you've identified promising diversification strategies, then  upscale that on the whole farm.  
**0:21:51-0:21:55:**  Yes.  So that's already happening.  So we did that.  
**0:21:55-0:22:07:**  I'm talking a little bit about the past here.  We did, for example, introduce Robusta coffee.  That wasn't something that was grown there in the past.  
**0:22:07-0:22:19:**  So they had a lot of experience with Arabica coffee in the high elevations, as I mentioned.  It's quite a big coffee farm.  The Robusta is something new and that's been planted this year and there'll be more to  
**0:22:19-0:22:32:**  come.  And Robusta, well, the name indicates it.  It can deal much better with changing temperatures and also thrive.  
**0:22:32-0:22:46:**  The Arabica needs cooler temperatures and Robusta is a good solid one, sort of to connect  the low elevations with the high elevations.  So that's tested and it's rolled now out at scale.  
**0:22:46-0:23:02:**  The cocoa, obviously, also they did that already quite a bit.  They have an interesting mix of aromatic cocoa varieties and that's being scaled up now.  But there's still, I mean, this used to be a cattle ranch and there's still so much area  
**0:23:02-0:23:26:**  that can be converted from degraded cattle ranch to agroforestry systems.  We're also thinking about silvopastoral systems, basically, but we haven't done that yet.  So you're right in a way that we're trying different things and then there's still so  
**0:23:26-0:23:35:**  much area that can be developed that we can put that into practice at larger scale.  But the plan is there.  The plan is established.  
**0:23:35-0:23:48:**  The natural forest obviously gets protected and some areas enriched again.  And so it's clear what we want to do.  Where do you get this knowledge?  
**0:23:48-0:24:06:**  Because agroforestry, although it's practice, probably more in the tropics than in Europe.  So maybe there's already more knowledge generated in those types of climates, but it still remains  quite experimental compared to other production methods, at least at large scale.  
**0:24:06-0:24:16:**  So how are you going about discovering what works and also what kind of knowledge are  you using?  Yeah, that's a good point.  
**0:24:16-0:24:37:**  I mean, agroforestry, regenerative practices, there's quite a lot of, as you say, it's still  something that is in development, but there has been a lot of research in temperate climate  zones when it comes to tropical agriculture.  
**0:24:37-0:24:49:**  There isn't that much research out there.  There isn't that much experience out there.  This obviously traditional practices which we're learning from, but those need to be  
**0:24:49-0:25:14:**  adapted and improved on without losing the core elements of them.  So what we have built internally is a team of technical experts on exactly those topics.  So we have a team, technical services team, we call it, which consists of specialists  
**0:25:14-0:25:36:**  in different professions within agriculture.  So be it on soil health, be it on fetus sanitary management, be it on water management.  We have a GIS expert to help us with the design of those systems, a couple of others.  
**0:25:36-0:25:54:**  So it's quite a sizable team by now.  And this team is deeply involved in the project design together with the local teams.  So the local teams bring the local knowledge, reference data and experience simply with  
**0:25:54-0:26:16:**  working with this environment, what grows there, how it can be designed.  And the central team brings in the experience from many projects, smaller, larger, conventional  agriculture regenerative projects, and brings all of this together to design something better.  
**0:26:16-0:26:27:**  And that's part of our mission.  And our mission is not just to build good farms, it's also to change the way farming  is practiced within our farms, of course, but also beyond.  
**0:26:27-0:26:43:**  We want to be role models to an extent for other farmers who look at what we're doing,  they see that it works, and they can embrace those practices.  I wanted to understand who exactly is working on the farm then because 5000 hectares seems  
**0:26:43-0:26:57:**  so big and how many farmers are working the land and what does the local team look like?  Yeah, sure.  So we're not cooperative setups.  
**0:26:57-0:27:15:**  So we actually own land, we establish professional farm teams, but we work with cooperatives,  we partner with communities and so on.  So it's quite an elaborate setup that we established there.  
**0:27:15-0:27:33:**  So you have to imagine a local management team with a permanent staff base, in this  case of Schimeld, we're talking about roughly 300 people that are permanently employed,  they're full time employees working in the farm.  
**0:27:33-0:27:54:**  And then, yes, you obviously have peak times, harvest seasons, where you're bringing in  some temporary workers, several hundreds, in this particular case, who help with harvest.  And our objective obviously is to create as many permanent jobs as possible.  
**0:27:54-0:28:15:**  But also those temporary jobs are incredibly important for those communities.  In particular, in those traditional catchy communities.  Originally it's not seen that a woman has a formal job and formal employment.  
**0:28:15-0:28:30:**  And that's something, for example, that changed so that the women in the communities, they  get an opportunity to earn a living as well, to get into those farms during the harvest.  And so that's what you typically see.  
**0:28:30-0:28:46:**  And then this is complemented with our one to three teams.  I mentioned this technical services team, but there's also, of course, there are controllers,  there are project supervisors who are making sure that the financials are okay, that the  
**0:28:46-0:28:55:**  plan is implemented.  We have certain audit layers, the investors want to make sure that the money is used in  the right way.  
**0:28:55-0:29:14:**  So we bring in external experts, we bring in external auditors.  So it's quite an elaborate setup of doing and also layers of control that happen all  in a good spirit, all in a partnership spirit, of course.  
**0:29:14-0:29:37:**  And then all of this is connecting with the surroundings.  So we have actually in that particular farm, we have two smallholder programs running.  One is called the Unupa Unu program where coffee farmers are organized, small farmers.  
**0:29:37-0:29:51:**  And this farm, but also other farms help them to produce better and to also sell the product.  And there's another project which is relatively new.  It's called the Cacao forest.  
**0:29:51-0:30:09:**  So it's about cacao and caramu.  And again, it's about helping farmers to have planting material that is high quality, to  teach them how to plant it, when to harvest it, how to treat it and tend the production  
**0:30:09-0:30:19:**  over time and then to help market it.  So there's the central team, but there's a lot of community interaction happening as  well.  
**0:30:19-0:30:33:**  I wanted to ask you about the investor side.  Could you give us an explanation of who is exactly investing in projects like the one  you just described and what is the deal?  
**0:30:33-0:30:54:**  What can they expect out of it and what is their expectations and the advantages for  them to go and invest in a project like this one instead of any other project?  Okay, so who are typical investor groups or types of investors that are willing to look  
**0:30:54-0:31:11:**  at this kind of project, which certainly isn't straightforward.  You need someone who has to an extent patient capital.  So investing in any real asset is not something that realizes value overnight.  
**0:31:11-0:31:39:**  You need someone who has experience with alternative investments or private equity.  So in the sense that you are buying land values, infrastructure in countries, in this case  in Guatemala, but basically those are emerging markets with let's say imperfect market structures.  
**0:31:39-0:31:48:**  So you need investors who understand the risks that they are entering into.  It's not only at the farm level, you know, you have country risks, you have currency  risks.  
**0:31:48-0:32:06:**  You need to understand how the money flows into those countries, how money is taxed there,  how it flows back to you as an investor ultimately.  So we're talking about professional investors and we're talking about larger investors who  
**0:32:06-0:32:24:**  have specialists in-house who understand these risks.  This can be pension funds, this can be endowments.  It can also be a large specialized asset managers in the sustainable investment space and large  
**0:32:24-0:32:50:**  family offices who you often find that family offices, they have a strong agenda.  You know, content wise, so as you say, the principal, basically the family, the owners  behind the capital behind it may have very specific investment objectives and they often  
**0:32:50-0:33:01:**  don't shy away from real assets.  They think intergenerational, so they have a long term vision of how their money should  be used and hopefully in a good way.  
**0:33:01-0:33:16:**  And so you're looking for these kind of investor groups that are professional, have experience  with risk management.  They understand the challenges ahead and they have in this particular case, a strong sustainability  
**0:33:16-0:33:32:**  agenda because else why would you invest into something that is a bit more complicated than  just buying into a, let's say a very modern, very professionally run, but conventional  farm, which is much better documented.  
**0:33:32-0:33:48:**  You have more data out there, it's easier to sell the product and so on and so on.  So that's what you need, those groups.  And now here's the challenge with these kinds of projects that we have.  
**0:33:48-0:34:09:**  And as you are very active in the field of regenerative agriculture, you know that the  kinds of projects that are very good on these practices, they tend to be not so big.  So we're talking about small projects because the work is very detailed, very detail oriented.  
**0:34:09-0:34:21:**  And at the same time, the kind of capital that has these abilities that are described  are big groups.  You know, they have to manage billions of dollars, billions of Euro.  
**0:34:21-0:34:34:**  And that is not a good match.  You know, you have investment groups who need to manage billions of assets and they cannot  make a 1 million investment.  
**0:34:34-0:34:49:**  It just doesn't work from the setup.  So what you need on the one hand is that the models and regenerative agriculture need to  be able to be scaled up, make them bigger so they become investable and they become  
**0:34:49-0:35:00:**  worth the time of these investors.  And on the other hand, these investors need to work or come around the reality that those  types of investments are smaller.  
**0:35:00-0:35:17:**  You know, it's not a 500 million infrastructure investment or renewable energy investment.  It's a farm and we can bring it up maybe to a 40 or 50 million dollar investment.  But beyond that, it gets a bit difficult.  
**0:35:17-0:35:36:**  So this is where we see our role to close this gap, you know, to bring up those practices  to scale and at the same time to make it accessible for investors.  That's fascinating because it's true that agroforestry and regenerative agriculture  
**0:35:36-0:35:54:**  in general requires such careful management and often is still at a stage where it's fairly  experimental and it's more the case of individuals finding solutions that work in their local  context rather than having one fit all methodology that we could, you know, unroll without any  
**0:35:54-0:36:06:**  risk.  And I'm just wondering, how are your investors capable of accepting that risk?  Because fundamentally today it is still risky in a way because we don't have, you know,  
**0:36:06-0:36:19:**  as you were saying, like it's much safer a conventional farm that has a lot of data.  And here it's still something very innovative.  So are you still able to really make a financial case or is it more that you convince these  
**0:36:19-0:36:37:**  investors that it's something that's, you know, risky but worth developing?  Yeah, I mean, let's be honest about this.  So I would not say that, you know, all of the farming we do is fully regenerative agriculture.  
**0:36:37-0:36:54:**  You know, we are trying to incorporate more and more principles, actions, activities,  research into our projects, you know, and some of the purists in your community, they  will say like, yeah, okay, that's good.  
**0:36:54-0:37:11:**  But you know, it's not what I would describe what I'm doing is different, you know, and  that's true.  So what we're doing is in a managed risk approach to bring in more and more practices that don't  
**0:37:11-0:37:28:**  come at the sacrifice of profitability, at least not, you know, unknowingly, you know,  we're not risking the capital of the investors starting to experiment with the money.  You know, let's see how this goes.  
**0:37:28-0:37:41:**  We had a one hectare plot, let's scale it up to 1000 and see what goes.  Work like that.  So, and also you have to see not all of the projects that we have, the 12 farms that I  
**0:37:41-0:38:01:**  mentioned, or some of them are forestry projects, but say that the 12 projects we have, some  of them started their life out as conventional monocultures, you know.  And it's not that easy to change a 10 year old monoculture to a biodiverse agroforestry  
**0:38:01-0:38:13:**  system, at least not overnight.  But what you can always do is to start using regenerative practices.  And for that, we were looking at that as well.  
**0:38:13-0:38:34:**  You know, we've established a whole curriculum and internal training program for all our  staff to fully embrace those practices because, you know, they come, some of them come from  conventional farming, you know, and they have to embrace those principles and have to understand  
**0:38:34-0:38:52:**  how to change their ways.  And so we designed a whole curriculum around, you know, soil organic matter, how to manage  it, how to maintain it, how to increase it, how different plant combinations are beneficial  
**0:38:52-0:39:05:**  or not.  And all of this, we thought about it like, yeah, should we have like a clear policy that  says this needs to be applied, this needs to be applied, or should it always be in the  
**0:39:05-0:39:11:**  local context?  And you know the answer.  It's always of the local context.  
**0:39:11-0:39:27:**  So you cannot have a one size fits all activity plan, basically, where you say, okay, everywhere  we farm, we do these three things, you know, it doesn't work like that.  You need to look at the very specific environment, you need to look at that plot, you need to  
**0:39:27-0:39:40:**  look at that sub farm, the 50 hectare area close to the river or up on the hill and make  some decisions in the field on a day to day basis, basically.  But how do you balance this?  
**0:39:40-0:39:48:**  I mean, when you take a project, you know, how do you decide, you know, how quickly do  we go?  How innovative do we go?  
**0:39:48-0:40:03:**  Because at the end of the day, that's a question that most farmers face at some points, unless  you start something, you know, completely regenerative, if that means anything from  the beginning, but you know, that doesn't guarantee you an economic model.  
**0:40:03-0:40:11:**  You know, that's a possibility.  But often people have, you know, a production system, which has, you know, pros and cons,  and might not be perfect.  
**0:40:11-0:40:21:**  And then you're trying to slowly move towards regenerative practices.  But the speed at which you go and the amount of risk you take is always the question.  And you know, how do you assess that?  
**0:40:21-0:40:31:**  Yeah, that's a very good question.  I mean, you're right, when you get the chance to design something completely new from scratch,  that's the most convenient situation to be in.  
**0:40:31-0:40:45:**  You know, we have knowledgeable people, we have access to a lot of research.  And so we can design hopefully the best possible system.  But if you have a running farm, you know, and that farm needs to make a profit, I mean,  
**0:40:45-0:41:00:**  it needs to pay for, it needs to pay the wages, it needs to pay the bills, basically, how  do you take those risks?  So we're looking for opportunities for change.  
**0:41:00-0:41:15:**  So with our partners and consultants and advisors together, we define a theory of change for  every farm.  So there's a theory of change on the social side, you know how a farm should change.  
**0:41:15-0:41:29:**  And there's a theory of change on the biodiversity side of things.  And that theory of change is obviously a long term vision of how to go from A to B to Z  over time.  
**0:41:29-0:41:46:**  And what you need to do is to check your progress against that vision periodically and frequently  and say like, am I actually progressing or am I not doing the things that I should be  doing to achieve my theory of change?  
**0:41:46-0:41:56:**  And at the same time, you cannot just fully embrace your theory of change at the sacrifice  of profitability.  That's correct.  
**0:41:56-0:42:18:**  So you need those opportunities where either an area has been aging and it needs to be  replanted or regrafted anyway, or you're looking at maybe a crop that doesn't sell that well  anymore so you decide to introduce something new.  
**0:42:18-0:42:37:**  And those redesign opportunities give you an opportunity to change the system there  and to embrace the research that you maybe have conducted on a smaller plot for the last  couple of years and say like, okay, yes, I can actually produce less, sorry, produce  
**0:42:37-0:42:53:**  more but with less inputs.  So we test those different systems and then we're gradually moving from the established  plot or the established approach to a new approach, if you see what I mean.  
**0:42:53-0:43:06:**  And so you're not experimenting in the blind, you're actually going into a change situation  knowingly.  At the same time, you can introduce many practices without entering risks.  
**0:43:06-0:43:15:**  So just, I mean, I don't want to start talking about another farm, but there's a farm in  Panama called Kwangwo.  It's also about cocoa.  
**0:43:15-0:43:40:**  It's a very wet and tropical environment at the Atlantic coast.  So it's cocoa, it's native forest, it's plantain, a lot of plantain production there.  So we looked at how to develop that farm and we went from the principle do not disturb.  
**0:43:40-0:43:56:**  So rather than doing deep tilling and all of this, we actually decided, no, let's do  it differently.  Let's plant the cocoa actually just carefully opening up the soil, leaving the top cover,  
**0:43:56-0:44:16:**  the ground cover, sorry, undisturbed and putting the cocoa in and leaving basically just opening  it up, planting the cocoa in, obviously carefully tending for it, but not going the traditional  way of land preparation, but do it in a very careful way.  
**0:44:16-0:44:25:**  And it seems to work very well.  It's progressing well.  And so we're embracing those practices and we don't think it's a big risk.  
**0:44:25-0:44:38:**  It's something that we try and we have the big benefit that we have 12 farms.  So you can try things in different places and you have a network, a knowledge network  that exchanges amongst each other.  
**0:44:38-0:44:57:**  And so you don't have to do all the experiments in the same place.  You can learn from what, I don't know, the farming team in Chinalp did and compare that  with what the farming team in Kwangwo does or what the guys in the Amposia project in  
**0:44:57-0:45:11:**  the Dominican Republic do.  So I think there the portfolio thought helps a lot to de-risk and say like, yeah, oh, we  already did this last year and it works very well.  
**0:45:11-0:45:26:**  And that gives the local team the confidence to do that as well because it's been tested  and it's been tried and it's been tried by someone you trust because you know them, you  work with them, you meet them at workshops regularly.  
**0:45:26-0:45:40:**  And yeah, that's what we're trying to establish.  How is that a theory of change comparing to what you're seeing on the ground then?  Because to clarify my thoughts, I think if we go back to agroforestry specifically, the  
**0:45:40-0:45:54:**  theory of change of agroforestry is clear and often available.  Let's say we can make more resilient agricultural systems, reduce inputs, reduce pest pressures,  diversify production.  
**0:45:54-0:46:12:**  All of this sounds amazing and I'm not saying that it's not happening, but we also see the  flip side of it, which is diverse systems require more knowledge, require more management  time, require more marketing time sometimes because you have different products or commodities  
**0:46:12-0:46:29:**  to sell depending on which scale we're talking about and many kind of practical problems.  And this is what I find exciting talking to you today is to really understand, you know,  obviously you set up this project with the hypothesis that agroforestry could deliver  
**0:46:29-0:46:44:**  all of this and could at the same time regenerate these farms and deliver financial returns.  Do you think that's happening?  Are you validated in there or do you see that tension between the regenerative dimension  
**0:46:44-0:46:56:**  and the financial return dimension?  Well, there is a certain clash, I agree.  And I mean, well, first of all, you have to ask yourself what none of this means anything  
**0:46:56-0:47:09:**  per se, you know, agroforestry, you know, there's no way.  Of course, there's a definition of that, but it's such a wide field that you can interpret  it in many ways, you know, it's the same with regenerative agriculture.  
**0:47:09-0:47:19:**  Suddenly everyone is regenerative.  It's amazing how they change overnight.  And so those terms aren't defined.  
**0:47:19-0:47:35:**  So you have to, you have to find your own definition of what that means to you.  If you are a group that is serious about that, you need to obviously defend that about two  to against other people who have maybe a different opinion about that.  
**0:47:35-0:47:54:**  But so first of all, it's about defining what you're doing there and how far you go down  the rabbit hole if you want.  But secondly, and I believe we are genuine about this and pushing the boundaries of what  
**0:47:54-0:48:07:**  is possible.  So here we come to your question, what is possible is in the context of profitability,  you know, in the sense of, am I willing to sacrifice or to bring the costs up to such  
**0:48:07-0:48:29:**  an high level because the attention of detail for these systems is so high that, you know,  my labour costs, the time I spend on tending to a particular area is so high that overall  it doesn't translate into the profitability I need to bring in the capital.  
**0:48:29-0:48:43:**  So that's a trade off to be found or an optimum to be found.  And what our head of operations always says, you know, what we're about is to find that  optimum.  
**0:48:43-0:49:03:**  It's not about short term maximisation of yields, nor is it about short term optimization  of regenerative practice, maximisation of regenerative practices.  It is about finding that optimum where you can be in a healthy profitable zone and you're  
**0:49:03-0:49:25:**  running your farm in a credible way and a very transparent way and you communicate what  you're doing to the investors and you find those groups who are willing to invest in  those models and they don't expect the double digit returns that they may be able to squeeze  
**0:49:25-0:49:37:**  out of high yielding conventional agriculture, but they want to see some returns and they  want to see the returns that you communicated to them.  So it's very much about trust and transparency.  
**0:49:37-0:49:50:**  You need to explain what you're doing.  You need to explain what impact that may have on your costs.  You may also, you need to sell better.  
**0:49:50-0:50:02:**  You know, if it costs more to do it, then you need to find those buyers who are willing  to pay more for the product.  So that's why we also build a sales team, you know, product sales team, because it's,  
**0:50:02-0:50:18:**  you cannot just have higher costs, but then still sell to the local trader and it gives  you the same price as it gives to the conventional team.  So you need to find those buyers in the market that are acting more ethically and they are  
**0:50:18-0:50:32:**  interested in products that have been sourced, you know, traceable, but also they care about  the way it's been produced and those buyers exist and you need to find them, you need  to convince them.  
**0:50:32-0:50:49:**  So it's that holistic management, but first and foremost, you need to explain what you're  doing to the investors and then you will find that there are groups out there who buy into  that and they see that there is the long-term value in that change because I believe, and  
**0:50:49-0:51:02:**  we as a group believe that in the long term, what we're doing will become the standard  model of farming, you know, or there will be no farming anymore.  That's the alternative, you know.  
**0:51:02-0:51:16:**  So let's not get into this sort of preaching kind of discussion.  But I wanted to, I mean, sorry to interrupt, but you know, I definitely want to go into  the sales bit, but I wanted to finish a bit on the investor bit because you're saying  
**0:51:16-0:51:30:**  finding that optimum between profitability and let's say, you know, environmental services  or regeneration, I don't know how we want to call it, but how do you make that optimum  then?  
**0:51:30-0:51:45:**  Do you kind of have this analysis before where you decide on a certain return on investments  and then, you know, you have to fix yourself to delivering that and then you allow yourself  some experimentation that stay within that target of profitability or, you know, how  
**0:51:45-0:51:59:**  do you tackle the optimum?  How do you calculate your kind of, what is your planning process?  Yeah, well, it's, well, first of all, you start with some return expectations that are  
**0:51:59-0:52:10:**  communicated.  So you know what the investor needs.  I mean, I mentioned, I mentioned pension funds, you know, you also have to see that a lot  
**0:52:10-0:52:24:**  of investors, well, they have their own investment or their own return objectives in the sense  that they are working for other people.  It's not their money either, you know, it's the money of the people who will be pensioners  
**0:52:24-0:52:41:**  in this fund, the beneficiary.  So they have returns that they need to deliver to, you know, pay for your pension or my pension.  And that's what they need to see in terms of return.  
**0:52:41-0:52:58:**  And you, in order to deliver that, there is a big transition, a transmission mechanism  between, you know, what is being sold as cocoa or coffee or timber and what ends up in the  pocket of the investor basically from that.  
**0:52:58-0:53:06:**  Sure.  In terms of overheads and taxation and what you all have.  So you can work backwards and say like, okay, this is what I need to achieve at the farm  
**0:53:06-0:53:15:**  level.  Now, and then the question is, is that achievable with the practices that we have in mind with  that change agenda?  
**0:53:15-0:53:28:**  And there you are in a constant iteration where you have to see like, okay, if I do  this, it's not only a question about, am I doing it?  The second question is, am I doing it now?  
**0:53:28-0:53:41:**  Should I do it now or should I do it later?  Or should I do it over time or should I do it in one go?  And are there also other sources of funding out there, grant-based and so on that may  
**0:53:41-0:54:01:**  be able to finance those transitions, you know?  Because usually the transition phase is the most difficult part.  I believe that a fully productive, biodiverse, regeneratively managed plot of land that is  
**0:54:01-0:54:15:**  fully productive, it can deliver the same financial results as a conventional monoculture  or more.  But to get there takes an awful lot of time.  
**0:54:15-0:54:29:**  And that period of time, that is hard to get through because there you don't make that  much money and it costs more to establish it and some things fail and then you need  to start from scratch.  
**0:54:29-0:54:42:**  And that process basically that needs, that is difficult.  I'm not saying we have all the answers there, but we plan some of that into our financial  models.  
**0:54:42-0:54:53:**  We communicate that, ramp up time.  We have investors who have that patience that they don't expect, you know, planting today  returns tomorrow.  
**0:54:53-0:55:11:**  But also that patience is limited, you know?  So you cannot do all that you wish to do at the same time.  And we're currently working on also bringing in other sources of funding, match funding,  
**0:55:11-0:55:31:**  where you basically bring your own money and you find a grant or public donor who's willing  to invest into that research together with you, you know, to have research plots, to  have test areas on different topics.  
**0:55:31-0:55:47:**  And then once you've established, okay, this works, it's an optimum, it's different to  that, and sometimes there are different optimums, you know, there's the, okay, I've put in maximum  inputs and I get the highest yields.  
**0:55:47-0:55:57:**  And there's the other extreme of, no, I don't touch that land and I just reap whatever is  coming out of there.  And we're looking obviously at something in between that.  
**0:55:57-0:56:12:**  But I imagine that must be difficult because there's so little data on the actual financial  viability of these innovative production models.  It must be quite difficult for you then to be able to give a really precise number in  
**0:56:12-0:56:33:**  terms of return and incorporating that complexity into the projects.  Well, yes and no.  I mean, to be honest, I think quite good on the cost projections in terms of, you know,  
**0:56:33-0:56:53:**  I mean, ultimately you have a permanent level of staff there that knows what they're doing.  So those labor costs are clear, you know, I mean, those are the people you're working  with and the question is more, what can they achieve?  
**0:56:53-0:57:08:**  So is your timing right?  I think so I'm less concerned about the cost planning, for example, and more about, you  know, is the change agenda, is it not too ambitious?  
**0:57:08-0:57:18:**  You know, are we not moving too fast?  Is it possible to do several hundred hectares in that way every year, you know, or does  it take more time?  
**0:57:18-0:57:33:**  And that you also know what you can sell the products for, you know, I mean, by now we  have a good portfolio of buyers who like our products and so we know what we can achieve  price-wise in the market.  
**0:57:33-0:57:47:**  So you have a good understanding of your costs and you have a good understanding of the prices  you can achieve in the market.  The question mark in between is the change agenda, you know, so like how fast can your  
**0:57:47-0:57:59:**  production change and ramp up?  So and how much will it actually produce?  And those are the question marks that you have because those systems haven't been tried  
**0:57:59-0:58:19:**  and tested for decades and centuries, you know.  So if you have a, to come back to that, you may have example, if you have a system where  you have robusta, cacao, rubber, plantain, or sort of on the same hectare planted in  
**0:58:19-0:58:41:**  innovative ways and tended in a very careful manner, you know, like looking at managing  the nutrient cycle, the water cycle, all of that very carefully.  You have an expectation of how your yields will look like, but that's difficult to manage,  
**0:58:41-0:58:53:**  you know, how will the yield exactly look like in year four after planting or year five  after planting.  And that's where we're still gathering data and getting better and where we're also sometimes  
**0:58:53-0:59:08:**  realizing, hey, it's been slower, you know, it's been slower.  We don't have the production yet that we thought we would have.  But I'm impressed at the fact that you're managing this on such a large scale because  
**0:59:08-0:59:25:**  already on the scale of an individual small farm, it's already sometimes difficult, you  know, to anticipate what you can actually get out of it because you might have anticipate  in theory that your inputs will reduce because you'll have a more resilient production system  
**0:59:25-0:59:41:**  that will require less pest control or whatever.  But actually anticipating that and how that expresses in the local context is so difficult.  And yeah, if you guys managed to pull that off on multiple projects at the same time,  
**0:59:41-0:59:50:**  congratulations.  Well, I mean, don't congratulate us too early.  I mean, we've a couple of years, well, a bit more than a couple, but a few years into this  
**0:59:50-1:00:04:**  process and it takes time.  But you know, so far we're doing I think well.  But you're absolutely right because you have your theory, you're like, okay, I do this  
**1:00:04-1:00:15:**  and then this effect will happen and that will bring down costs or I can reduce that  input, you know.  So that's your theory and in principle everything's fine with that theory, but then the realities  
**1:00:15-1:00:30:**  were acting in nature, you know.  So your theory gets thrown into the bin because suddenly it's a drought year or it's super  wet, it's been raining like crazy or I don't know, you're doing well and then the hurricane  
**1:00:30-1:00:37:**  goes through.  So which is probably not what happens too much in the south of France, but it also happens  there.  
**1:00:37-1:00:46:**  It's maybe a bit more temperate, but...  We have droughts, don't worry.  We have our own challenges as well.  
**1:00:46-1:01:05:**  So you know, your plans go well and then you need to deal with just realities in the farm  and that happens to us as it happens to a smaller farm.  The difference is if you are a small farm team, then you're one, two or three people  
**1:01:05-1:01:18:**  with all this knowledge and to react to that.  And in our case, we are more, you know.  You have knowledgeable people on the farms who can take fast actions.  
**1:01:18-1:01:32:**  You have that support team, technical services team that can bring in specialists to say  like, okay, look, I need to improve on that irrigation system.  How am I going to do it?  
**1:01:32-1:01:46:**  And these people have the experience of many projects, you know.  So that's a support layer that you may not have as a standalone farmer.  You have to rely on Google or hire expensive consultants.  
**1:01:46-1:02:05:**  But I imagine that as an organization, it must be very difficult to combine both kind  of a centralized decision-making process in the sense that you still have, you know, one,  two trie with your central team managing different projects, managing the relationship with investors.  
**1:02:05-1:02:19:**  So keeping that cohesive structure.  But at the same time, having decentralized structures as well so that you can be responsive  to local conditions and things that come up because, you know, a big advantage you have  
**1:02:19-1:02:36:**  if you're just one farmer on your land is that you're able to react to situations very  quickly and to make decisions that only involve a few people and observe very closely the  feedback loops between what you're implementing and what you're observing and how the land  
**1:02:36-1:02:42:**  is responding.  And doing that at such a scale seems really complex.  Yeah.  
**1:02:42-1:03:00:**  And I think you're mentioning a very important point.  You need to, if you want to do this in a good way, then you need good local trusted partners  who know what they're doing and are also able and willing to take decisions when they are  
**1:03:00-1:03:23:**  required, you know, and those decisions need to be aligned with your corporate thinking  and strategy and development process, if you see what I mean.  So what I think doesn't work is if you just treat those farms as sort of contract farming,  
**1:03:23-1:03:38:**  you know, and the people, the local people are not empowered to take, you know, to think  for themselves and to take those decisions.  That doesn't work in practice because you have to take a million decisions every day.  
**1:03:38-1:03:55:**  And if the local manager ultimately doesn't care because, you know, he doesn't feel like  he's taking ownership for the farm, it's just, you know, a hired gun if you want.  Then that will not work.  
**1:03:55-1:04:18:**  So I think we're very happy and lucky with the partners that we have in the farms.  We also had failures in that regard that we had local teams that, I don't know, didn't  somehow quite connect to our vision and they didn't implement what we thought they were  
**1:04:18-1:04:30:**  implementing.  They were taking decisions that actually had some bad consequences.  And so we learned from that and more and more, we are actually involved ourselves in the  
**1:04:30-1:04:43:**  farming.  So we're not an investor, we're not just a sort of technical support group, but we are  very actively involved in the farm operational setup.  
**1:04:43-1:05:06:**  And also we set up joint venture structures with local operators, with individuals to  set up specific farm operator or operating companies that are managing a farm.  And we're making sure that what we want to see as a theory of change is happening in  
**1:05:06-1:05:18:**  the field and there is a direct feedback.  At the same time, the people are empowered enough, the local general managers and the  farm managers and so on, they are empowered enough and knowledgeable enough and educated  
**1:05:18-1:05:30:**  enough that they can make those decisions that are necessary.  They don't need to, oh, there's a problem.  And then they need to go all the way through back to Berlin to ask for approval to do something.  
**1:05:30-1:05:41:**  That's not happening.  But I wanted to ask on the social side of it, because you mentioned earlier that you  went for a structure where you own big farms.  
**1:05:41-1:05:57:**  And so the structure is we're talking on 5,000 hectares and I can see how that makes sense  linked to the investments necessities.  You were mentioning that the type of investors you're talking to aren't going to invest in  
**1:05:57-1:06:09:**  a kind of 10 hectare farm.  But going forward, what kind of place do you see for small farmers?  Do you think that necessarily agroforestry and changing agriculture has to go through  
**1:06:09-1:06:26:**  these mega farms owned sometimes by an organization that's from somewhere else or whatever that  centralizes so much land?  Or do you think that it will be able, that it's a possibility also for small autonomous  
**1:06:26-1:06:37:**  farmers to play a part in the picture?  That's a super difficult question.  That is a question that we discussed quite a bit.  
**1:06:37-1:06:55:**  So yes and no.  I think there is more and more need for big professional farms that hopefully embrace  an agenda for good change.  
**1:06:55-1:07:17:**  But to act as in a hub and spoke kind of way in a region, in an area to empower those small  holders, to empower the small farmers.  I mean, what I guess you and I don't want to see is the kind of change that happened  
**1:07:17-1:07:34:**  in most of European agriculture where you literally have no one working and farming  anymore.  Everything's largely mechanized and at huge scale and at the sacrifice of biodiversity  
**1:07:34-1:07:50:**  and the whole social measure.  And there are some reversing trends there, of course, but generally I think that is still  true for North America and Europe and so on and so on.  
**1:07:50-1:08:05:**  So that's not what we want to see.  At the same time, I think you cannot rely on, I don't know, donor programs and providing  technical assistance to millions and millions of small farmers.  
**1:08:05-1:08:19:**  And in particular in the tropics, almost all of the farming, the production is still coming  out of smaller order production.  So that needs to get better.  
**1:08:19-1:08:32:**  It needs to become, first of all, it needs to become profitable and worthwhile for the  small farmer.  And there are only some ways how to achieve that, you know, that actually enough that  
**1:08:32-1:08:52:**  is worthwhile doing that farming.  And my personal belief is that it will have to be a combination that on the one hand,  not everyone should be doing subsistence farming, you know, on a tiny plot, but rather you need  
**1:08:52-1:09:10:**  some sort of concentration, at least a couple of hectares, you know, to make it worthwhile  implementing those better farming practices and so on and so on.  And then making sure that these farmers are, you know, benefiting from the hard work they  
**1:09:10-1:09:22:**  put in and the knowledge that was transferred to them and that they applied in practice.  And if that is not translated into higher prices, they can achieve, then they will not  do it.  
**1:09:22-1:09:35:**  So that needs to happen.  And at the same time, I think there need to be more aggregators out there, such as our  farms, but obviously also many others who are acting as local hubs, basically where  
**1:09:35-1:09:50:**  the farmer can sell at a good price, where he can get technical assistance from, where  he can get knowledge from and inputs and so on.  So I think it's a combination of having more aggregators or big farms that act as aggregators  
**1:09:50-1:10:10:**  and not just in isolation and alleviating the small farmer out of poverty in the sense  that not everyone can become a profitable farmer on one or two hectares of land.  I think that is not a possibility.  
**1:10:10-1:10:28:**  But if you can bring up a big number to a level where it can actually generate a good  source of income, then I think much has been achieved.  I wanted to understand, you know, as a business, the decision to invest in perennial crops,  
**1:10:28-1:10:45:**  which have much longer cycles, seems risky in a time of climate change where it's so  hard to predict future weather patterns.  And how are you managing these to integrate these longer cycles, both in terms of knowledge,  
**1:10:45-1:10:57:**  because the feedback loops are longer with trees and perennial crops and also in terms  of harvests and returns?  That's a good question.  
**1:10:57-1:11:08:**  So yes, we are all about perennial crops.  That's right.  At least sort of at the core of our production systems.  
**1:11:08-1:11:22:**  And the lead times to production are much longer.  So let's say like with coffee, it's two to three years.  But in cocoa, which we are a lot about, you're more looking at five to seven years.  
**1:11:22-1:11:35:**  And the date palms we've been talking about, they take eight or nine years, you know, until  they produce something meaningful.  So that's an awful lot of time in which things can go wrong.  
**1:11:35-1:11:58:**  And then thereafter as well.  At the same time, those are incredibly important components in a strategy that embraces climate  change, carbon sequestration, and biodiversity.  
**1:11:58-1:12:17:**  So having those objectives at the same level as profitable farming, for us, that leads  to perennial crops.  And it may be more challenging, but at the same time, I think it's more profitable.  
**1:12:17-1:12:25:**  Long term, it's more profitable than annual crops.  You have higher investments upfront.  That is true.  
**1:12:25-1:12:42:**  You have higher, longer lead times.  So this is something that can only be overcome with more patient investors who understand  that they will not have annual distributions from that investment in the first couple of  
**1:12:42-1:12:53:**  years.  But once you've overcome that, then you have a very stable system.  You know, if it is irrigated, for example, if it has a good management crew that knows  
**1:12:53-1:13:10:**  how to manage fit or sanitary risks and so on, then you have a very stable system that  you can run for 10, 20, 30 years, depending what you have there.  And it delivers very highly on all these dimensions.  
**1:13:10-1:13:20:**  And that's what you need to keep in mind.  So our change agenda is ambitious.  And so we thought that the perennial crops are the best way to achieve that, the best  
**1:13:20-1:13:29:**  way to get there.  We'll be moving towards the end of the interview because we've been chatting for a while and  I want to be conscious of your time.  
**1:13:29-1:13:43:**  And I was just wondering, you know, we're on the podcast mainly focused on temperate  climates and with agricultural as it's practiced in the US and in Europe and in industrialized  context.  
**1:13:43-1:13:59:**  And do you see the potential for, you know, projects in Europe?  I mean, not maybe specifically for your organization, if that's not the scope you've given yourself,  but do you think the type of projects you're running now, the methodologies could be transposable  
**1:13:59-1:14:06:**  to large scale farming in Europe or America?  I think so.  And I hope so.  
**1:14:06-1:14:23:**  But I mean, you're right.  Our focus has been, as I said at the beginning, on those vulnerable habitats and climate zones.  So we're active in the tropics, we're active in very dry environments.  
**1:14:23-1:14:35:**  And well, unfortunately, those dry environments are coming to Europe and to North America.  So we may come with that, if you see what I mean.  And unfortunately, I'm not joking.  
**1:14:35-1:14:53:**  So in a sense, what we're doing in Morocco, for example, in terms of organic dates production,  and we're looking at many other models that can be done there at the moment for further  investments.  
**1:14:53-1:15:17:**  You know, the same vulnerability applies to the south of Spain, south of France.  I mean, we've been on field trips in Brandenburg, surroundings of Berlin, well, headquarters,  and these are some of the lowest rainfall areas in the whole of Germany, very dry areas.  
**1:15:17-1:15:30:**  And the Centropic farm that we visited there had to do with, I think it was 300 mils of  rainfall a year, you know, that's not much.  That's very low.  
**1:15:30-1:15:50:**  So, and that's sort of 50 kilometers outside of Berlin.  So unfortunately, I think what we're doing is very, very relevant to farming in temperate  climate zones for the future, because there will be less and less temperate climate zones,  
**1:15:50-1:16:04:**  you know.  So I think what we're learning there, you know, how to be successful in semi-arid areas,  how to be, you know, how to be organic producers or near organic producers in very wet tropical  
**1:16:04-1:16:24:**  environments, and to keep those fungi at bay and so on.  Those things, I think, are hopefully very valuable pieces of information, data points  that can be used in temperate climates in the future.  
**1:16:24-1:16:36:**  And you know, we're not exclusive to that, that we stay in the tropics and so on.  We're looking at potentially making investments also in the south of France and Spain, you  know.  
**1:16:36-1:16:47:**  But there must be an agenda or a theory of change attached to it.  Ultimately, we're a mission-driven company.  We're not just looking for the easiest way to farm.  
**1:16:47-1:16:59:**  Sometimes I feel that we're looking for the most complicated way to farm.  But you know what I mean.  Those challenges exist in France, they exist in Germany, they exist in the US or in northern  
**1:16:59-1:17:07:**  Mexico.  And we will eventually, you know, if we can tap into more capital, then we will eventually  go there.  
**1:17:07-1:17:24:**  At this point in time, we obviously also want to stay to the proven areas, you know, where  people know that we can do this kind of agriculture in Mesoamerica.  They know we can do it in Morocco.  
**1:17:24-1:17:41:**  So obviously, it's easier to convince them to do more there or to invest for more investment  in those areas than to say, hey, let's go to other places.  But we're pushing further into Africa, we're pushing further into Southeast Asia.  
**1:17:41-1:17:56:**  That would have been our agenda already for this year if that little pandemic wouldn't  have come into our way.  And there's nothing that stops us from going into more temperate climate zones.  
**1:17:56-1:18:04:**  And in any case, just to make that point again, those are getting unfortunately more extreme  as well.  Sure.  
**1:18:04-1:18:21:**  The question of the need, I think is it's clear that we already need innovative techniques.  The region where I am has, you know, droughts basically every year now.  And it's clear that talking with farmers, even those that are not interested in agroforestry  
**1:18:21-1:18:33:**  or haven't determined itself, they're very clear that the first place to have green grass  is under trees and the last place where the animals can still eat is still under trees.  So there's definitely the need for it.  
**1:18:33-1:18:49:**  But I do agree with you.  I think, you know, agroforestry in tropical climates is probably a safer bet.  It's been used for far longer and the heat and the access to plenty of light definitely,  
**1:18:49-1:19:05:**  you know, lends itself well to this kind of stratified systems.  And yeah, it's still something, you know, it's still a question I'm trying to understand  is to what extent, what types of techniques are adapted to Western or let's say temperate  
**1:19:05-1:19:11:**  climates.  Clearly hedges have been used for a long time.  But you know, I have quite a skeptical mind in general.  
**1:19:11-1:19:24:**  So I'm still trying to understand if putting trees in the middle of a parcel is a good  idea or not, and we haven't answered that in this context.  Thank you so much for taking the time to answer my numerous questions.  
**1:19:24-1:19:36:**  And thanks for doing so in such an interesting manner.  I really enjoyed hearing about all of this.  And maybe we can have you back in the podcast in a few years and follow your progress on  
**1:19:36-1:19:44:**  these many exciting projects.  Thank you Etienne for giving me and us as one to trade the opportunity.  It's no, very good questions.  
**1:19:44-1:19:57:**  I'm happy that we had the opportunity to also to have the time to go in a bit deeper and  now would be great to come back at some point.  So thanks.  
**1:19:57-1:20:12:**  Thanks for making it this far and I hope you enjoyed this episode as much as I did.  As usual, you'll find all the relevant information in the description just below and feel free  to get in touch with us with suggestions for other episodes or some feedback through our  
**1:20:12-1:20:15:**  website or social media.  