<script src="https://cdn.podlove.org/web-player/embed.js"></script>
    <script>
        document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', function () {
          if (document.readyState === 'interactive' || document.readyState === 'complete') {
            podlovePlayer('#player', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast/22-how-agroforestry-improves-farm-biodiversity-and-impacts-insect-dynamics-with-tom-staton.json', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast/config.json').then(registerExternalEvents('player'))
          }
        })
  </script>---
title: 22 How Agroforestry Improves Farm Biodiversity And Impacts Insect Dynamics With Tom Staton
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2021-06-13)  

**0:00:00-0:00:23:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:23-0:00:35:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry.  In order to find out how it can help us with these challenges, we'll be interviewing farmers,  
**0:00:35-0:00:48:**  scientists, and other experts to share with you their experiences, practical advice, and  scientific research.  Hello and welcome to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:00:48-0:01:01:**  I'm your host Dimitri and today we had a chat with Tom Statton, PhD researcher at Reading  University talking about insects and agroforestry.  Often in agroforestry we talk about, or in tree planting, we talk about the ecological  
**0:01:01-0:01:16:**  benefits and we wanted to find out more about how that works, how beneficial they really  are and is everything that is being said about agroforestry, is it showing up in the field  as well?  
**0:01:16-0:01:32:**  And we had a really interesting conversation with Tom about this who brings up some fascinating  elements in terms of management styles, understories in trees, types of insects that are favoured  and not favoured, and more.  
**0:01:32-0:01:45:**  So I hope you enjoy this interview and let us know what you think.  Hello Tom and welcome on the podcast.  Hello Dimitri and thanks for the invitation, it's very nice to be here.  
**0:01:45-0:02:00:**  Awesome, well I think to start off it would be really great for our listeners to have  a bit of an idea of who you are and what you're doing and some of your current activities  at the moment.  
**0:02:00-0:02:22:**  Sure yeah, so I'm a PhD student in my fourth year now, so right at the end of my PhD.  I'm at the University of Reading in the UK, which is in southern England.  And really I suppose in terms of my background, my background is really in ecology and biology.  
**0:02:22-0:02:35:**  So I did a biology degree, then I did the masters in biological recording and ecological  monitoring.  Then I worked as a consultant ecologist for a few years, advising developers and people  
**0:02:35-0:02:47:**  like that.  Then I fancied the change, so I started a PhD.  So really my background is in ecology and I'm interested in any applied ecological problem  
**0:02:47-0:03:06:**  really of which agriculture, there's lots to be interested in there.  So that's how I got into this.  Okay so my PhD, I'm really looking at biodiversity and agroforestry and particularly plants and  
**0:03:06-0:03:14:**  insect diversity.  But I'm particularly interested in looking at that from an applied angle, so from a farming  perspective.  
**0:03:14-0:03:30:**  What are the good aspects of biodiversity in agroforestry?  So things like pollinators or the natural predators of pests.  And also what are the challenging aspects, so things like weeds and insect pests.  
**0:03:30-0:03:43:**  So it's trying to weigh up those pros and cons really of biodiversity and agroforestry.  Okay, how did you get involved with agroforestry in the first place?  How did you start working in agroforestry research?  
**0:03:43-0:03:59:**  Yeah, well it was really coming to the PhD and I was looking for PhD opportunities.  I saw this one advertised and it looks like an interesting topic really, so it went from  there.  
**0:03:59-0:04:09:**  But as I say, I'm interested in applied ecological problems.  I like getting out into the field as well and getting my hands dirty and collecting  data.  
**0:04:09-0:04:20:**  And so this project really takes away these boxes in terms of being a very applied practical  project.  So yeah, that's how I got into it.  
**0:04:20-0:04:38:**  Okay, it was quite exciting to find your research actually.  That was advised to us by Sally and Joe, who we interviewed in a previous episode.  And for us, one of the objectives of this talk would be to really delve into the nuance  
**0:04:38-0:04:59:**  of how agroforestry and under what conditions and with what management does it have an influence  on our insects and therefore how that can influence also the economics of the farm by,  for example, favoring or defavoring predatory insects that can help with other types of  
**0:04:59-0:05:14:**  pests, such as aphids, et cetera.  And I know your research touches a lot of points based on this.  So it would be awesome if you could give us a bit of an intro as to what you found out  
**0:05:14-0:05:25:**  in your research about insects and agroforestry.  How have insects been favored or defavored in an agroforestry context compared to an  arable context?  
**0:05:25-0:05:46:**  Yeah, so I mean, what you said about nuance earlier is very true.  And I think when I started out on the project, I was kind of seeing it in a quite polarized  view and seeing, well, can agroforestry be a positive solution, not just for biodiversity,  
**0:05:46-0:06:01:**  but for pest suppression and for pollinators.  Whereas as I've gone through the project, I've realized that the reality is a bit more  nuanced and there's pros and cons really of biodiversity.  
**0:06:01-0:06:21:**  So I think firstly, in terms of biodiversity overall, we're certainly finding strong evidence  that agroforestry does improve biodiversity in terms of plants and insects, species compared  to monocultures of arable.  
**0:06:21-0:06:41:**  And that's as we would expect really, and there's previous evidence for that as well.  So there's a growing body of evidence supporting that conclusion.  But in terms of the applied perspective, so looking at pests and pollinators, we've really  
**0:06:41-0:07:00:**  found that it's quite a nuanced result really.  So rather than agroforestry universally suppressing all insect pests, we're finding that some  are suppressed, whereas others seem to be a bit more of a problem in agroforestry.  
**0:07:00-0:07:23:**  So for example, the pollen beetles in Orssey rape, we found way less of them in agroforestry.  So 57% fewer pollen beetles in agroforestry compared to pure monocroping of Orssey rape.  So huge difference.  
**0:07:23-0:07:37:**  Whereas the flip side of that is something like slugs, where we found 39% more slugs  in agroforestry than in pure arable fields.  So it's a bit of a mixed bag really in terms of pest abundance.  
**0:07:37-0:07:52:**  And we can explain that in terms of the traits of those insects.  So pollen beetles are very mobile, they're very attracted to a big flower resource.  And so a big field of Orssey rape is perfect for pollen beetle because they can get in  
**0:07:52-0:07:59:**  very quickly.  There's loads of food for them.  And they have a very quick life cycle.  
**0:07:59-0:08:09:**  So the high disturbance of the arable field doesn't really affect them.  Whereas slugs are very different.  Of course, they're not mobile.  
**0:08:09-0:08:27:**  They're not particularly attracted to any particular resource.  And so they do quite well in agroforestry because, well, probably because of a number  of reasons, including the refuge from cultivation and also the higher moisture stability in  
**0:08:27-0:08:39:**  the soil.  The soils tend to retain more moisture in agroforestry.  So it's quite a nuanced result.  
**0:08:39-0:08:58:**  The other thing that we found was certainly higher diversity of natural enemies.  So natural enemies are the predators and parasitoids of pests.  We did find higher diversity of them in agroforestry than in arable, which suggests a higher level  
**0:08:58-0:09:14:**  of natural pest control.  Okay, so I saw on one of the, I think it's your latest research paper, excuse me if I'm  not familiar exactly with the dates and the names, etc.  
**0:09:14-0:09:28:**  But I found that you had seen an increase in ground predators in the agroforestry system,  such as beetles.  And I'm just going to push the logic a bit and see to understand why things have worked  
**0:09:28-0:09:40:**  or why things are working in this way and why not.  But for example, if the ground beetles have been favoured and they eat slugs, would we  expect at some point for things to even out?  
**0:09:40-0:09:56:**  I mean, I don't know, do we have a sense of how things could evolve with this example  now of this basic relationship between the beetles and the slugs?  Yeah, I think in that respect, yeah, you're right about the ground predators in agroforestry.  
**0:09:56-0:10:20:**  Agroforestry does seem to favour those, particularly those ground based predators.  But I think in terms of pest populations, pest populations depend on how many of those  pests are being eaten, but also by how suitable the habitat is for those pests.  
**0:10:20-0:10:37:**  So it may be that there's more predators of slugs in agroforestry.  But also if the habitat is so much better that it outweighs that top down predation,  then you'll end up with more slugs, which I suspect is what's happening in agroforestry.  
**0:10:37-0:10:48:**  There are more predators.  The habitat suitability for slugs outweighs that factor.  Yeah, nice.  
**0:10:48-0:11:00:**  And I mean, what about the insects such as pollination?  I saw there was also some interesting results in terms of pollinators in the system.  Could you tell us a bit about that as well?  
**0:11:00-0:11:16:**  Yeah, so yeah, that is a bit more simple really, in that it is pretty much universally beneficial  effects of pollinators in agroforestry.  So yeah, we're writing a paper at the moment on that.  
**0:11:16-0:11:33:**  And there was a paper that came out last year actually from a previous PhD student at Reading.  And we're finding about two times more pollinators in agroforestry than in arable field, which  basically which is a big effect.  
**0:11:33-0:11:40:**  A lot more.  Yeah, yeah.  And not just numbers of pollinators, but also the species richness of particularly of wild  
**0:11:40-0:11:52:**  bees.  So there's a lot more species of wild bees in agroforestry.  And interestingly, we've been looking at which species of bees particularly benefit.  
**0:11:52-0:12:04:**  So is it just common bee species that you're getting more of?  Or is it favouring declining, rarer species?  And it seems that it is those rarer declining species which are particularly benefiting  
**0:12:04-0:12:21:**  from agroforestry.  So species, particularly smaller winged species are benefiting most from agroforestry.  And those smaller winged species are also more vulnerable to population declines.  
**0:12:21-0:12:36:**  Because they're much less mobile, they're much more sensitive to localised habitat conditions.  So that's really promising in terms of agroforestry being a really effective tool for conserving  wild bees.  
**0:12:36-0:12:51:**  Which is very important.  I'm sure your listeners have heard lots about catastrophic insect declines globally.  And bees are certainly taking a big brunt of that in terms of their vulnerability to  
**0:12:51-0:12:59:**  extinction.  So yeah, agroforestry looks like a really good way of mitigating that and bringing bees  back into farms.  
**0:12:59-0:13:11:**  Which is of course good for conservation, but also good for farming and pollination,  crop pollination.  And from my understanding, I had read this by looking at the resources in your research  
**0:13:11-0:13:23:**  and kind of drilling in.  Wild bees are, I think it was research in China, I'm not sure, but they found that wild  bees are more effective than normal bees or than let's say cultivated bees, it's not the  
**0:13:23-0:13:43:**  right term, but at pollinating, right?  Yes, yeah, there's lots of evidence for comparing managed bees like honey bees.  In the UK we normally have managed honey bee hives around the edges of crop fields to pollinate  
**0:13:43-0:13:55:**  the crops.  So there's been studies looking at how effective wild pollinators are compared to honey bees.  And there's lots of evidence that having those wild pollinators really helps to improve pollination.  
**0:13:55-0:14:12:**  So there was one study that came out recently that looked at, that compared the weight of  strawberries pollinated by honey bees versus wild bees.  And they found that the strawberries pollinated by wild bees were significantly heavier than  
**0:14:12-0:14:21:**  those that had been pollinated by honey bees.  Wow, I mean, I really wonder why would that be the case, right?  I mean, that's crazy.  
**0:14:21-0:14:34:**  Yeah, I mean, yeah, there's lots of reasons for that.  But I'm really having a good diversity of different bee shapes and sizes so the pollen  can get into different places.  
**0:14:34-0:14:49:**  It seems to be important, whereas honey bees are quite limited in terms of where they take  the pollen and how they move it around, basically.  And so can we assume that that's the case with other species as well?  
**0:14:49-0:15:08:**  Because I mean, I guess flying insects like bees can be, maybe it was, you specifically  studied these ones, but can we assume that the complexity of other insect groups will  also be emphasised and their importance in the ecosystem can also, is also an important  
**0:15:08-0:15:16:**  consideration in agroforestry, yes, you know, more simple monocrop fields without the complex  layers?  Absolutely, yeah.  
**0:15:16-0:15:31:**  Yeah, so there's lots of interest in that in the way in the ecological research, looking  at the importance of diversity for pollination, as I've mentioned, but also for natural pest  regulation.  
**0:15:31-0:15:52:**  And so there was a study that looked at what we call the functional diversity of predators  and parasitoids, which is basically the number of different types of predators that you have.  So it looks at the hunting mode of predators, so whether they're ambush predators, or whether  
**0:15:52-0:16:06:**  they're active, or whether they sit and wait.  And also whether, which part of the plants they use, so whether they run along the ground  or whether they're aerial.  
**0:16:06-0:16:26:**  And things like this looked at this functional diversity and found that the functional diversity  of predators was the most important predictor of pest regulation or pest suppression.  And more important even than the number of different species of predators that you have.  
**0:16:26-0:16:46:**  So having these, not just different species of predators, but different functions of predators  is really important for this natural pest suppression.  So yeah, it's really interesting to look at it from this functional biodiversity.  
**0:16:46-0:17:01:**  And I mean, for me, it really makes me wonder, what is it in the agroforestry system that  favors this biodiversity?  Is it the more diverse food source, the more diverse structure of the environment that  
**0:17:01-0:17:14:**  creates more habitats?  We have an idea of what creates better conditions for accommodating higher biodiversity of insects.  Yeah, so it's a good question.  
**0:17:14-0:17:31:**  And again, there's a lot of reasons for that.  They're really introducing plant diversity into a field always benefits biodiversity  in general, because of course, plants underpin the whole food web.  
**0:17:31-0:17:49:**  So you have more plant diversity, you have more insect diversity.  And so agroforestry is a good way of doing that.  One really, excuse me, one important factor in terms of that plant diversity is of course,  
**0:17:49-0:18:07:**  how the space below the trees is managed, particularly in an alley cropping system where  you have strips of trees.  And then that space is an opportunity really to provide a food source for invertebrates  
**0:18:07-0:18:24:**  and insects and other wildlife.  And so one of the things we've looked at actually is to compare tall flowering understories.  So the understory being the vegetation below the trees, compared to regular limo understories  
**0:18:24-0:18:36:**  to suppress the vegetation.  We found significantly higher diversity associated with those taller flowering understories,  particularly early in the season.  
**0:18:36-0:18:51:**  So it seems that that vegetation is really important, particularly for overwintering  of insects.  And particularly, interestingly, the main benefit of that was on the beneficial insects,  
**0:18:51-0:19:01:**  so the predators of pests and the pollinators.  Whereas we didn't really see any worsening of pest problems from those taller flowering  understories.  
**0:19:01-0:19:14:**  So it seems that vegetation below the trees is an important reason why agroforestry can  be so beneficial to biodiversity.  Okay, that's really interesting.  
**0:19:14-0:19:27:**  One of your papers focuses solely on this, right?  It's just looking at how the management of that understory will influence the...  It compares quite a lot to the flower strips that we also talk a lot about.  
**0:19:27-0:19:36:**  This is a bit diverging a bit from agroforestry, but that's also an important conservation  technique that we're seeing popping up around the place.  And so I wonder what's...  
**0:19:36-0:19:50:**  Just stepping back a little bit, what's the benefit of a flower strip?  Yes, a flower strip with trees, also called agroforestry.  What's the difference there?  
**0:19:50-0:20:05:**  I mean, do the trees have an influence?  Well, the trees will have a microclimatic influence.  So there's good evidence again that the trees produce wind speeds in the crop alleys in  
**0:20:05-0:20:17:**  between the trees.  And that will have an effect on flying insects.  So again, thinking of things like bees, especially the smaller bees are quite sensitive to wind  
**0:20:17-0:20:30:**  speeds.  So reducing wind speeds by introducing trees will be beneficial to them.  So that's probably the main mechanism by which the trees will benefit biodiversity.  
**0:20:30-0:20:50:**  But of course, the other kind of a side of biodiversity, the reason trees are planted  is for economic benefit.  And that's really important because wildlife friendly farming techniques need to work economically.  
**0:20:50-0:21:04:**  And the disadvantage with having flower strips is that they're not providing you with an  income, a direct income that is.  So there's a limit to how many flower strips a farmer is going to plant and they're probably  
**0:21:04-0:21:13:**  not going to plant them across that field every 24 meters.  Whereas an agroforestry, that's exactly what farmers do because they're receiving an income  from those trees.  
**0:21:13-0:21:29:**  So the trees are providing an economic justification to have a high density of these flower strips  across the field.  And also a justification for keeping them there in the long term.  
**0:21:29-0:21:46:**  Okay, yeah, that makes a lot of sense.  But again, if I can drill this in a bit more, is there not some role for the tree in the  direct benefits in terms of food and shelter to the insects?  
**0:21:46-0:22:02:**  Yes, there is, there is absolutely, yeah.  And that's probably a slightly neglected kind of topic in ecological research.  In fact, there was a paper that came up very recently on bees, looking at the importance  
**0:22:02-0:22:18:**  of trees for bees.  And it found that things like tree sap and resin are actually really important for bees  because they use them to build their nests, which we don't really think about.  
**0:22:18-0:22:30:**  We just think about having lots of flowers for bees, but actually they do need these  other sources of food like resin and sap.  Interesting.  
**0:22:30-0:22:42:**  So, yeah, and yeah, of course the same goes for other insects, that we use these resources  of endopom trees.  And the flowering, as you say, many trees are very early flowering.  
**0:22:42-0:22:59:**  For example, apple trees, which are the main tree species we've been studying in our agroforestry  field sites, flower very early and provide a really abundant floral resource early in  the season.  
**0:22:59-0:23:15:**  And that's, again, that's good evidence that having that temporal availability of food  sources is really important for bees because when they come out of hibernation, they need  to, or they emerge from the nests, they need an immediate source of food really.  
**0:23:15-0:23:36:**  So having early flowering and also late flowering species is really important for their populations.  I mean, maybe it's a good time now and maybe it's also a bit late, but first it would be  great for you to mention kind of the setup of the plot where you were measuring data.  
**0:23:36-0:23:44:**  Just to clarify, are we talking about a hedge system?  Are we talking about what agroforestry system are we talking about?  Where have you done your measures?  
**0:23:44-0:24:01:**  Yeah, so we selected three sites, all in the UK, all in a similar part of the UK.  So they're all quite climatically similar.  And all of the three sites are working farms, so they're all commercial farms, they're not  
**0:24:01-0:24:16:**  university setups.  And each of the farms has an agroforestry field as well as a monoculture arable field  within the same management, and in most cases right next door to each other.  
**0:24:16-0:24:34:**  So we were able to compare, and really the whole aim of the research was to compare the  agroforestry fields to the arable fields.  And yeah, in terms of the agroforestry setups, they were, so they're alley cropping systems.  
**0:24:34-0:24:50:**  So it's a row of trees or a strip of trees.  Then you have a crop alley, which was 24 metres wide, all of the sites.  And then another row of trees, another crop alley, so on.  
**0:24:50-0:25:04:**  So the tree rows were mostly apple trees.  One of the sites was a bit more diverse, more of a range of fruit and nut species, but mostly  apples.  
**0:25:04-0:25:26:**  And these are planted on semi-dwarf rootstock, so they get about three or four metres tall.  So the shading impact on the crop isn't too severe compared to bigger timber trees.  And the tree rows are set within a three or four metre wide strip.  
**0:25:26-0:25:45:**  And then the space below the trees, the understory, was sown with some kind of flower mix at all  of the sites.  And that varied from a nectar-rich, quite diverse wildflower mix at some of the sites,  
**0:25:45-0:25:58:**  through to a clover mix at one of the sites.  And what else?  So the trees were around, the trees were planted, well, at the time we were collecting the data,  
**0:25:58-0:26:15:**  the trees were about between three and eight or nine years old, something like that, depending  on the site.  So reasonably young, really, in terms of the establishment time.  
**0:26:15-0:26:35:**  And two of the sites were organically managed.  The other one wasn't organic, but they do limit their pesticide use, and also mint-till.  So they're all kind of practicing some kind of ecological farming technique alongside  
**0:26:35-0:26:46:**  the ecofaristry.  For me, it makes me wonder a bit about, you know, we looked at, we talked about increased  biodiversity.  
**0:26:46-0:27:08:**  We talked about increased predators, especially early in the season, which is when there is  also a lot of pressure from herbivorous insects like aphids, et cetera.  Did this increased biodiversity express itself in an improvement in the crop performance,  
**0:27:08-0:27:26:**  be it either the apple or the intercrop grains, for example?  So firstly, before I answer that, I meant to say the crops in the ecofaristry.  The ecofaristry systems were mostly cereals.  
**0:27:26-0:27:35:**  So we had mostly oats, actually.  There was a bit of barley and wheat.  One of the sites grew, obviously, grape in one of the years.  
**0:27:35-0:27:54:**  So they were all cereal-based rotations.  Yeah, so in terms of benefits to the crop, in terms of the different understory treatments,  we compared aphid colonies in the apple trees above the flowering mix versus the mown understories.  
**0:27:54-0:28:06:**  We found significantly fewer aphids in the apple trees above the understories, which  had been regularly mown, and also significantly more natural enemies early in the season in  the trees.  
**0:28:06-0:28:24:**  By natural enemies, I mean predators and parasitoids.  So there was a nice link there between the higher abundance of predators and suppressed  aphid colonies associated with those flower strips.  
**0:28:24-0:28:40:**  And we also followed that through to the apple crop.  And we found, again, significantly fewer aphid-damaged apples above the flowering understories.  So there was an observable effect on the apple crop.  
**0:28:40-0:28:59:**  So it was quite nice to be able to follow that through from predators.  More predators, fewer pests, and fewer pest damage.  But in terms of a comparison between agroforestry and monoculture, arable, the problem was there  
**0:28:59-0:29:16:**  wasn't really significant enough pests to build up anywhere to see any observable crop  damage.  So we weren't able to measure crop damage because there wasn't enough of it from pests.  
**0:29:16-0:29:40:**  But really, in terms of the value of having natural enemies, because in a way it's a bit  of a tough sell trying to promote naturally occurring predators on farms at the moment  because pesticides are so cheap and readily available and mostly effective.  
**0:29:40-0:30:00:**  So why would a farmer stop using pesticides and try to promote these naturally occurring  predators when they have this reasonably reliable and cheap quick fix in terms of pesticides?  And I think the answer to that is in really the long-term insurance value of having these  
**0:30:00-0:30:18:**  natural predators, particularly in terms of we look at the way pesticide regulation is  going in recent years, particularly in Europe and the EU.  It's getting tighter and tighter as we're becoming more aware of the environmental and  
**0:30:18-0:30:36:**  human health risks associated with pesticides.  But also the evolution of pest resistance.  So we're having to continually develop new pesticide products as the insects find ways  
**0:30:36-0:30:53:**  around them basically and find ways to tolerate them.  And that will continue for as long as we're using pesticides.  So really the value is, of course, added to that climate change and shifting distributions  
**0:30:53-0:31:07:**  of new pests.  We can have new species arriving in areas where we didn't find them before.  So having a good diversity of predators is really important to have that insurance and  
**0:31:07-0:31:24:**  that resilience against future risks.  And that's where the value is, which is a bit of a tough sell because you're talking  about a slightly intangible long-term benefit rather than a short-term quick fix.  
**0:31:24-0:31:43:**  But yeah, that's where we see the value.  And yeah, I'm not completely against pesticides, but the more tools we have in our toolkit  to protect our crops and our food production from pests can only be a good thing.  
**0:31:43-0:31:54:**  No, that completely makes sense to me and resonates with me.  I was just recently working in Switzerland where they are going to vote, I think on the  12th of June.  
**0:31:54-0:32:16:**  The population is going to vote in a referendum style to ban basically, if I'm not wrong,  it's all pesticides, synthetic pesticides uses in agriculture.  So I think it's insecticides, herbicides, they're going to ban a lot of the chemical  
**0:32:16-0:32:24:**  tools that the farmers have.  And the farmers are lobbying quite heavily to not let that happen because it is quite  extreme to just take away all these tools from the farmers.  
**0:32:24-0:32:44:**  And there are some serious side effects of that, which go beyond ecology, which go in  basically what's, I mean, that's another conversation, but the point is that there's pressure, more  and more pressure from citizens, from politicians and et cetera, to get rid of these tools that  
**0:32:44-0:32:52:**  farmers currently have.  And so we have to find alternatives.  But I really like to connect that with what you said earlier on of, you know, well, if  
**0:32:52-0:33:09:**  you're going to put, if flower strips benefit trees, benefit insects and benefits the resilience  of your system and the strength of your ecosystem, then being able to make some kind of money  from that strip by using agroforestry.  
**0:33:09-0:33:24:**  And a lot of our interviews are based on this, on interview practitioners and look at how  they are, how their economic model works.  You know, how can people put trees on their landscapes and make it profitable for them?  
**0:33:24-0:33:30:**  And actually we interviewed Stephen Briggs on this.  That was, you may have done research on his farm.  I'm not sure.  
**0:33:30-0:33:40:**  Yes.  But so it's interesting actually to connect your research with his, with the conversation  with him, because, you know, he was very happy with apples, as you said, you know, low shade  
**0:33:40-0:33:58:**  and apples that produce an income quite quickly and that can be value, can be transformed  and can gain value very well.  So that's, I think that's a really interesting way to merge, you know, the productive needs  
**0:33:58-0:34:11:**  of the farm with the ecological requirements of our ecosystem and now of society as well.  Yeah, that's my little rant, but now I'm going to start interviewing you again.  I completely agree.  
**0:34:11-0:34:23:**  Yeah.  And it has to be, it has to work ecologically and economically.  Yeah, that's, that's, you know, both, both are very important.  
**0:34:23-0:34:33:**  And we have been looking at the economics of agroforestry, particularly of intercropping  apples with cereals.  We've been, we've been looking at that as well.  
**0:34:33-0:34:43:**  So yeah, I'd be happy to talk more about that.  Yeah, that, I think it's a great moment.  I'm curious, what results did you find when looking at the economics?  
**0:34:43-0:35:01:**  How was, could you break that down a little for us?  Yeah, so we, firstly, we did quite a theoretical exercise.  So we basically came up with 18 theoretical farms, all of which had an agroforestry field  
**0:35:01-0:35:14:**  and an arable field.  And the question was really, is the agroforestry more profitable than arable?  And if so, at what point does agroforestry, after how many years does agroforestry become  
**0:35:14-0:35:32:**  more profitable than the business as usual arable system?  And the agroforestry, as I say, was intercropping apples with cereals with 24 meter wide alleys.  So basically, Stephen Briggs' system.  
**0:35:32-0:35:46:**  And of those, so we tested 18 scenarios based on whether they were organic or conventional  management, and also looking at different productivity levels of the apples and the  arable crops.  
**0:35:46-0:36:00:**  So we combined different productivity levels of each in each of organic and conventional  systems.  And we found that of the 18 scenarios, 15 of those, in 15 of those agroforestry was  
**0:36:00-0:36:14:**  more profitable than arable within 20 years.  And we chose 20 years because that's about the productive lifespan of apple trees on  these rootstocks.  
**0:36:14-0:36:28:**  So in most cases, agroforestry was more profitable eventually.  But the next question was, well, how many years does a farmer have to wait to see that  profitability compared to business as usual farming?  
**0:36:28-0:36:41:**  And that was between seven and 12 years.  It became more profitable to farm using this agroforestry system rather than monoculture  arable.  
**0:36:41-0:36:55:**  So there's quite a substantial period a farmer has to wait to see that profitability come  to fruition really.  And this is, of course, I should say this is assuming that there's no grants.  
**0:36:55-0:37:10:**  So it's assuming the farmer doesn't receive any grant to plant the trees, doesn't receive  any stewardship support from the government or anything.  So it's just equal subsidies between the two systems.  
**0:37:10-0:37:25:**  So after we tested the 18 theoretical scenarios, we then wanted to test that using real world  data.  So Stephen Briggs, who you spoke to on a previous episode, one of the farmers at one of our  
**0:37:25-0:37:42:**  study sites, he kindly shared with us some yield and economic data.  So he shared with us the yields he was getting from the agroforestry and the arable fields  and also how much it cost him to set up.  
**0:37:42-0:37:59:**  And so we then tested the profitability of his system of the agroforestry versus arable.  And that confirms that the agroforestry was more profitable than arable, or at least we  would expect it to be within 20 years.  
**0:37:59-0:38:20:**  So that was a nice confirmation really of our theoretical expectations.  And I mean, when you talk about a profitability that starts between seven and 12 years and  then would last until or would exist until 20 years when the trees would need to be changed  
**0:38:20-0:38:38:**  overall, have you managed to use some calculations such as the internal rate of return or calculations,  including the time value of money in order to see is it more valuable after 20 years  to invest in agroforestry rather than not?  
**0:38:38-0:38:56:**  Yeah, yes, we have been doing that.  So we've been including discount rates in our calculations.  And yeah, in all of those 15 of 18 scenarios I mentioned, the discounted rate of profitability,  
**0:38:56-0:39:20:**  i.e. in discounting future profitability, was higher from the agroforestry than arable.  So yeah, it does show that it's a worthwhile investment provided the apple trees.  So in the three scenarios which weren't more profitable, in all of them, the reason they  
**0:39:20-0:39:37:**  weren't more profitable was because the apple production level was low.  The apple yields were low and the profitability of agroforestry never caught up with the arable.  Okay, very interesting.  
**0:39:37-0:39:53:**  I mean, that leads kind of nicely to one of the questions that I wanted to, one of the  aspects that I wanted to delve into with you is looking at the management regime of the  tree line.  
**0:39:53-0:40:13:**  So looking in a bit more detail, it's clearly more beneficial for biodiversity and for predatory  insects, etc., to leave the flower stripped or the strip underneath the trees to have  it planted as flowers and to leave them flower and to not mow them.  
**0:40:13-0:40:31:**  Has your research showed that there are some concerns in terms of weeds, weed pressure  for the intercrop around these agroforestry lines?  Yeah, so that's another interesting topic and we haven't really mentioned weeds yet.  
**0:40:31-0:40:46:**  So again, the effects on weeds is again quite nuanced.  It's similar to the effect we find on insect pests in that it's not like agroforestry universally  suppresses weeds or that all weeds are more of a problem in agroforestry.  
**0:40:46-0:41:09:**  It really depends on the weed.  So we did also measure weed cover in the agroforestry fields and compared them to the arable fields.  And we found that the effect of agroforestry on weeds, we can really characterise by whether  
**0:41:09-0:41:27:**  they're perennial creepers or more annual seed-spreading species.  So for example, something like blackgrass, which is a very common weed in the UK anyway,  is an annual grass and it produces lots of seeds.  
**0:41:27-0:41:43:**  And so arable fields are basically creating blackgrass heaven by arable farming because  they like disturbed ground so their seeds can get in and germinate.  They grow very quickly, go to seed very quickly and then spread.  
**0:41:43-0:41:57:**  So the arable way of farming is kind of perfect for blackgrass.  Whereas in agroforestry, it's more broken up.  Particularly, you have vegetation below the trees.  
**0:41:57-0:42:08:**  They can't really get into that.  So we found that blackgrass level certainly weren't any higher in agroforestry than in  arable.  
**0:42:08-0:42:28:**  Whereas something like a perennial creeping weed, like creeping thistle, if they can get  a foothold in the tree rows, then they can become a problem.  So they then creep out vegetatively into the crop alleys from the tree rows.  
**0:42:28-0:42:41:**  So it's more vegetative spread of weeds is the challenge in agroforestry rather than  seeds coming in.  Because I mean, the weed seeds, I mean, just to understand the logic, the weed seeds of  
**0:42:41-0:42:51:**  the fast reproducing, flying type or easily dispersed weed seeds.  I mean, they're there anyways, they're around.  Right?  
**0:42:51-0:43:02:**  That's kind of, I'm trying to understand how that would happen.  If they're already around, it's not necessarily going to be a man.  And if they're managed with the tillage and with maybe herbicides, etc.  
**0:43:02-0:43:11:**  That's not necessarily what's going to be the problem.  The problem is that we're creating channels throughout the land where perennial creeping  weeds can establish themselves and expand out.  
**0:43:11-0:43:14:**  Exactly.  Yeah.  Yeah.  
**0:43:14-0:43:17:**  That's right.  Yeah.  Yeah.  
**0:43:17-0:43:27:**  So because of that, the management of the tree row understory is obviously becomes very  important in terms of managing the weed problem in agroforestry.  Okay.  
**0:43:27-0:43:32:**  Could you tell us more about that?  So some of the implications around the management?  Yeah.  
**0:43:32-0:43:48:**  So yeah, I mentioned earlier a bit about the research we did on comparing on-mown versus  mown understories.  And I mentioned the benefits of those on-mown flowering understories for biodiversity.  
**0:43:48-0:44:08:**  But in that, I wouldn't suggest that the vegetation is never mown.  So by on-mown, we just mean, let the flowers come up in the spring and summer.  But it still needs some management, even if that's just cutting once every year or two.  
**0:44:08-0:44:26:**  And I think really, the management of the understory needs to be guided by site conditions.  So something like creeping thistle, there's an optimal time to cut thistles so that it  knocks them back when their underground reserves are at their lowest, which I think is just  
**0:44:26-0:44:42:**  before they come into flowering or something like that.  So if this was a particular problem on the farm, then the cutting should be timed to  maximize that thistle control.  
**0:44:42-0:44:57:**  So whereas on another farm, if thistles aren't so much of a problem, then possibly the mowing  regime, cutting regime could be relaxed a bit more.  So it really needs to be guided by site conditions.  
**0:44:57-0:45:16:**  I mean, I'd love to delve into how we can manage this, practically manage this understory.  I mean, it's so important for biodiversity.  And so we want to manage it carefully to balance it with the other objectives of the farm.  
**0:45:16-0:45:34:**  So yeah, and I think there are other options for that.  And I've mentioned these wildflower understories.  Another option is to have a clover-based understory, particularly if that can be regularly managed.  
**0:45:34-0:45:49:**  Clovers are obviously quite, don't really mind being cut often, so they can be managed  quite intensively.  And that also helps with nitrogen fixation, of course.  
**0:45:49-0:46:07:**  So yeah, having a clover or some kind of legume understory is an option.  Some farmers have experimented with growing horticultural crops in their understories.  And I think you had Ian Tolhurst on one of your earlier episodes, he was talking about  
**0:46:07-0:46:22:**  that.  But that's another way of receiving another income stream from that understory.  But again, that's quite obviously quite a labor-intensive option.  
**0:46:22-0:46:30:**  It would work in certain contexts.  Yeah, exactly.  But I'm very glad that you listened to at least some of our episodes.  
**0:46:30-0:46:42:**  That's very positive.  So yeah, I like what you're saying also about the clovers, because that's actually a technique  that they use in tree culture, in fruit tree culture.  
**0:46:42-0:46:59:**  It's called living mulches and being able to find crops that can tolerate mowing, even  maybe tolerate some mulching from time to time and go through, but also that do not  compete too much with the tree by having shadow root systems, by being more efficient with  
**0:46:59-0:47:17:**  water, maybe less dense roots, yeah, root mats like we would find with perennial grasses,  which would be some of the most competitive, and managing them by mowing to keep them there.  That's actually a technique that they're using in fruit culture.  
**0:47:17-0:47:30:**  So if it can also benefit the insects, that would be beneficial.  But I would expect though, that wild flowers, perennial flowers that would install themselves  there would be the most beneficial for insects.  
**0:47:30-0:47:39:**  Is that right?  Yeah, yeah, I would expect that would be right.  Because what you really want for insects is a good diversity in terms of different flower  
**0:47:39-0:47:52:**  structures.  So you want more open flowers, things like daisies, as well as the more kind of tubular  flowers like the clovers and legumes.  
**0:47:52-0:48:05:**  So clovers tend to be really good for bumblebees, because bumblebees have got long tongues,  and the nectar in the clover is quite inaccessible, unless the bee has a long tongue in order  to reach it.  
**0:48:05-0:48:18:**  So they're great for bumblebees, but not great for things like hoverflies, which have really  short tongues.  So yeah, I mean clover and stories would certainly benefit bumblebees and some insects, but I  
**0:48:18-0:48:35:**  think generally the best is to have a good diversity.  I mean the risk of having, of sowing a wild flower mix, and a big problem with that is  that you end up with a really nice diverse flower mix within two or three years.  
**0:48:35-0:48:58:**  But then after that you see the competitive grasses, the coarse grasses starting to take  over, particularly on the more fertile soils.  So that can be a challenge to keep it at that stage where you've got the nice diverse mix.  
**0:48:58-0:49:10:**  And again, management is important for that.  But that's a shared problem, if I can add just a little something else.  That's a problem that you would see with mechanical weeding, and that would also be a problem  
**0:49:10-0:49:23:**  that you would see with chemical weeding.  Some weeds would just, some resistant weeds, for example with the chemical one, and even  with the mechanical one, not weeds, sorry, grasses in this case, they would start settling  
**0:49:23-0:49:29:**  in.  So that would also be a problem that would need to be managed with other understory management  regimes.  
**0:49:29-0:49:41:**  Yes, yeah, yeah, that's true.  Nice, so in this case, for me it's interesting to understand why would you mow it regularly  like you did?  
**0:49:41-0:49:53:**  And you did the experiment to see that the benefits in terms of insects with letting  it grow are clear from your research.  But what about mowing it regularly?  
**0:49:53-0:49:58:**  What kind of aspects did that benefit?  Was it the competition with the trees?  What was it?  
**0:49:58-0:50:16:**  Yeah, I suppose competition with the trees, also perhaps weed suppression.  So if, yeah, if, you know, mowing for certain weeds could be helpful.  But we also wanted to kind of have a bit of a proxy for completely bare ground.  
**0:50:16-0:50:33:**  So in some agro-touristry systems, I think it is more common really in continental Europe,  they just have a bare strip below the trees, which is sometimes just herbicide and kept  as bare ground.  
**0:50:33-0:50:53:**  So having the mown understory isn't the same as that, but it's more similar to having a  bare strip below the trees.  So we wanted to kind of be able to generalize our results a bit more to that really.  
**0:50:53-0:51:08:**  So there aren't necessarily a huge amount of benefits to having it mowed regularly.  It's probably best to just let it, to mow it maybe once or twice a year, but to let  it go to flower, let it benefit the system, especially in the spring, and then during  
**0:51:08-0:51:18:**  the summer, mow it, let it go off.  Am I kind of understanding correctly some of the recommendations you would give to manage  the understory?  
**0:51:18-0:51:34:**  Yes, yeah, absolutely.  Yeah, I mean, in terms of benefits of the mown understory, we didn't really find any.  There could be benefits in certain contexts if there were certain weed problems, but we  
**0:51:34-0:51:54:**  didn't find any biodiversity benefits at all of having mown understories.  So yeah, what you said, I would agree with.  Relaxed management, some management is needed, but really keep it as low intensity as possible  
**0:51:54-0:52:04:**  is best really.  And also an important factor is not just having the flower cover, but having the vegetation  structure over the winter.  
**0:52:04-0:52:22:**  So it's ideally having some taller, tusky vegetation left over winter, because that  overwintering resource is really important for beneficial insects.  So try not to mow it too late in the year.  
**0:52:22-0:52:33:**  Okay, very interesting.  And then it would be left over winter with this kind of more 3D structure.  And then it would be mowed just before when spring kicks in, or would it just be left  
**0:52:33-0:52:50:**  and then the plants would come up in spring and then be mowed before it goes to seed?  That would be the best option?  Yeah, I suppose ideally it would be left over winter and then left through spring to come  
**0:52:50-0:53:11:**  into flower and then mown later in the summer, once or twice would be best.  That said, if it was mown early in the spring, well, really it's best to leave some refuge  really.  
**0:53:11-0:53:24:**  So something that some farmers do is to cut the outer parts of the understory and leave  the central bit.  So immediately between the tree trunks, leave that a bit taller.  
**0:53:24-0:53:33:**  Because of course, if you cut it all at the same time, then you completely obliterate  this resource for insects.  And then that has quite a big impact.  
**0:53:33-0:53:46:**  So if some refuge can be left when you do cut it, or another way is to rotationally  cut it.  So you could cut one row at one time and another row at another time like that.  
**0:53:46-0:54:05:**  So leaving some kind of refuge at all times is the ideal way to do it.  What I find quite reassuring with this is that we're not talking about some very complex  systems to implement in order to favor biodiversity.  
**0:54:05-0:54:21:**  I mean, here we're just talking about managing a tree understory.  And it's not necessarily super complex.  There is the need to establish a certain crop, I mean, to establish a certain flower mix,  
**0:54:21-0:54:35:**  or certain clover mix, or whatever the farmer decides, and then to mow it a few times possibly.  And then eventually after a few years, if it turns too much to grasses, to burn your  grasses to be tilled in and started again.  
**0:54:35-0:54:56:**  But it's something that farmers would have the experience to manage quite well.  And so my question is, is now, to what extent can a farmer reliably expect to have the same  results as you have observed in these farms that you followed?  
**0:54:56-0:55:12:**  I mean, how confident can we be that, you know, from my context in France, for example,  or in Switzerland, or somebody else in, I mean, let's try to stay in the kind of oceanic  VAS, I mean, continental Europe, let's not go to Mediterranean now, but in this kind  
**0:55:12-0:55:24:**  of area of Europe, can a farmer expect to just have the similar results?  Does the literature show certain consistency?  Yeah, so I think there's two elements here.  
**0:55:24-0:55:36:**  Firstly, there's the biodiversity element, and then there's the pests and weeds, more  specific element.  So I mean, if we start with the biodiversity, yeah, there's good evidence that Agroforestry  
**0:55:36-0:55:53:**  does quite consistently improve biodiversity compared to monoculture.  The strength of that effect will depend on the system design.  So like we've said, understory management, particularly, also what trees you're planting,  
**0:55:53-0:56:13:**  diversity of trees, the width of your crop alleys, whether it's organic or conventional.  Interesting is there's a recent study in France that found that Agroforestry systems that  were conventionally managed with pesticides, the tree rows actually acted as a sink of  
**0:56:13-0:56:37:**  beneficial insects, rather than a source.  So the organic Agroforestry systems improved predators' diversity, but it actually had  a negative effect on in the conventional systems because you're basically spraying it all with  
**0:56:37-0:56:45:**  pesticides and so that the predators are all staying in the tree rows and not really moving  out into the alleys.  Interesting.  
**0:56:45-0:56:59:**  So that does have a big impact.  And also, landscape context is very important.  So we found the strongest effects of biodiversity at Stephen Briggs' farm.  
**0:56:59-0:57:16:**  And his farm is in a very intensive agricultural landscape.  So there's very few hedgerows and trees in a wider landscape.  So we think the reason for that is because the baseline situation is much lower.  
**0:57:16-0:57:35:**  So with these arable fields, the biodiversity is quite poor because it's in such an intensive,  even though his farm is organic, the surrounding landscape has very little semi-natural habitat.  So by planting Agroforestry, there's then a bigger difference between the Agroforestry  
**0:57:35-0:57:49:**  and the arable.  Whereas in a more diverse landscape where there's already good amounts of semi-natural  habitats, like hedgerows, patches of woodland, then by planting Agroforestry, if you've already  
**0:57:49-0:57:58:**  got quite good diversity on the farm, then Agroforestry isn't going to improve it as  much, if that makes sense.  Yeah, that makes a lot of sense.  
**0:57:58-0:58:06:**  Very interesting.  Yeah.  Again, it helps to nuance a bit the conversation, to look at, you know, sometimes this may work,  
**0:58:06-0:58:18:**  sometimes it may be opposite, as you've just mentioned right now, which is interesting.  Yeah, yeah.  Yeah, I mean, yeah, the other thing I would say on that is the effect on, more specifically  
**0:58:18-0:58:35:**  on pests and weeds.  I've mentioned the results on that are quite nuanced, which is why we've tried to generalise  the findings and we're trying to say, well, pests which are less mobile and more generalist  
**0:58:35-0:58:50:**  and less attracted to a specific arable resource, like slugs, are probably more of a problem  in Agroforestry, as are perennial creeping weeds.  Those much more mobile pests, which are really attracted on max to arable resource, like  
**0:58:50-0:59:08:**  a pollen beetle or a cabbage stem-free beetle, are likely to be more of a problem in monoculture  arable.  So the effect that a farm will see on pests and weeds will really depend on what pest  
**0:59:08-0:59:25:**  and weed problems they have.  And if their concern is things like black grass and cabbage stem-free beetle, then Agroforestry  is likely to be beneficial for helping to control that.  
**0:59:25-0:59:44:**  Whereas if it's slugs and thistles are the main problem, then Agroforestry will provide  some challenges.  Have you found some significant, significant effect of the, on one hand, the proximity  
**0:59:44-1:00:01:**  of the Agroforestry line, so between 20 to 50 metres, for example, as well as the width  of the Agroforestry tree line, such as, you know, it's Stephen Briggs, it's three metres  wide, some other forest systems, it can be as small as one metre wide.  
**1:00:01-1:00:21:**  Are these also significant in looking at biodiversity and predator populations?  Yeah, so it's a tricky one because nobody's really tested it specifically.  But we have looked at spatial patterns of biodiversity across the alley.  
**1:00:21-1:00:39:**  And actually there's very few strong patterns, which is quite surprising.  So in other words, the species that we're finding and the abundance of those species  in the centre of the crop alleys is quite similar to the edge of the alleys.  
**1:00:39-1:00:52:**  So there's quite a big spinner over effect.  It does, the diversity of species does decline slightly into the centre of the alley, but  it's quite small effect.  
**1:00:52-1:01:08:**  And this is in 24 metre wide alleys.  So the tree varies do seem to have a big spillover.  So I mean, my expectation on that would be that if we say a 50 metre alley, which is  
**1:01:08-1:01:22:**  twice as wide as the width that we studied, that the diversity probably wouldn't be radically  different to what we find in the 24 metre wide alley based on the patterns that we've  observed.  
**1:01:22-1:01:45:**  And yeah, ultimately, I very strongly expect a 50 metre wide alley to be much more similar  to a 24 metre wide alley than it would be to a pure arable field.  So in other words, introducing diversity into your arable field will be a good thing.  
**1:01:45-1:01:58:**  Obviously the more the better, but it doesn't seem that the spacing of the tree rows is  having a huge effect.  And probably other things like the management of the understory that we've been talking  
**1:01:58-1:02:11:**  about is a more important factor I would expect anyway.  I mean, it'd be amazing if you could give us a sense of where's the research at looking  at biodiversity and agroforestry.  
**1:02:11-1:02:32:**  Are we at a place where we can be very confident about making models and making strong principles  based on the research we've managed to do?  Are we still at a kind of an immature stage?  
**1:02:32-1:02:43:**  Could you give us, maybe us and our listeners, a sense of where research is at and what are  some of the biggest problems in research?  And by problems, I just want to elaborate quickly on this.  
**1:02:43-1:02:55:**  For me, when I look at some of the research out there in agroecology or in agriculture,  many times it's on very small plots and it can be quite difficult to look at the bigger  patterns happening around.  
**1:02:55-1:03:09:**  And actually I was studying a French agronomist that was showing that when they started doing  similar studies but on a much bigger plots, and by bigger plots they were looking at two  passages with a sprayer for the whole length of the field.  
**1:03:09-1:03:22:**  So they were looking at sometimes one hectare at a time, BS one hectare next to that.  And they started to see completely different patterns.  And that's, for reference, that's Francis Bouquet, who's just taken out a book that's  
**1:03:22-1:03:32:**  really, really interesting.  It's in French though, but he's got some interesting thoughts and he's done some interesting research  on that.  
**1:03:32-1:03:45:**  And looking at being critical and self-critical as well of research, it would be great to  delve a bit into that.  Yeah, it's a really important point actually.  
**1:03:45-1:04:01:**  And yeah, I mean, the challenge with agroforestry is we want to study it at realistic scales,  but we also want enough replication that we can be confident in the results.  And it's very difficult to achieve both.  
**1:04:01-1:04:14:**  So some studies of agroforestry have looked at plot scale agroforestry and then have had  lots of replicates.  So the results are then quite robust, but they're also perhaps not necessarily realistic  
**1:04:14-1:04:30:**  of field conditions.  Whereas something like my study, I've been looking at working farms, field scale farms.  And so it's realistic of field scale working farm conditions, but I've only got three sites  
**1:04:30-1:04:48:**  and really to have a really high degree of confidence in the results, most ecology studies  try to use kind of 15 or 20 sites at least.  If we were looking at something like flammable strips, for example.  
**1:04:48-1:05:06:**  But the sites just aren't available at the moment in terms of looking at agroforestry.  So it does need to be tested more.  But there are also where we're finding consistent results among sites, then we can be reasonably  
**1:05:06-1:05:19:**  confident.  And also if there's a mechanism to explain that result, then we can be reasonably confident  that that's a reliable result.  
**1:05:19-1:05:40:**  So I think in terms of future research, something that I think is important is to look at things  like predation rates of pests and crop damage by pests, which I mentioned a little bit about  in terms of the apples above the flower strips.  
**1:05:40-1:05:56:**  It would be interesting to look at agroforestry and to look at whether predation rates of  pests are higher in agroforestry than monocultures and whether crop damage can be reduced in  agroforestry.  
**1:05:56-1:06:09:**  Very interesting.  Okay, well, thank you so much, Tom, for the first introduction to biodiversity and agroforest  systems on the podcast.  
**1:06:09-1:06:15:**  So thanks a lot for taking the time.  Thank you.  It's a pleasure.  
**1:06:15-1:06:24:**  So thank you so much for making it this far.  We hope you enjoyed it as much as we did.  This was definitely a very interesting interview delving into the details of agroforestry,  
**1:06:24-1:06:38:**  which we hope we'll be doing more in the future with other researchers.  Let us know if there's some specific topics or researchers that you want us to get into,  and we can find out more about it and we can try to organize an interview.  
**1:06:38-1:06:47:**  Also we are doing the podcast on the side of our jobs and we are funding everything  ourselves so please consider donating on our website.  It's very easy to do.  
**1:06:47-1:07:17:**  Any small amount will help for us to keep going with this podcast.  So thank you very much and see you next time.  