---
title: 23 Scaling Agroforestry In France With Fabien Balaguer
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

<script src="https://cdn.podlove.org/web-player/embed.js"></script>
    <script>
        document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', function () {
          if (document.readyState === 'interactive' || document.readyState === 'complete') {
            podlovePlayer('#player', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast/23-scaling-agroforestry-in-france-with-fabien-balaguer.json', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast/config.json').then(registerExternalEvents('player'))
          }
        })
  </script>

### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2021-06-25)  

**0:00:00-0:00:23:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:23-0:00:33:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  these challenges.  
**0:00:33-0:00:48:**  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Hi everyone and welcome back to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:00:48-0:00:57:**  I'm your host Etienne.  Today I have the pleasure of sharing with you an interview with Fabien Balaguet from  the French Agroforestry Association.  
**0:00:57-0:01:07:**  We've been waiting for a while to get someone on the show to talk about agroforestry in  France because a lot of things are happening around here.  And I think Fabien is the perfect guest to do that.  
**0:01:07-0:01:21:**  His organization is leading the way in developing agroforestry practices in France.  They offer technical guidance to farmers, facilitate knowledge sharing and pretty much  do everything required to get projects off the ground.  
**0:01:21-0:01:31:**  Fabien has a great overview of some of the challenges and opportunities coming with developing  agroforestry in a European context.  And I was really impressed by his pragmatic and smart approach.  
**0:01:31-0:01:37:**  And I'm sure many of you will find it as interesting as I did.  Enjoy the episode.  Hello Fabien and welcome to the podcast.  
**0:01:37-0:01:48:**  Hello, good afternoon.  Thanks for joining us today.  And let's start with a bit of an introduction on you and who are you and how did you get  
**0:01:48-0:01:54:**  into agroforestry?  Wow, that's a long story.  Broad question as usual.  
**0:01:54-0:02:08:**  Well, just to try and make it as concise as possible.  First of all, I'm an agronomist.  That's what I have been since I started to study that subject.  
**0:02:08-0:02:27:**  I'm passionate about agriculture and agronomy since really long time ago, since I was a  child actually.  And then I discovered agroforestry in my studies, quite early in my studies actually.  
**0:02:27-0:02:43:**  And then I specialized in agroforestry.  I did a master's at Bangor University in Wales.  And agroforestry has become my main job.  
**0:02:43-0:03:03:**  At first I worked in tropical countries in cooperation, as we say.  So in the Sahel, which means between Senegal and Ethiopia.  And I work initially a little bit with the World Agroforestry Center, which is based  
**0:03:03-0:03:22:**  in Kenya, but I was there in East Africa in different countries.  And then I started working with NGOs all across the Sahel.  Well, to me, Africa is a big handbook of the well-thought agronomy and agroecology from  
**0:03:22-0:03:33:**  soil to landscape.  Because of course, you talk about soil fertility, but you talk also about natural resource management  and of course climate change and how to manage all that.  
**0:03:33-0:03:52:**  It was a big, big learning moment in my career.  And then I came back to France and I wasn't really sure about what to do.  And then I came across some people who were already working at the French Agroforestry  
**0:03:52-0:04:06:**  Association and this is how I entered in the loop.  And now I'm directing the association nationally.  Could you give us a bit of an overview of what LAFAF does and what it looks like today  
**0:04:06-0:04:17:**  as a structure?  Yeah, of course.  So we work, our main job is what we call group facilitation.  
**0:04:17-0:04:34:**  So we work in different regions, in the different regions, trying to have a local development  approach to agroforestry.  So we gather, of course, pioneer farmers, but also technical experts.  
**0:04:34-0:04:56:**  And the idea is really to have, to identify and work with pilot farmers to make the best  practices spread over across more farms every day.  So this is our main job historically.  
**0:04:56-0:05:09:**  So we have one department of that.  And then the second department is about research and development.  We will work a lot more with applied research and with science.  
**0:05:09-0:05:25:**  The main thing is really to answer farmers' questions.  So yeah, it's very related.  And we have a lot of demand now on that kind of thing, because of course we know a lot,  
**0:05:25-0:05:41:**  but we still have a lot of questions, especially farmers.  So technical questions, real ones.  And then we work also about the economic aspects of all that.  
**0:05:41-0:06:00:**  So meaning all the market channels and how to add value to what farmers are doing.  Of course, on the economic side, but also on raising awareness among consumers.  So that's a third department.  
**0:06:00-0:06:20:**  And it's a bit newer, but it's growing also quite a lot.  And it makes us work with the agri-food actors and quite a lot of companies from that sector.  So it's quite exciting, actually.  
**0:06:20-0:06:34:**  And last but not least, we have an information and communication department, which is more  or less like in every organization.  So altogether, it's about 20 people, paid staff.  
**0:06:34-0:06:56:**  And then in terms of partner, all across the country, we have 120 local organizations that  we will work with every day, from the field expertise to teaching and training and also  a little bit of research, of course, as I said.  
**0:06:56-0:07:05:**  Well, I'm sure you're not too bored, quite a program.  No, yeah.  That's a busy life.  
**0:07:05-0:07:16:**  Yeah.  Well, it's a lot of really interesting things going on.  And maybe you could give us a few examples of some of the projects you're working on  
**0:07:16-0:07:33:**  at the moment, just to understand a bit what the face of agroforestry is in France at the  moment and your main projects.  Again, it's a broad question because we basically work on a lot of context and a lot of topics.  
**0:07:33-0:07:53:**  Agroforestry is a really broad thing, right?  So what I could say is that today in France, in every type of system, you have a dynamic  that goes towards agroecology and agroforestry, whatever you call it.  
**0:07:53-0:08:13:**  And I would specifically mention what happens in the vineyard sectors.  So basically trying to reshape the landscape to improve or to allow better management of  the vineyards.  
**0:08:13-0:08:30:**  That's a big dynamic nowadays due basically to climate change and all the problems that  we have in making wine in a changing climate.  We have a lot of drought with degraded soil as well, because that's among the most degraded  
**0:08:30-0:08:48:**  soil, of course.  So this is mainly in the regions where wine is produced in France.  There's quite a few of them, but we work even in the Champagne area.  
**0:08:48-0:09:07:**  So again, a lot of work and a lot of challenge.  And of course, we don't want to really fail with that.  So it's a big challenge and we try to do our best.  
**0:09:07-0:09:32:**  One thing that's really interesting is also to work in the livestock sector, which is  another sector with a lot of demands due basically also to climate change and the summer drought.  So basically how to improve the environment, the animal welfare, and also how to have more  
**0:09:32-0:09:59:**  forage in the dry season.  So agroforestry allows us to improve both the pasture management and also to have a,  I would say, complementary forage due to trees, forage trees or fodder trees as we call it.  
**0:09:59-0:10:15:**  So all that is also developing quite a lot.  But anyway, we work in direct relation with farmers every day and we just try to answer  what comes out.  
**0:10:15-0:10:34:**  And again, we have activities in a lot of contexts.  I should mention as well that France has a temperate context, but we also have overseas  territories in the tropics, especially in the Caribbean, for example.  
**0:10:34-0:10:55:**  And we now have an office as well on that side of the world.  And it's quite inspiring, of course, because it's tropical agroforestry, which is totally  different, but it's very useful to see what happens in a more dynamic context, of course.  
**0:10:55-0:11:04:**  Maybe using either the vineyard example or the livestock one, I don't know.  Could you tell us what it looks like then?  You were talking about working with farmers.  
**0:11:04-0:11:17:**  So you put up tests, you build experiments with them, and then they feed back some data  to you.  And how does that relationship work in terms of generating knowledge on agroforestry?  
**0:11:17-0:11:32:**  Yeah, that's a big question because, of course, agroforestry is something not new at all,  but that we are rediscovering every day on the field.  So there is no expert in agroforestry.  
**0:11:32-0:11:46:**  The expert is the group.  And the main part of our job is really to facilitate that every day and have groups  of practitioners working together.  
**0:11:46-0:12:00:**  We've been developing methods and tools to allow that every day.  And we basically want farmers to be able to have a collective brain and put all their  observations together.  
**0:12:00-0:12:28:**  And then we try to, of course, I would say, edit those data and summarize the main trends.  So for example, in the vineyard area, if I talk the example of the Champaign area again,  we have about 80 farmers or technical advisors as well working together every day.  
**0:12:28-0:12:53:**  And really, I would say, making observation and putting all that together, we have a digital  tool that works on the computer and also on a smartphone.  So we can share photos, we can share measurements, we can share ideas, et cetera, et cetera.  
**0:12:53-0:13:08:**  So it's very exciting.  There's something in France called the economic and ecological group, which are innovation  groups of farmers.  
**0:13:08-0:13:26:**  There's about 500 in the country now, and about 100 works on something that goes towards  agroforestry.  So we really rely very much on those local groups.  
**0:13:26-0:13:44:**  And there is a lot to gather every day, of course.  I want to go into this issue of knowledge because it's so important when we come to  agroforestry and any kind of complex system.  
**0:13:44-0:14:00:**  But before we do that, I wanted to finish a bit of our overview of agroforestry in France.  And you mentioned a strong demand from vineyards and livestock farmers because of the challenges  they face with climate change.  
**0:14:00-0:14:21:**  Would you say that these are the most technically advanced systems, though, or actually some  of the most developed and well-researched are maybe alley cropping?  Yeah, I would say they are the most urgent systems.  
**0:14:21-0:14:35:**  I'm not sure what kind of system is the most advanced because really we are late.  We are very late in every context, I think, nowadays.  But it's progressing very well, I should mention.  
**0:14:35-0:14:57:**  I mean, I'm not being pessimistic.  One of the systems that we've been working a lot as well is popular agroforestry.  So in a diversity of patterns, but you mentioned alley cropping.  
**0:14:57-0:15:22:**  I think alley cropping is a big opportunity as well in some contexts, especially in the  grain crops.  What I don't really believe in is the timber production as such over 80, 90 years.  
**0:15:22-0:15:45:**  On the contrary, we've been working with foresters on more pragmatic models with faster growing  species and popular being one of them.  And of course, what's interesting with this species is that there is a full industry dedicated  
**0:15:45-0:16:05:**  to popular and a very strong demand for the primary matter, I would say.  So as soon as you are able to produce quality popular, you will have a market after that.  And popular agroforestry is a traditional practice in many regions of France.  
**0:16:05-0:16:23:**  So we're trying also to rediscover that and make it a bit more pragmatic in terms of economic  model, etc.  So yeah, I wouldn't be able to say what was the best or the most advanced system.  
**0:16:23-0:16:36:**  I think in every context, you have some opportunities.  And then you want, of course, you want to decide what's in line with your objectives,  with the work you want to do as well.  
**0:16:36-0:16:57:**  Because as a farmer, if you plant popular, for example, it's a change in practice that  is very much important, right?  You need to learn how to prune the trees, how to manage the whole thing.  
**0:16:57-0:17:12:**  So yeah, it's really a farmer's decision.  And then of course, you want to know what's possible in every context, depending on the  soil and the climate.  
**0:17:12-0:17:31:**  This might take us down the rabbit hole a bit earlier on, but I can't resist asking,  why are you so skeptical about timber production on longer cycles?  Well, because I only believe in what I've seen.  
**0:17:31-0:17:51:**  And I've never seen that kind of system in a commercial context.  So on farms, that would be profitable in the end.  So a lot of research has been done on modeling all that on experimental sites, but I've never  
**0:17:51-0:18:06:**  seen this happen in commercial farms.  And rather what we have seen is the limitations that we are facing when we're trying to implement  that at bigger scales.  
**0:18:06-0:18:35:**  And on farms with farmers who don't really realize how long is the work behind that.  And I think it's quite uncertain anyway.  If you want to do timber, if your main objective is to grow trees for timber, just do forestry.  
**0:18:35-0:18:50:**  That's the main way of doing it.  It's the most efficient and very well advanced in this case.  So I think trees on farms can be for timber, but it's just the icing on the cake.  
**0:18:50-0:19:10:**  It shouldn't be the main objective.  Apart from the fast growing species that you can integrate more easily in farming systems,  of course, if you grow popular, it will be over a 20-year cycle, 15 to 20 years, depending  
**0:19:10-0:19:23:**  on the context.  And I think this is a bit more realistic already for a farmer.  What you say really hits home, because actually Dimitri recorded an interview with Rowan Reed  
**0:19:23-0:19:34:**  a few weeks ago.  And it was really interesting because he's really into producing timber.  And what I took out of the episode was how difficult it is if you're not going to process  
**0:19:34-0:19:52:**  yourself with all the infrastructure, a sawmill, and all these things.  It's actually really hard to enter the timber game and harvest wood in an economically profitable  way, because of questions of economy, of scale, because of the problems linked to if you're  
**0:19:52-0:20:02:**  planting diverse species, who's going to come and harvest two trees.  Yeah, but that's a big issue.  And I think we can probably elaborate a little bit on that.  
**0:20:02-0:20:16:**  I know Rowan very well.  And of course, first of all, he's a very talented practitioner.  He's a really good manager.  
**0:20:16-0:20:37:**  But also, he works in Australia, where you can grow timber in 30 years.  So this already becomes a bit more realistic in this context.  I think what's complicated is to grow timber trees on a very long period of time, with  
**0:20:37-0:20:55:**  a lot of uncertainty on the market, on the pests, on everything.  A lot of work also to prune those trees and to shape those trees to really have high quality  timber in the end.  
**0:20:55-0:21:13:**  So yeah, it's not the most, I think, pragmatic way of doing agroforestry.  I'm not saying we shouldn't do it, but there is a lot of things we can do before that.  In terms of management, and you talked about so meals, et cetera, et cetera.  
**0:21:13-0:21:27:**  What we have in France is cooperatives to reassure all the equipments and machineries  that we need.  So it becomes, it's not so much of an issue on that side.  
**0:21:27-0:21:48:**  Because if you get together with, at the regional scale, I would say, if you have enough farmers  going into that kind of things, it's quite easy actually to get organized.  And you're creating jobs, which is good as well.  
**0:21:48-0:21:58:**  Zooming back a bit to the bigger picture of what you do at L'Afafe, you mentioned the  tool you have for sharing knowledge.  And I really want to talk about this topic.  
**0:21:58-0:22:13:**  I think if I'm not wrong, it's called land files.  Yeah, exactly.  I'm a user, or a future active user, because I did a training on fodder trees.  
**0:22:13-0:22:26:**  And I thought it was great what you guys were doing, because to give a bit of context to  our listeners, it wasn't just a training.  It was then you had access to a platform to share knowledge, and also receiving emails  
**0:22:26-0:22:37:**  and doing webinars and moments of exchange for every person to actively become a source  of knowledge.  So congratulations for that.  
**0:22:37-0:22:47:**  It was great.  And maybe you want to tell us a bit more about that.  First of all, I should mention that it's a farmer's idea, as usual.  
**0:22:47-0:23:00:**  We've been working with farmers for almost 10 years now on a daily basis in different  regions.  And of course, we do what I call group facilitation.  
**0:23:00-0:23:20:**  So we have activities, technical days, trainings, as we said.  And the farmers are always very motivated and enthusiastic.  But during a long time, they mentioned that we should be able to exchange on a daily basis  
**0:23:20-0:23:44:**  in between the different meetings.  So first of all, we set up what we call WhatsApp groups, as everyone does, I think, these days.  And after a time, we realized that it was really a shame, because we're not gaining  
**0:23:44-0:23:50:**  any knowledge as such.  We're just exchanging.  But then we lose everything, right?  
**0:23:50-0:24:13:**  So landfises come as a solution to that, taking the basics of a social network, of course.  But with some functionalities that have been developed for agricultural development, and  specifically for that.  
**0:24:13-0:24:33:**  So basically, whatever happens is recorded, plot by plots and farms by farms.  And then we're able to go back in history and see what happens and really analyze some  concrete transitions.  
**0:24:33-0:24:58:**  And it's some kind of, I would say, big case studies in real life context.  So then you can also compare different contexts.  You can also have some participatory experiments, which is also something we're trying to encourage.  
**0:24:58-0:25:17:**  So as you mentioned, also, it's a big tool to do some follow up after technical days  and trainings, because, of course, training is also something very important.  But if you only consider it as, OK, I've done my training.  
**0:25:17-0:25:28:**  Now I'm good.  It's never going to change the world.  So what we wanted is to have a training as a, I would say, starting point.  
**0:25:28-0:25:43:**  And then after the training, you want those people to implement and keep creating the  knowledge and transferring the knowledge between each other.  So that's what LandFi allows us to do as well.  
**0:25:43-0:25:58:**  But do you have the manpower, because it's such a huge job to then extract from all this  data and this experience to actually extract conclusions and be able to see patterns?  Is that something that you're able to do today in your organization?  
**0:25:58-0:26:12:**  Or is it just a kind of peer to peer tool where farmers can gain what they can?  Yeah.  Initially, it was a peer to peer tool, which was already quite a good thing, I think.  
**0:26:12-0:26:41:**  And now we're trying to develop some projects with different partners from the R&D sectors.  And also the more, yeah, even fundamental research with data scientists, et cetera,  et cetera, to try and see what we can get from these big, big quantity of data, which  
**0:26:41-0:26:58:**  what's interesting is that each data is associated to a context.  Because of course, if you have data, if some farmer tells you that, look, I've tried this  and it works, if you don't know anything about the context, it's not an information.  
**0:26:58-0:27:15:**  It's not useful.  But as soon as you have the context and you have a lot of information in that pattern,  I would say, then you are able to see what's, it's not statistics.  
**0:27:15-0:27:38:**  It's about probability of when I do that, in most of the cases, I can get bad results.  And also you can really identify the condition for success.  So we assess both the successes and the failures, of course, because both are interesting.  
**0:27:38-0:27:55:**  But that story, it's only the start of a bigger story, of course.  And we need, as you mentioned, we are desperate about how much work we get every day with  all that and the different projects we are running.  
**0:27:55-0:28:08:**  But the team is growing slowly but surely.  And also we work in partnership with more and more people.  So it's promising, I think.  
**0:28:08-0:28:17:**  Wow.  And then how are you considering feeding back this information to farmers once you've identified  these patterns and these probabilities?  
**0:28:17-0:28:36:**  Well, you have different types of things.  You can work, if you work at the group level, like the training and then the follow up on  implementation, you are able to come back one or two years later with the same group  
**0:28:36-0:28:53:**  and see the, I would say, the new knowledge that has been developed, answer new questions  as well.  So it's like second level training.  
**0:28:53-0:29:10:**  That's one type of activities that we can do.  Second thing is that we can identify some case studies and really have the full story  across several years, even if we like.  
**0:29:10-0:29:32:**  So it's really important because what we noticed is that farmers don't necessarily need statistics  and very clear figures and very accurate stuff.  What they want is to have clear and concrete examples of other farmers doing things in  
**0:29:32-0:29:51:**  a similar context as the one they are working in.  So it's really about having a big quantity of data and then being able to give everyone  what he or she needs.  
**0:29:51-0:30:01:**  Yeah.  And with the land files, I think you've already answered part of the problem of the knowledge  gap and the amount of knowledge required.  
**0:30:01-0:30:18:**  But even if you have peer to peer information, agroforestry remains very knowledge intensive.  Let's say you're a farmer that has a certain type of production, integrating trees means  that you also need to integrate new types of expertise, like working with the tree,  
**0:30:18-0:30:31:**  pruning it, planting it, protecting it.  How do you think we can overcome this barrier of how much knowledge is required and that  can be a problem for farmers?  
**0:30:31-0:30:48:**  Well, I think it's just what we call agriculture.  It's about observation and adaptation every day, especially now in a context of climate  change and so much challenges that we're facing, of course.  
**0:30:48-0:31:09:**  But I think the only way of doing that is, and the new way of overcoming those issues  is really to get together and being able to work as a team.  And the main problem that we see now in the countryside is that you have less and less  
**0:31:09-0:31:26:**  farmers.  In France, for example, you have 500,000 farmers, which is about 1% of the population.  And this 1% is managing almost 55% of the country.  
**0:31:26-0:31:38:**  So you have a lot of spreading of people, which means a lot of spreading of the knowledge  and the brainpower.  So you have a lot of challenges to tackle.  
**0:31:38-0:31:57:**  The whole society expects the farmers to solve everything from climate change to food quality,  to sustainable water management, et cetera, et cetera.  And you have very few people to do that and no tool to allow them to work together.  
**0:31:57-0:32:01:**  So that's the main issue.  And we are in the 21st century.  Come on.  
**0:32:01-0:32:19:**  We can overcome that.  It's just about methods and tools and really being willing to achieve that.  And once we have everything, really, I don't think it's such a big issue to, of course,  
**0:32:19-0:32:35:**  we need 10 to 15 years probably to do the transition.  But it can go a lot faster than before.  Because before what used to happen is that you were being taught by your dad, who were  
**0:32:35-0:32:51:**  taught by your granddad, et cetera, et cetera.  So generation after generation, you were able to gain knowledge.  But you needed probably 10, 12 generations to really master your context.  
**0:32:51-0:33:14:**  And if you change farmers from one region to another, they would get lost.  So right now, we have to go faster in reinventing the way we are farming.  And I think we can do that with all the technologies that we have nowadays and the ability to really  
**0:33:14-0:33:29:**  cross all the observations and feedbacks and experiences.  So to me, it's more of a social problem than a technical one.  I'm feeling inspired now.  
**0:33:29-0:33:39:**  Let's do it.  Would you say today that the different agroforestry systems you're working with have an established  economic model?  
**0:33:39-0:33:52:**  Or is it a challenge to find the place of the tree in the farm economy?  Well, in France, I would say no.  It's not well established yet, economically speaking.  
**0:33:52-0:34:17:**  It's a bit strange maybe because for many countries, France is considered as the leading  country, at least in Europe, with a bit of advance in the transition.  Actually I think nowadays we are facing some kind of shortcomings.  
**0:34:17-0:34:39:**  The agroforestry has been developed as a landscaping activity.  So it's like you're planting trees because you feel good in planting trees.  You're kind of curing yourself about the world's problems.  
**0:34:39-0:34:57:**  And of course, the media is also responsible for that, I think.  So you still have a lot of people and companies committing to plant a lot of trees in a very  short period of time to really save the world.  
**0:34:57-0:35:13:**  And we all believe in that, but actually it's not going to happen this way.  In agroforestry, we don't want a lot of trees in a short amount of time.  We want the right tree in the right place with the right management strategy.  
**0:35:13-0:35:31:**  And this is a bit more complicated, of course, which means that planting trees is something  essential but we also have to gain knowledge in managing agroforestry systems at the system  level.  
**0:35:31-0:35:50:**  So I always say that agroforestry is two-thirds of agronomy and one-third of everything else.  And many people talk about agroforestry as being just tree planting on the farm, which  is, of course, a little bit simplistic.  
**0:35:50-0:36:16:**  So in terms of economy, we still have to, I think, improve our understanding of that.  There are good examples, but of course, models are many.  For the popular agroforestry that I mentioned earlier, we have now very good economical  
**0:36:16-0:36:40:**  and economic and agronomic models that are quite robust and quite viable.  But it's not the same for all the agroforestry systems that we are working on.  We still have a lot of work on the pipe.  
**0:36:40-0:36:55:**  As you mentioned, there's such a diversity of systems.  As soon as I said agroforestry systems, I regretted the term because it actually refers  to such a diversity of practices that we should ban that term.  
**0:36:55-0:37:07:**  It's really interesting, but maybe I had the wrong impression as well that I felt like  France was at the forefront of agroforestry.  But you seem to be saying that not necessarily.  
**0:37:07-0:37:26:**  Are there other countries a bit in similar contexts that you think are doing a better  job at advancing the kind of economic basis of it?  Well, it's not an easy question because now I have to choose who to mention.  
**0:37:26-0:37:48:**  Basically what I could say is that in Europe, we have a European Agroforestry Federation,  which is very dynamic and efficient as well as gathering everyone.  We can see that in almost every country of Europe, there are some things happening, good  
**0:37:48-0:38:04:**  things.  And really, you could go to Italy, to Belgium, to the Czech Republic.  All those countries are really making good progress towards reintegrating trees in the  
**0:38:04-0:38:27:**  farming landscapes.  But again, what I should mention is that agroforestry is about transitioning from an agriculture  with of course little trees to a farming system with more trees.  
**0:38:27-0:38:50:**  But it's also about reactivating the soil and the landscape fertility.  So we should integrate agroforestry in a broader framework of agroecological transition.  And we work a lot on conservation agriculture as well and that kind of practices that goes  
**0:38:50-0:39:11:**  together with the tree side.  And agroforestry is really, to my view and to many of us, is really the reunion, I would  say, of agronomy and trees.  
**0:39:11-0:39:24:**  So trees are a big part, but agroforestry is not limited to planting trees or managing  trees.  And I think it's important to, especially when you talk about the economic side of it,  
**0:39:24-0:39:40:**  it's very important to have this system approach.  But are you seeing certain patterns emerging already in terms of maybe some systems, you  mentioned the popular system already, but some systems being more challenging than others,  
**0:39:40-0:39:57:**  or maybe that a certain scale is required for them to be successful?  I'm not sure of that.  I think in every context you have some valid techniques and options.  
**0:39:57-0:40:27:**  And what we are lacking right now is field expertise, to being able to advise farmers,  not only in one moment, but on a number of years, to really run this transition altogether.  But on each farm and sometimes on each plots, you have to really adapt a set of practices  
**0:40:27-0:40:46:**  that is really adapted to that context.  And right now in France, we are lacking expertise in many regions.  Farmers are quite keen on trying and discovering, I would say, or rediscovering agroforestry.  
**0:40:46-0:41:02:**  But what they don't want or what they won't be interested in for many years is to just  having a landscape approach.  Like I'm doing a postcard and they tell me that it's saving the world and that's it.  
**0:41:02-0:41:19:**  We have to integrate that in the agronomy and in the economy.  And that's not an easy thing as well, of course.  So when we talked about teaching and training, I think it's a key thing.  
**0:41:19-0:41:32:**  And technical advice is also a big part of the story.  Related to this question on economics, there's the question of how to finance the transition  towards agroforestry.  
**0:41:32-0:41:44:**  And I know that in France and in Europe in general, the cap payment system is huge in  farm economics.  And I know that there's also some public subsidies coming out for trees.  
**0:41:44-0:42:00:**  I wanted to understand in your view, how are they encouraging the proper, the right tree  at the right place, as you were saying?  And what kind of agroforestry systems are they pushing for in terms of public funding?  
**0:42:00-0:42:16:**  Paradoxically, I think funding is not a problem.  It's not the problem.  The problem is to being able to advise every farmer in his transition, his or her transition.  
**0:42:16-0:42:39:**  And as soon as you do that, there is a long work before you plant your trees.  Most of the time, farmers face very daily problems in terms of soil fertility, in terms  of water balance, in terms of forage during the summer, as I said, for their livestock.  
**0:42:39-0:43:02:**  And if you're not solving those problems that are problems that they're facing now in the  present, you won't be able to make farmer invest in the future.  Just because they are facing those problems right now, and you should tackle them first.  
**0:43:02-0:43:22:**  So the key thing, I think, is to be able to have enough expertise again on the field.  And of course, then there's an investment.  And in France, we are lucky enough to have possibilities of different types of financing,  
**0:43:22-0:43:37:**  whether public or private.  I think if you take it this way, there is no problem.  If you take it in the other way, like there is money to plant trees, are you interested?  
**0:43:37-0:43:55:**  In this case, you're going to probably fail.  You're going to, of course, spend your money and plant your trees, but they won't really  provide what you're expecting from them.  
**0:43:55-0:44:15:**  So in our team, there are people working on fundraising.  And what I always say is, if you have, for example, founders, potential founders, companies,  et cetera, if those people ask you to plant a given number of trees for a given amount  
**0:44:15-0:44:33:**  of money, just go away from that, just go to the next contributor, because it's not  solving the problem ever.  And we've been doing that for 40, 50 years now in many countries.  
**0:44:33-0:44:47:**  And again, tree funding is not the solution to do sustainable development.  It's a mean.  It's not the start of the story.  
**0:44:47-0:44:56:**  I see what you mean.  The reason why I was asking is, often the cap payment system, because of its scale,  is very bureaucratic.  
**0:44:56-0:45:10:**  And then on the other hand, you were explaining to us how context specific each agroforestry  system has to be, how every situation is different, every context.  And I was just wondering if there's a tension there, because I remember looking at some  
**0:45:10-0:45:25:**  funding opportunities on planting trees, and it was very precise on the number of trees  per hectare, and what essences were available.  And instinctively, when I saw that, I thought, OK, well, it's great, because you get some  
**0:45:25-0:45:41:**  money to plant trees, but it also kind of ties your hands technically, and to a certain  extent as well.  Yeah, but I think we have now many opportunities, or many ways on how to fund projects.  
**0:45:41-0:46:05:**  And one of our jobs is to really identify the right, what do you call that, the right  financing tool for each project, right?  So again, if you're able to really have quality advice, and then you know exactly what you  
**0:46:05-0:46:26:**  have to do on this farm, for example, what this farmer wants to do, and what he's able  to do, and then you know how much it costs, after that, it's quite easy to go and get  funds, and to really identify the most adapted funding.  
**0:46:26-0:46:47:**  But it's not the way it happens usually, because of course, as you said, funders are basically,  they set the objectives before knowing what's the need.  And also they set the same objective for a whole region, if not the whole country.  
**0:46:47-0:47:07:**  So, yeah, it's a nightmare for us, because you have plenty of projects that are already  here and it cannot match with what the funders want.  So again, what we're trying to do is really to identify everything and then do some legal  
**0:47:07-0:47:30:**  work, you know, between the opportunities and the demand.  But again, this is the reason why I mentioned that what we are lacking now is those people  with enough technical expertise to really do the job in the right order, and then go  
**0:47:30-0:47:42:**  and get the funds in the proper way.  So yeah, I agree with your impression.  You were mentioning private funders as well.  
**0:47:42-0:47:56:**  Who are we talking to at this moment?  Who wants to be investing money in a transition towards agroforestry?  Well, I would say in terms of profile, I would say almost everyone, at least a wide range  
**0:47:56-0:48:27:**  of people and companies and funders, whether from the agri-food sector or from totally  other sectors, transport, airlines, even cosmetic brands, et cetera, et cetera.  So again, I think it's a good opportunity, but we shouldn't fall in what we could call  
**0:48:27-0:48:42:**  greenwashing or tree washing, as we say now, because basically there is a kind of a competition  between companies.  The first one said I commit to plant 100,000 trees.  
**0:48:42-0:48:57:**  And then the one next door said I will plant a million trees.  And then the next one said I plant 10 million trees.  Now I think some companies, they are at least at 100,000, 100 billion, sorry, trees or even  
**0:48:57-0:49:12:**  a billion or whatever.  And this is just a nonsense, because again, we don't want, at least for agroforestry,  we don't want many trees, but we want the proper trees.  
**0:49:12-0:49:31:**  And it's actually, the perfect agroforestry is actually a landscape with trees in many  contexts, but in a quite scattered way.  It's not really dense most of the time.  
**0:49:31-0:49:41:**  So as I said, again, if you want to plant a lot of trees, if you want to do timber trees,  all that is for the forestry sector.  It's not for agroforestry.  
**0:49:41-0:50:01:**  But as soon, just one addition to that, I noticed from my experience that as soon as  you start counting trees or setting an objective in number of trees, you're not going to the  right path.  
**0:50:01-0:50:11:**  You mentioned companies wanting to plant trees.  I heard in some of those motives may be linked to carbon sequestration or all these issues  around climate change.  
**0:50:11-0:50:22:**  Do we also see companies wanting to plant trees to change, for example, their value  chain or actual change their way of doing business?  Yeah, very much actually.  
**0:50:22-0:50:39:**  I think the carbon footprint is one way of seeing things.  And of course, it's a major at the moment.  But what we always try to say is, again, just do something sensible for farmers.  
**0:50:39-0:50:56:**  Just do some real agroforestry development on the field.  And then of course, it will be positive in terms of carbon.  And we will be able to assess your impact if you like.  
**0:50:56-0:51:05:**  But don't start talking about carbon.  Because it's a consequence.  It shouldn't be a starting point.  
**0:51:05-0:51:21:**  What we want is to build a more sustainable and profitable agriculture.  It's not to offset carbon footprint.  Because if you only want to do that, again, you're able to do that in different kinds  
**0:51:21-0:51:38:**  of ways that will be very efficient in storing carbon, but that they won't be efficient at  all in terms of sustainability of the farming model.  So it's a trap most of the time.  
**0:51:38-0:52:04:**  And anyway, we work also with the agri-food sector.  More and more actors nowadays wanting to really have some CSR approaches and being a bit more  responsible in producing their primary matter.  
**0:52:04-0:52:21:**  And then some of them don't even talk about carbon, surprisingly.  So it's about really quality and social impact of their activities.  And the environmental impact as well.  
**0:52:21-0:52:34:**  Apart from carbon, if you talk about biodiversity, for example, it's a big issue nowadays and  a big concern for those actors.  That's really interesting.  
**0:52:34-0:52:51:**  So you're really seeing an avenue for change there with working with big economic actors  on these issues.  It's not the easiest part, but it's now starting to be very interesting.  
**0:52:51-0:53:13:**  And the key thing is really to know where you want to go.  Because of course, if you just want to take money from a company, I think it's doable.  But the easiest way is to just, again, sell some impact or some intention or some story  
**0:53:13-0:53:40:**  that you won't even be able to write in reality.  So I think it's our responsibility to work with everyone, but really be extremely ambitious  on what we are doing and what we are going to invest this money for.  
**0:53:40-0:54:08:**  And it's not the easiest part when you start talking about agricultural development and  facilitating the transition to a certain number of farmers, say 200 farmers.  It's a lot of work and not very probably sexy as tree planting can be as such.  
**0:54:08-0:54:21:**  One theme I was very curious about is commercialization.  As farmers include trees in their productive systems, it often means having additional  products to sell.  
**0:54:21-0:54:35:**  How do you think we can organize and facilitate selling diversity for a farmer?  Ag and forest trees should always go with an additional income eventually.  That's the definition, I would say.  
**0:54:35-0:54:52:**  But then the key thing is really to adapt the system to what the farmers want to do  on his or her farm.  And this is why I was mentioning that the technical advice is very important.  
**0:54:52-0:55:20:**  Because you won't be able to really let the thing go and then decide.  You have to decide at first and really analyze the constraints and opportunities.  And from there you build something that is tailored to the farm you are helping to transition.  
**0:55:20-0:55:41:**  So there shouldn't be a problem if you do things again in the right order.  But then of course you have to assess the productivity of that new system and maybe  the need for additional work, which means creation of additional jobs for example.  
**0:55:41-0:55:56:**  So all this has to be planned.  Otherwise it can be a big issue at some point if you didn't anticipate.  But it seems it also requires again some kind of collective work.  
**0:55:56-0:56:07:**  You mentioned cooperatives earlier on.  I'm not sure it necessarily has to go through them.  But at some point organizing what in French we call filleres, and I don't know how the  
**0:56:07-0:56:13:**  English word, I apologize.  Market channels, I would say.  Market channels.  
**0:56:13-0:56:29:**  But also in the case of people doing direct selling, they might need to have collective  transformation units or whatever the product is.  I often feel that when you're a farmer diversifying a lot, it can be hard to do so alone in your  
**0:56:29-0:56:45:**  corner.  Well, it depends really on the system.  If you have a poultry farmer and that farmer wants to produce walnut, it's a very efficient  
**0:56:45-0:57:08:**  system to have walnut above your poultry on the same piece of land.  And by the way, it's one of the most profitable systems that we have been working on.  The economic results of both systems is really impressive.  
**0:57:08-0:57:27:**  Of course, on a hectare basis, right?  On a piece of land that is relatively small most of the time, but that's really having  two productions on top of each other.  
**0:57:27-0:57:59:**  So in this case, you might be quite self-sufficient in really developing your model.  Then of course, if you want to produce, for example, wood pellet for energy, for fuel  wood, in that case, it's more of a regional project and you need a bunch of farmers to  
**0:57:59-0:58:16:**  get together and really work on that.  And also it's about new tree planting, but it's also about managing the existing trees  and the existing hedges most of the time.  
**0:58:16-0:58:34:**  So this is more of a collective project in that case.  We have a few of them that are quite well established in different regions of France,  including one in the Caribbean, as I said earlier.  
**0:58:34-0:58:52:**  So it really depends on context and opportunities.  And what we try to do when we work in a region is really to assess, and that's the very  first point, to assess what are the main opportunities in this region.  
**0:58:52-0:59:16:**  Because in some regions, you would be able to produce fuel wood from hedges, for example,  and it will be a very big lever for change.  And in other regions, it's not an option for local, economic and political reasons.  
**0:59:16-0:59:29:**  So it's really important to know where you are and to assess the context before you start  thinking about what's doable.  And then once you know what's doable, economically speaking, and in terms of soil and climate,  
**0:59:29-0:59:47:**  you can go and see what your farmers want to do, but really sticking to what's doable  among the doable options.  Because it's a nonsense as well to say, I would like to do that.  
**0:59:47-1:00:02:**  But if it's not possible in your context, if your soil is not adapted to that, you're  dreaming.  So it's important to have this initial analysis.  
**1:00:02-1:00:16:**  And again, it's why I was pointing out that we need more expertise and that is more people  in the different regions.  In agroforestry, we're often talking about, for example, supporting systems such as hedges  
**1:00:16-1:00:27:**  that can create ecosystem services and support a crop and benefit the crop, for example,  in certain contexts.  But we're also talking about, as you said, walnuts over chickens, which is an actual  
**1:00:27-1:00:38:**  crop being produced and being stacked on top of another enterprise.  Could be, for example, timber intercropping, etc.  Like timber production stacked on top of a grain production.  
**1:00:38-1:00:50:**  I'm curious in practice, because this is what's really interesting with talking to you here,  is that we can see, we can hear through you what's been implemented in practice on a few,  on hundreds of projects or a hundred projects.  
**1:00:50-1:00:58:**  I don't know exactly how much it is in France.  What do you see more of?  What do farmers in practice tend more towards?  
**1:00:58-1:01:15:**  Is it, do they always manage to reach the optimal end result of having supporting systems  plus managing to produce from them plus super well integrated with the other crops that  they have?  
**1:01:15-1:01:26:**  Where are we dreaming and where not?  Well, you're not dreaming at all, but we have to really keep in mind and mention that first  of all, it's a transition.  
**1:01:26-1:01:44:**  So you won't do that from one day to another.  And the farms that we can consider as a mature agroforestry farms now are in this path since  sometimes even 15 years.  
**1:01:44-1:02:00:**  Okay, but at least a number of years, at least eight to 10 years.  So it's a process.  And it's good that it is a process because it's a change in practices that is really  
**1:02:00-1:02:18:**  important and the farmers really need to also gain knowledge and be able to learn this new  way of farming basically.  Then the other point here is that agroforestry is something that we are inventing or reinventing  
**1:02:18-1:02:31:**  every day.  As I said, you don't have the ultimate agroforestry handbook.  You won't ever have it just because it's practice and knowledge exchange.  
**1:02:31-1:02:54:**  So yeah, as we mentioned already a little bit, agroforestry is not black and white.  It's always, there's always a margin for improvement in every context.  So we start from where we are and then every day it's a process of improvement.  
**1:02:54-1:03:15:**  And yes, of course, we have farms that have transitioned long enough, I would say, to  have both an economically viable and robust system and also some significant change in  terms of ecosystem services.  
**1:03:15-1:03:43:**  I think the most tricky part is the economic side.  But as soon as you have an agroforestry system that is economically viable, first of all,  it means that it has more chances to be sustainable.  
**1:03:43-1:03:59:**  Sustainability is directly linked to profitability.  And then once you reach this point, the ecosystem services are just a bonus.  And you will have everything coming together.  
**1:03:59-1:04:15:**  It's about, it's what agroforestry is, it's the magic.  You have impact on the biodiversity and the water cycle, on the climate and the microclimate  locally as well.  
**1:04:15-1:04:34:**  As soon as your trees grow properly, all this will go with the package, it will come together.  But your trees have to grow and this is the hardest part.  Whilst we're on this economics aspect, I just wanted to understand what you said earlier  
**1:04:34-1:04:51:**  on about, you know, when you said we asked if we had reached a point where economically  agroforestry was established and you said, you know, not yet.  And I just wanted to understand a bit more why you had said not yet.  
**1:04:51-1:05:18:**  In most of the examples, it's not, I would say it's not mature enough to my view.  But yes, we have examples that are established, that are analyzed and we have some economic  models in a number of systems that are perfectly well known.  
**1:05:18-1:05:39:**  Because as I said, we do some research and development.  It's practically what we are trying to do every day, to look at the concrete example  and analyze the transition, the cost, the type and the amount of work and then the profit  
**1:05:39-1:05:59:**  in the short, mid and long term basis.  So right now, yes, we have examples and we have the information.  But what I was saying is that most of what we call agroforestry is not yet robust enough,  
**1:05:59-1:06:14:**  economically speaking, to my view.  And to my view, it shouldn't be called agroforestry.  But you know, that's the, I don't know what you call that.  
**1:06:14-1:06:35:**  But it's like a very well known word now and everyone is using it.  But agroforestry implies economy.  And it implies a very systemic approach about the farm and its economy, of course.  
**1:06:35-1:06:55:**  I just wanted to ask, which types of systems are you specifically referring to that, in  your opinion, shouldn't be called agroforestry?  Well, every system that are just here to be planting trees as some kind of landscaping,  
**1:06:55-1:07:13:**  as I was saying earlier.  We have plenty of people planting hedges, for example, and saying that, look, it's going  to bring back some biodiversity, which is, of course, realistic.  
**1:07:13-1:07:29:**  As soon as your tree grows properly, of course, if the tree doesn't grow, you won't have any  ecosystem service.  You won't have enough biomass, enough habitat, enough whatever you like.  
**1:07:29-1:07:46:**  But those systems that are really the most important ones in terms of quantity, most  of the time they have no economic model behind.  So that's what I was trying to mention.  
**1:07:46-1:08:04:**  I'm not saying it's not useful or it's not an interesting step.  But if we want it to be sustainable, it has to be profitable, which is why I was pointing  out this.  
**1:08:04-1:08:15:**  But to take the example of a hedge, then, let's say you're a farmer and you plant a  hedge as a windbreak.  Let's take the livestock example.  
**1:08:15-1:08:34:**  I put hedges in to provide shade to my cows and maybe a bit of fodder, et cetera.  Would you be happy with that result saying, OK, it's improving my production system?  Or does this for you, it necessarily implies an additional production?  
**1:08:34-1:09:02:**  Well, I think if a windbreak allows you to basically keep growing a crop or having livestock,  of course, it's economically sensible.  In plenty of regions, you don't even know if you will be able tomorrow to have livestock  
**1:09:02-1:09:19:**  in the pastures, et cetera, et cetera.  So if it's well thought in this way that you were describing, I think it's good enough.  Of course, you could go beyond that and have a proper economy for those trees or those  
**1:09:19-1:09:36:**  hedges.  In such a way that the trees will pay for what they take in terms of space and time  for management, of course.  
**1:09:36-1:10:00:**  But in many ways, still you have hedges that cost a lot to the farmers and they are just  seen as a boundary or maybe a fence, kind of a living fence.  But they take a lot in terms every year in terms of cleaning and maintaining without  
**1:10:00-1:10:17:**  having any economic model behind.  And I think this is one of the main reasons why trees and hedges are seen as a charge,  as something costly and time consuming.  
**1:10:17-1:10:42:**  So in this case, if you look at the landscape with those kind of hedges, most of the time  quite low hedges just for the sake of having it at the boundary of a field.  In those case, you could call it agroforestry, but it's not really what we want.  
**1:10:42-1:10:59:**  Because in those landscapes, the number of trees and hedges are still decreasing just  because they are seen as a problem by farmers and as something that doesn't pay for what  they cost.  
**1:10:59-1:11:13:**  When you're looking at even the fastest, let's take the timber example, even a hedge, even  for fast growing trees such as a poplar or a black locust, which you're going to harvest  in maybe 20 years.  
**1:11:13-1:11:30:**  If you're producing maybe biomass, it could be a faster cycle with other trees, etc.  But the question is, is often whatever happens in agroforestry when you're dealing with trees,  you've got a long term project and that's a barrier to entry for farmers because even  
**1:11:30-1:11:41:**  for these fast systems, they're taking the costs of managing it, but they're only going  to benefit in many years.  We're not talking here of 90-year oak systems.  
**1:11:41-1:12:03:**  And so how do you see in the field farmers going beyond this boundary?  How do you as the Afaf can help farmers to deal with this?  Well, first of all, this is one of the reasons why having a system based on the slow growing  
**1:12:03-1:12:17:**  timber trees is not realistic to my view.  So you can have a long term profit, but you should also have a mid term or short term  profit in the same system.  
**1:12:17-1:12:34:**  So this is how we are trying to design our systems.  You should always have those different timescales.  And again, on the tree side, but also on the crop side, that most of the time you can do  
**1:12:34-1:12:51:**  a lot also to improve the model.  And then one thing we talked about financing.  There are opportunities, I think, today in some types of system.  
**1:12:51-1:13:17:**  And we could take again the example of Poplar, where the industry is able to reinvest in  the production of quality primary matter.  And in that case, the farmer is able to have some intermediary revenue for his work.  
**1:13:17-1:13:48:**  So those systems are starting to be developed in some context and some types of markets.  For example, for the Poplar, we're working now on that type of systems.  So really having a contract for production of quality would in the end, but with the  
**1:13:48-1:14:03:**  commitment of the industry behind.  So a security, a guarantee for the farmer who knows that if he gets involved with this  business and he does an OK job at letting the trees grow or a good job at getting the  
**1:14:03-1:14:18:**  trees grow, he is guaranteed a certain income.  I'd like us to maybe move on to the last section I had in mind, which is going back to a bit  more technical design aspects, just because I think a lot of our listeners are in the  
**1:14:18-1:14:35:**  field trying to find solutions.  So in this final part, I was wondering, Fabien, of course, I don't want to ask you to make  any generalizations, but are there some recurring mistakes that you see in the conception and  
**1:14:35-1:14:56:**  implementation of agroforestry systems that you would like to share with our listeners?  I'll try not to repeat too much what I've been saying already, but what we see very  often is mistakes in choosing the right tree, adapting to the context.  
**1:14:56-1:15:18:**  So that's a very common mistake.  And again, it's a question of expertise and initial diagnosis.  But then one thing also I think is, and maybe it's even more specific to France, we tend  
**1:15:18-1:15:39:**  to plant trees at final density in agroforestry.  So basically, I plant a tree and I want it to grow and have this ultimate quality that  I'm expecting.  
**1:15:39-1:15:58:**  And I'm not sure it's realistic when you work with trees to work with that kind of mindset.  Because basically, if you look at what foresters do since centuries ago, they plant more trees  than what they needed in the end, right?  
**1:15:58-1:16:15:**  And then they do some selection, some thinning, some etc, etc.  And I think we should rediscover a little bit the basics of silviculture in agroforestry  as well.  
**1:16:15-1:16:38:**  And this is even more important in the context of climate change, where we don't really know  what's going to happen next.  So yeah, planting more trees and giving us the opportunity to select, I think is important.  
**1:16:38-1:16:59:**  Having the right mix, trying to also integrate probably new species to really kind of anticipate  climate change effects.  All these are questions that we are trying to tackle nowadays.  
**1:16:59-1:17:08:**  What about planting a diversity, vs planting a single species?  Is that something that you're also working with at the moment?  Yeah, of course.  
**1:17:08-1:17:28:**  Always.  I think we should have a mix, as I said, and it's really important.  Which doesn't mean that, for example, if you work with walnut above chicken, of course,  
**1:17:28-1:17:41:**  your main species will be walnut.  And that's the sensible way of doing it.  And if it's the project, if it's what the farmer wants to do, you have to go with that.  
**1:17:41-1:17:57:**  But then you could always do things in the boundaries to add more diversity and have  hedges, for example, to integrate that in the broader landscape and have some corridors,  etc.  
**1:17:57-1:18:22:**  So this is always what we try to do, to add as much diversity as possible in terms of  species, but also inside every species to have a genetic diversity.  So for example, if you want to plant walnut again, you would choose a diversity of varieties.  
**1:18:22-1:18:41:**  Just because, yeah, of course, you want to not put all the eggs in the same basket.  I was wondering in terms of tree genetics, are you able to find good nurseries to work  on to try and in that diversity already bring genetics that might be more adapted to climate  
**1:18:41-1:18:48:**  change?  Or is that something you're not focusing on as a priority?  Well, it's one of the priorities, yes.  
**1:18:48-1:19:07:**  Because the quality, the genetic quality is the key thing.  I mean, yeah, it's what determines everything else.  So yes, we do work with tree nurseries.  
**1:19:07-1:19:29:**  There is still a lot of work to do because, of course, in agroforestry, we have a diversity  of contexts and we have complicated contexts for trees.  Trees are, I would say they need the most fertile soil, right?  
**1:19:29-1:19:50:**  If you look at the forest, the soil quality in a forest is the best one.  And trees always come in the ecological succession when the soil is already fertile enough.  And when you try to plant trees on farmlands, most of the time you put them in a complicated  
**1:19:50-1:20:12:**  context in this case because most of the soils are degraded.  So you need to be really looking at genetics and good quality of seedlings as well.  And again, this is also the reason why every time you should, every time you plant a tree,  
**1:20:12-1:20:35:**  you should also adapt your agronomy and be good at soil management practices.  Just because that's the only way your trees can grow properly and provide you your services  and your diversity of incomes.  
**1:20:35-1:20:50:**  In the fringe context, because it's the one where, of course, you know the most about,  if I'm a farmer and I'm thinking about agroforestry I'm interested in, what are the next steps  for me?  
**1:20:50-1:21:05:**  Who do I contact and where do I start?  Well, one of the main contexts I think is agroforestry.fr.  And we have, of course, a phone number and a contact email, etc.  
**1:21:05-1:21:25:**  So we try to answer everyone and then depending on the region, we can put them in contact  with local partners.  And then, yeah, I think farmers should just go and talk with other farmers.  
**1:21:25-1:21:44:**  And when you're able to get together the ones who want to do and the ones who have already  done is the best way, I think, of learning and identifying the best solution for everyone.  Do you think that there's an agroforestry system for every context?  
**1:21:44-1:21:55:**  Or can you think of some situations where it's just better to leave trees out of the  agricultural field?  That's a very good question.  
**1:21:55-1:22:10:**  My experience has shown me that there is no sustainable agriculture without trees.  At least I've not seen that in my life.  It might exist, but I don't believe in that yet.  
**1:22:10-1:22:29:**  Because I only believe in what I've seen, as I was saying in the beginning.  So I think it's already well known that we need to have trees in the farming system.  And now the very big question is how?  
**1:22:29-1:22:40:**  And that's where it starts to be interesting.  But to answer your question, yes, agroforestry is adaptable, I think, to every context.  And it's a necessity.  
**1:22:40-1:22:52:**  But then, of course, you won't do the same thing in every context and in every type of  systems.  Bouncing back to this interview with Rowan Reade, because I think it was very thought-provoking.  
**1:22:52-1:23:10:**  At one point, he said that the context between Australia and Europe was very different.  And that, for example, in Australia, farmers couldn't afford to plant trees in the same  way because they had much less subsidies.  
**1:23:10-1:23:24:**  They had to be much more flexible.  And he was saying that putting trees in the agricultural field, in entre parceler, for  him didn't make much sense because it tied down farmers for two long periods of time  
**1:23:24-1:23:40:**  when for him, you needed a maximum of flexibility.  Do you agree with that in the European context?  Well, I think alley cropping is one type of practice.  
**1:23:40-1:23:56:**  And it's valid in some contexts, but probably not too many of them.  Probably I would say 20%.  80% is everything else.  
**1:23:56-1:24:14:**  But alley cropping is quite useful when you have bigger plots, basically.  So the first thing is really to see what you can do in the boundaries.  And you can always do a lot of things, field boundaries, the road verges as well, the riparian  
**1:24:14-1:24:30:**  areas, et cetera, et cetera.  And once you've done that, if you have plots that you think are still too big, you can  divide them up a little bit more through alley cropping systems.  
**1:24:30-1:24:43:**  That's the way I try to put it.  It's like building a house, right?  You have the first walls, and then you can divide and have more rooms, et cetera, et  
**1:24:43-1:24:49:**  cetera.  But you should start with the beginning, of course.  So it's the same here.  
**1:24:49-1:25:03:**  Again, it's a transition of a number of years.  And we should go from the easiest part to the hardest and the most committing part as  well.  
**1:25:03-1:25:07:**  Yeah.  So I agree.  I agree with what Roland was saying.  
**1:25:07-1:25:18:**  Well, thank you so much, Fabien, for taking the time to talk to us.  It was really a fascinating conversation.  And we really hope to have you on for next episode some of the time.  
**1:25:18-1:25:24:**  My pleasure.  Thank you.  I hope you enjoyed this episode.  
**1:25:24-1:25:55:**  As usual, all useful links are below.  Please consider supporting the podcast by donating on our website or by just contributing  content and questions for our future episodes.  