---
title: 24 Planning And Designing Holistically With Darren Doherty
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

<script src="https://cdn.podlove.org/web-player/embed.js"></script>
    <script>
        document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', function () {
          if (document.readyState === 'interactive' || document.readyState === 'complete') {
            podlovePlayer('#player', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast/24-planning-and-designing-holistically-with-darren-doherty.json', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast/config.json').then(registerExternalEvents('player'))
          }
        })
  </script>

### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2021-07-12)  

**0:00:00-0:00:23:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:23-0:00:33:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  these challenges.  
**0:00:33-0:00:47:**  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Hello and welcome to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:00:47-0:01:04:**  I'm your host Dimitri and today we interviewed a special guest and that's Darren Dougherty.  For many of you he will not need an introduction but for others, Darren is a leading consultant  and designer in regenerative agriculture working on thousands of projects around the world,  
**0:01:04-0:01:20:**  currently leading the way with the Rigrarians platform and his Rex trainings which we'll  talk about in this interview.  Darren has had an extraordinary experience working on many, many different projects,  
**0:01:20-0:01:32:**  many different pieces of land, on many different contexts all around the world, designing,  planning and etc.  And so his opinion about trees on landscapes and agroforestry is really important to us  
**0:01:32-0:01:51:**  in order to understand a bit better how we can make it work, where did it work, where  not and what it takes for a farm to implement these types of systems successfully.  This episode has a special focus on education, training and planning as well as quite a lot  
**0:01:51-0:02:04:**  of psychology in it.  We don't focus so much on the technical agronomy but it's very important for us to deal with  these bigger picture issues and some of the context that goes around planting trees because  
**0:02:04-0:02:12:**  they're really important.  So we hope you enjoy.  So yeah, I thought that we usually start like this with our guests.  
**0:02:12-0:02:26:**  If you could give us a little intro as to how you got into agriculture and how you got  started on this path really.  With a bit towards how I got into agroforestry as well?  
**0:02:26-0:02:33:**  I think general agriculture to start off with and then we'll little by little head into  the forestry layer of...  Yeah, cool.  
**0:02:33-0:02:41:**  Because I started, I probably started with forestry before I started with agriculture.  So...  No, start there then, perfect.  
**0:02:41-0:03:00:**  You know, I don't see much of a difference between agriculture and agroforestry.  In fact, my sort of vision of agriculture is agroforestry that the two have to go together.  And that's really born out of some of my earliest memories growing up on my grandparents farm  
**0:03:00-0:03:19:**  because my dad was killed in Vietnam when I was a baby in the war there.  I was only just four months old and my mum was very young and we were already living  at my grandparents farm, so my maternal grandparents.  
**0:03:19-0:03:30:**  So that was a very mixed farm.  Not classic I suppose for Australia because a lot of Australian farms are, well they're  mixed.  
**0:03:30-0:03:43:**  Like when you say a mixed farm in Australia, it means you grow wheat and you grow sheep.  Or you grow a cereal crop and you grow cattle, which we did, but we also had a lot of forests.  My grandfather grew up in the Depression.  
**0:03:43-0:04:00:**  He was born in 1915 and before he went to college per se, he, during the Depression  as sort of like a 15, 16 year old, there was no jobs.  He couldn't afford school or whatever.  
**0:04:00-0:04:12:**  So he cut wood and he cut forests and did that.  And I've got some great photos of him when he was about 19.  He was really ripped because they just used saws and axes back then.  
**0:04:12-0:04:24:**  Old school, yeah.  I've never been as ripped as he was.  But anyway, he, so at our farm we had four blocks of forest on the farm.  
**0:04:24-0:04:38:**  One was a plantation that we put in.  One was, which was a eucalypt plantation.  Another lot that we, the other three lots were all regrowth, which were a coppice and  
**0:04:38-0:04:55:**  standards sort of set up.  And I remember spending a lot of time going out there when I was, you know, as small as  you could be to hold an axe, which is in our case probably four or five, and going out  
**0:04:55-0:05:08:**  there and thinning trees.  You know, whether it's just a bit of a, you know, a little coppice coming up in the paddock  of the eucalyptus, stray eucalyptus growing in the paddock or in a case here or whatever.  
**0:05:08-0:05:19:**  And then progressing to, you know, stuff when I was 14, 15, 16, a bit big, you know, a lot  bigger.  But the other thing which I pride myself on even today is I split a lot of wood for my  
**0:05:19-0:05:31:**  Nana.  So we had a wood stove in the house and it was always on, didn't matter how hot it was,  it was on and we always had a soup on the stove and all of that.  
**0:05:31-0:05:47:**  So one of my biggest things that I enjoyed as a young person was cutting wood and splitting  it and making the perfect stack and my Nana coming out and patting me on the head, you  know, all that sort of thing.  
**0:05:47-0:06:00:**  You know, it was sort of probably my first OCD moment where you've got the, you know,  I still do that today, I love winter, I love splitting wood.  I'm really good at it.  
**0:06:00-0:06:13:**  It's one of the things that I'm actually best at, is splitting wood.  Really not designing farms, splitting wood, splitting wood, you know, cold, Darren to  split your word at your home is very efficient and it does a very nice stack.  
**0:06:13-0:06:23:**  I do fantastic kindling.  I like, you know, I can split an inch wide.  So there's an inch piece I can split in the middle of that.  
**0:06:23-0:06:30:**  So bloody good I am, but anyway, no one gets to see it.  It's just me.  So you'll just have to work for it.  
**0:06:30-0:06:40:**  Now I've got a very nice Austrian splitting axe and yeah, I'm pretty into all that, but  that's my little sideline.  That's the forester inside you.  
**0:06:40-0:06:45:**  Yeah, that's, well, yeah, maybe.  Yeah.  But I love doing all of that sort of thing.  
**0:06:45-0:07:04:**  And it was great because it was free, you know, coppers timber that just keeps growing  back and often when I talk about the forestry layer now as a farm planner agroforestor,  so you know, make the cop that we should be making the coppers economy really central  
**0:07:04-0:07:14:**  to what we do.  Cause I see that coppers is such a brilliant thing.  How good is it that you can chop something down, use it.  
**0:07:14-0:07:25:**  It sucks more carbon down than what you would use in burning it when it regrows and it great  regrows for nothing.  And it's like, okay, don't have to plant a thing again.  
**0:07:25-0:07:32:**  It's you don't have to do all of that.  So it's just like, it can go forever.  Which is awesome.  
**0:07:32-0:07:42:**  So yeah, that's fantastic.  So there's a lot of, there's a lot that goes in for that for me in the way that I think  and yeah, there's a lot.  
**0:07:42-0:07:59:**  I like, I like the perpetuality of things and that's really built out of that time as  a young fella, as a, you know, my formative years.  And how did you, I mean, at the moment, what is your activity?  
**0:07:59-0:08:14:**  Like what, what, what are you doing at the moment on in this agricultural space?  What's your role?  So 30 years after, well 32 years this year, after shifting into the organics movement,  
**0:08:14-0:08:30:**  I was, I left school, traveled, got into hospitality.  And then after doing that for four or five years, I started managing an organic store,  organic food store that was in 1989.  
**0:08:30-0:08:55:**  And I then ran that for a couple of years.  And then in 1993, I started our farm planning consultancy, which I've been doing since 1993.  And so where I'm at now after doing however many thousands of farm plans and teaching  
**0:08:55-0:09:15:**  tens of thousands of people farm planning of various different guises, I now run a,  with my friend and colleague Georgie Pavlov, the Rigurians workplace.  And that's a sort of a, that's a digital platform that we opened in 2017.  
**0:09:15-0:09:35:**  And we really facilitate conversations and facilitate learning and professional development  between, well between producers around the world.  We've got about 75 different countries and about 3000 people that we work with.  
**0:09:35-0:09:47:**  And that's growing all the time.  So as you would know, Dimitri, we were talking before we started, that's a really quality  space and people come there for professional development.  
**0:09:47-0:09:58:**  And that's awesome that we can link, you know, a grazier in Somaliland with one in Russia,  with one in India, with one in South America and so on.  You know, it's just an amazing thing.  
**0:09:58-0:10:18:**  So we, a lot of what I do is about joining people together who otherwise, so I watch  all the conversations and I go, ah, you need to talk with this person.  I can't recommend this enough to our listeners because I've just joined the Rigurians platform  
**0:10:18-0:10:33:**  maybe a month ago and the quality of information on there is fantastic.  I mean, lots of very professional farmers and practitioners, consultants sharing on  in depth topics from, you know, soil fertility all the way to water management.  
**0:10:33-0:10:39:**  I've been really impressed.  So I recommend the listeners to check it out.  Thank you.  
**0:10:39-0:10:48:**  Yeah, it's been great.  And it's also, it's all based on the Rigurians platform.  So the workplace is, the Rigurians workplace is our digital platform.  
**0:10:48-0:11:04:**  And then within that, we, it's kind of, well, the workplace platform as it were, is a Facebook  product.  So Facebook developed this platform in late 2016 and they invited us.  
**0:11:04-0:11:11:**  We've got to, you know, you don't normally get a letter from Facebook.  And they said, hey, would you like to come and join?  I was like, really?  
**0:11:11-0:11:18:**  Is this spam?  Anyway, we've got this letter from Facebook saying, we've got this new platform and we'd  like you to try.  
**0:11:18-0:11:32:**  So we jumped on and interestingly, we were in the middle of teaching our first online  REX program, which is our longitudinal online program that we run, farm planning program.  And we're about halfway through it.  
**0:11:32-0:11:44:**  And I said to the, as you do, you know, we're all getting along with things.  And I said to the, to the, I think we had 120 people on the course and I said, hey,  we've just joined this new platform.  
**0:11:44-0:11:57:**  Would you like to have a look at it?  And at the end of this course, we're thinking of switching over.  So anyway, within, I think it was in one week, 95 to a hundred of those people had just jumped  
**0:11:57-0:12:07:**  on.  And they all said, no, we want to be here now we're in Slack in the program Slack.  And people just jumped straight over.  
**0:12:07-0:12:14:**  Okay, I think we're here now.  We're not going to wait till here, which is not really the way to run a course, but that  was how it ran.  
**0:12:14-0:12:26:**  But we set it up.  So it's all in the Regrarian's platform layers, just to make the distinction.  And that's our 10 layer platform that we've developed, which is climate, geography, water,  
**0:12:26-0:12:42:**  access, forestry, buildings, fencing, soils, economy, and energy.  And so, you know, when we have all of these conversations, like you might do on an old  style forum, we've actually got them all in these groups.  
**0:12:42-0:12:56:**  So just like Facebook groups, except this is, Facebook developed this platform as an  intranet for companies.  And it's based on what Facebook were using for a decade to manage their own internal  
**0:12:56-0:13:01:**  process.  So they had their own Facebook inside of Facebook, as it were.  So it's a really good architecture.  
**0:13:01-0:13:10:**  And it's worked really, really well for us.  We couldn't be more pleased with it.  And we're on the workplace for good program as well, which means that as a nonprofit,  
**0:13:10-0:13:14:**  we get the whole thing for free.  So that's great as well.  Yeah.  
**0:13:14-0:13:30:**  I think we've skipped a little step though, because, and that's my fault.  But how did you go, how did you end up creating this workspace and operating in this way?  I mean, what were the steps throughout your career that led you to now have the role of  
**0:13:30-0:13:40:**  a facilitator, a connector?  Well, I've always been a connector.  So when I was running the organic greengrocer, a lot of my role was buying food.  
**0:13:40-0:14:01:**  So we'd go out and connect with all of these organic farmers in the late 80s, early 90s.  And as I've said a number of times on different podcasts, once the conversation got beyond,  oh, you're selling this, I want that sort of thing, that immediate conversation, it  
**0:14:01-0:14:14:**  then got to, hey, tell me what the guy down the road or the woman down the road is doing  about how are they growing their potatoes?  Because I want to know, because they weren't talking to each other necessarily, but they  
**0:14:14-0:14:25:**  were using me as a bit of an intermediary.  And then beyond that, I started to say, hey, you should meet, you know, this person's growing  apples if you met them, and you talked about how they're doing it and connecting people  
**0:14:25-0:14:37:**  who are organic and biodynamic people who were just starting out.  So they were in a transition to organic or biodynamic.  And then, you know, teaming them up somehow with people who are a bit more advanced than  
**0:14:37-0:14:45:**  and same with livestock and all sorts of things.  So that's where my consulting career and you know what you're asking, that's where it all  started.  
**0:14:45-0:15:04:**  It's always been that an element of my consulting has been about connecting people, you know,  because you can't, I mean, there's some consultants out there who kind of practices if they know  everything and which is really annoying and egotistical.  
**0:15:04-0:15:16:**  And I think really when my friend Brock Dolman said, you know, we've got to get out of the  ecosystem and into the ecosystem, that really rang true for me, because that was really  the way that we were running anyway.  
**0:15:16-0:15:28:**  You know, you've got to realise what you don't know, or know what you don't know.  And I'd always practice that because of my upbringing.  And so what that meant was, well, if I don't know something, then someone does.  
**0:15:28-0:15:41:**  And so I need to make that connection.  So all through my consulting career, that's been the case.  But then I didn't have really a digital framework in which to really make that, enable that  
**0:15:41-0:15:55:**  and or an IT platform.  And that's when the workplace came to me, because I've tried forums, you know, anybody,  I mean, I was an early adopter on the internet, I first got the internet, I think in 95, 96.  
**0:15:55-0:16:18:**  I've still got my first modem, I'll leave it on my desk at home as a sort of a reminder  when the internet shit and you go, oh God, it was 9.6 kilobits per second or whatever.  So as a reminder, but you know, back then it was forums, it was email lists, it was  
**0:16:18-0:16:30:**  really crap.  And it was really hard and slow to interact.  But then when you come forward to these fantastic new platforms, which allow you to tag people  
**0:16:30-0:16:39:**  and create all these groups and so on.  You know, there's Hivebright, and there's a few others that are out there as well, that  enable you to do that.  
**0:16:39-0:16:50:**  And they're fantastic.  They just enable, well, I'll put it to you this way.  When we were really, really singing, like doing lots of farm plans and lots of development  
**0:16:50-0:17:13:**  back in the late 90s, early noughties, we were doing 100 to 120, 150 jobs a year, projects  a year, with a big crew, super busy, just doing lots and lots of work, planting lots  of trees, doing lots of farm development, fencing, trees, dams, houses, roads, all that  
**0:17:13-0:17:28:**  stuff.  It was a really big lot of work.  And these days, I'm able to handle about three times that amount, thanks to the IT platform  
**0:17:28-0:17:40:**  that I've got.  Now I'm not managing project managing, but I think if I was, I'd still be able to do  probably double what I was back then because the IT platforms are just that much more sophisticated  
**0:17:40-0:17:51:**  and enabling.  But, you know, even then we don't even bother with that because people just, you just connect  one and two and you just let them go for it, as opposed to you having the heavy fingers  
**0:17:51-0:18:05:**  in every pie.  So IT is a really big part of the whole conversation.  We talk to farmers a lot about what IT they've got so that they can just do better, be more  
**0:18:05-0:18:15:**  efficient.  We've just had an interview with the president of the French Agroforestry Association, sorry,  the director of the French Agroforestry Association, Fabien Bélaguet, and he was explaining to  
**0:18:15-0:18:28:**  us how they're using tools.  It's a tool called Land Files, and it's basically connecting farmers between them so that instead  of a consultant coming on and telling them what to do and then going off, they're creating  
**0:18:28-0:18:45:**  work groups, communication groups, where the farmers are training each other.  And that's a pattern we also saw with Rowan Reid, who's also trying to operate in this  way, where it's kind of a bottom up empowerment and education rather than a top down consultant  
**0:18:45-0:18:54:**  comes in and tells you what to do.  Which is really hard if you don't have the IT platform.  So yeah, what was that called, the French mod?  
**0:18:54-0:19:05:**  So he's called Fabien Bélaguet.  I can send you, it's our last episode, it'll force you to check out our website.  Thank you.  
**0:19:05-0:19:13:**  And it's the French Agroforestry Association.  No, no, what was the software that they were using?  You said that?  
**0:19:13-0:19:16:**  It's Land Files.  Land Files, yeah.  I'll take that.  
**0:19:16-0:19:26:**  Yeah, yeah, so I'm not sure what's the software, but basically the project is called Land Files  and it's doing exactly this, but yeah, something to check out.  I'll check it out.  
**0:19:26-0:19:45:**  So you're not doing consultancies anymore?  Not very much, no.  It's so often unnecessary because of our REX program.  
**0:19:45-0:20:00:**  So the REX program was, back when I was teaching permaculture courses, which I stopped doing  in 2014, from about 2012, I started to get really frustrated with the whole permaculture  design course.  
**0:20:00-0:20:13:**  It's a great course and it's a really good entree into agroecology and better ways of  living.  Don't get me wrong, it's really powerful from that perspective.  
**0:20:13-0:20:27:**  But for me personally, it just started to be really limited.  And by that stage I developed the Regrarians platform and so I developed my own thing.  So it was sort of like I needed to move on into that.  
**0:20:27-0:20:45:**  So in that crossover time when I was still doing PDCs and I developed the Regrarians  platform, it became clear to me that, and also what we were doing in the PDCs I was  teaching, I was teaching doing a design a day.  
**0:20:45-0:21:02:**  So ordinarily in the classic PDC you do a design at the end.  So you build up, build up, build up, and then in the last day or five days or whatever you'll  produce a design in a group and then you'll present it and so on.  
**0:21:02-0:21:15:**  Because of my development of the Regrarians platform, I actually started to do that with  the PDC.  And I was using the Mollison order so if it was the first day it was introduction we didn't  
**0:21:15-0:21:33:**  do anything but then I'd do concepts and themes in design or methods of design.  I'd start to get people to build maps and then when we got to the water or trees and  interactions I started to treat them as layers and I encourage people to bring their own  
**0:21:33-0:21:42:**  plans along.  Because people come to these things ultimately at a self-interest, you know they've got their  own properties or they've got their own stuff they want to do.  
**0:21:42-0:21:55:**  So that's where it really started in that period.  And then when I started to run the REX programs face to face we started to do that as well  but it was more formalized around the Regrarians platform.  
**0:21:55-0:22:15:**  Then when we started to do the online version of that it was all about people bringing,  for us facilitating again a process by which they went through each layer and they gradually  built according to the priorities that they had in life and what their land was telling  
**0:22:15-0:22:25:**  them that they should prioritize how to build their own farm plan and just help them to  do that.  So teach them how to fish not do the fishing for them.  
**0:22:25-0:22:44:**  And that's what you're really doing in a consultancy a lot of the time.  The owners of the property who will be the managers of the property with their families  over time they're abdicating that responsibility over to somebody else and I've done a lot  
**0:22:44-0:22:56:**  of that I just don't believe it's the right way to do it.  It's much better and it's much more empowering it's much more participatory.  My time spent in aid work really proved that as well there's so much aid work that I've  
**0:22:56-0:23:10:**  done in the mid 2000s in Vietnam and then in Sri Lanka and other places where it was  all really super participatory and it was just so much better than the classic Western  way.  
**0:23:10-0:23:26:**  You know it's sort of like Westerners go in and do aid and they do it highly participatory  but when they go out and do it with themselves they don't do it which was always my comment  with the aid organizations which were funded by governments typically I'd say well how  
**0:23:26-0:23:46:**  can your AG department like the USDA they'd go over to wherever and they'd be highly participatory  and it's all fantastic engagement and then you go back to the US where I've worked a  lot and they've done any of that I say hang on people are people everywhere just because  
**0:23:46-0:24:03:**  they're in a developing situation doesn't mean that they need a different approach.  People at home need exactly the same approach and so that's the way we've run ever since  and that's been really powerful and I'm glad to hear that others are doing the same because  
**0:24:03-0:24:16:**  it just makes sense and it's so much easier and you can deal with people.  There's nothing like self-interest you know.  Yeah I know there's a pattern coming out here and it's interesting to see such let's say  
**0:24:16-0:24:33:**  experienced practitioners that are converging to a similar conclusion and it must say a  lot about the way that we need to be because you know when you're looking at creating regenerative  agricultural systems which involve a much higher complexity which one of the barriers  
**0:24:33-0:24:49:**  to entry is knowledge you know we need to have technical support and the thing is how  do we provide that technical support and it seems to be coming out that you know we can  provide it it's possible to provide it and you know correct me if I'm wrong it's possible  
**0:24:49-0:25:05:**  to provide it by these networks through these platforms with peer interaction facilitated  by a person for example like yourself or like other more experienced you know people that  are five ten years up the ladder facilitating and coordinating a bit and you know giving  
**0:25:05-0:25:16:**  tips.  I think that's a good point I've made that often myself is that it's really good to connect  people who are only a couple of years ahead of you because of the you know the pains fresher  
**0:25:16-0:25:31:**  the mistakes are fresher the experiences are fresher and you know whereas someone who's  30 years ahead yeah it's really valuable but well times have changed since they were going  through a development phase because that whole startup phase you know if you if you've got  
**0:25:31-0:25:47:**  to a point of maturity and success you're not in startup anymore unless you've had some  major disruption of which is called or major change in enterprise which has caused you  to go back into startup but you're way beyond that so it's really helpful to have a meshing  
**0:25:47-0:25:57:**  of all of those characters together.  Yeah sounds good.  Listen I thought that maybe our listeners are getting eager for us to talk about trees  
**0:25:57-0:26:18:**  so well I was talking to to Harry Green from Propagate Ventures and we were naturally a  gossiping about you and he told me that your favorite layer is the forestry layer it's  something that apparently you mentioned quite a bit and on your book I was also quite well  
**0:26:18-0:26:30:**  like there was when you looked at the for example the copying and standards section  on the in the forestry layer you talk about you know this being the backbone of the farm  you started mentioning a bit at the beginning but I thought that maybe we could start by  
**0:26:30-0:26:46:**  you giving us an introduction to that you know why a tree is so important for you on  the farm landscape and why is it a backbone?  Well if you go into a landscape some people would argue that there's different backbones  
**0:26:46-0:27:06:**  I mean you might if you're lying down well when the backbone might be the soil and you  know because everything starts there but my friend Graham Hand says who's a holistic manager  a holistic management consultant he mentions that you know the soil is nothing without  
**0:27:06-0:27:30:**  plants because plants are the interface between the energy source the sun and this mineral  body that will be earth and plants are this living connection between the two and so regardless  of whether it's a grassland or a woody grassland or a closed forest or something in between  
**0:27:30-0:27:49:**  plants have a really key role to play and when I look at our platform and I go to the  forestry layer well for us that's all living organisms so it's not just flora it's also  fauna it's also fungi it's bacteria and so on it's and we really think all right well  
**0:27:49-0:28:06:**  how do they all integrate together and so being a backbone well you know if you look  into a landscape there's a couple of things that you look at one is the shape of it so  if you've got this bare bones plane well then it's pretty boring it's just that but it is  
**0:28:06-0:28:19:**  what it's the it's the shape of the land that really tells you what it is it's the shape  of the land and and the sky and that's pretty well all you've got is there any water in  it or whatever but that's that's basically all it is if it's just and it's just grass  
**0:28:19-0:28:35:**  right so you then go and if you've got that kind of landscape and then you go and put  trees into it or shrubs into it some woody plants in a structured way well in the landscape  if you look at the you know you can have a flood plain landscape here and then right  
**0:28:35-0:28:53:**  next door you've got one that's all wide spaced agroforestry or savannah plantings or you  know whatever it is it starts to get a dimension to it which it didn't have before and then  that from a backbone perspective and our backbone is our structure that's what holds us up right  
**0:28:53-0:29:15:**  and when I look at that kind of archetypal approach of integrating trees in different  assemblies in different layouts in onto a property then it defines the shape of how  we get around it also becomes a home to organisms which weren't there before and then they become  
**0:29:15-0:29:34:**  vectors for all kinds of variables and activities which weren't occurring before because you  just had grassland or you had cropland or something else which makes it pretty well  boring really boring to look at and not as diverse as it could be when it comes to a  
**0:29:34-0:29:58:**  whole range of different options whether that's the biodiversity that it invites and hosts  or whether it's the different income options and production options that you also can leverage  from that and if that goes on to be you know if you bring agriculture right down to it  
**0:29:58-0:30:18:**  regardless of what your production output is you're in the biomass business and it's  the state of different biomass that you produce Andrew Stewart who's a very close friend of  Rowan Reed I don't know if you've interviewed Rowan but yeah so they're really close mates  
**0:30:18-0:30:40:**  and Andrew's an agro forester he's just been nominated for the Bob Hawke Landcare Award  which is fantastic anyway his farm the way he classifies his farming output is he produces  X amount of wool but then he produces X amount of pine logs X amount of honey X amount of  
**0:30:40-0:30:58:**  bush foods and so on so it's but you know what it all is it's all different types and  layers of biomass which enable his kids to make a living off the farm and his wife to  make a living off of what is a relatively small farm so and so his productivity because  
**0:30:58-0:31:23:**  of that backbone of extra flora really makes a big difference to the bottom line of that  and that is a backbone because if you you know we always need wood we always need honey  we always need this that and the other all of these products so when you start to build  
**0:31:23-0:31:44:**  those things in they're always there and they can be managed in perpetuity which is obviously  fantastic there's nothing annual about it anymore I mean when I talk about the energy  layer for example or so you know one of the policies as I call it is that that people  
**0:31:44-0:32:03:**  need to start behaving like they're perennials not annuals because we are perennials right  we're a perennial organism we might have 70 80 90 100 years on this planet but so do a  lot of trees right that's the lifespan of some trees much more than some shrubs and  
**0:32:03-0:32:20:**  so on they're so we are perennials so why do we have to behave like annuals all the  time it makes no sense and that's you know it's a really big learning I think for us  to as we understand our role in our in the ecology especially in better quality agro  
**0:32:20-0:32:39:**  ecologies will then of course we're going to be thinking about how can we be more perennial  and that perenniality also goes from generation to generation just like all perennial species  do whereas annuals behave like teenagers going to nightclubs you know they spend their pay  
**0:32:39-0:32:58:**  straight away and they hope they you know they hope for the luck that they get you know  they're awfully opportunistic so have trees been an inherent part to to all your designs  when we're looking at you know the designs that you put in practice I'd love to for us  
**0:32:58-0:33:13:**  it's always nice to kind of zoom into practical examples to enable our listeners to kind of  get a feel for for what it is on the ground and you know I'm curious because in some context  maybe it's it doesn't necessarily work I don't know but has it has it always been an inherent  
**0:33:13-0:33:31:**  part of of your designs I think so I think people well yeah when you use the key key  point or keyword there my designs right so my designs when they're my designs when I'm  the consultant and I'm in charge bloody earth there's trees there you know okay because  
**0:33:31-0:33:48:**  and people when I offer when I when I had that sort of service that I was offering and  still do occasionally you know if I've got a particularly interesting project which you  know needs that kind of attention then I'll have a crack at it but most people will come  
**0:33:48-0:34:10:**  to me like I've got I would say my reputation is as a water guy and a tree guy right and  as a livestock guy so really water and agroforestry you might say a livestock oriented agroforestry  is probably what I'm best known for and a keyline guy in terms of how I pull it all  
**0:34:10-0:34:31:**  together so so that's my context that's my world view on how things can be but your enterprise  might be something quite different and you know you may not wake up in the morning thinking  about trees you might be a a weak person you might be a sheep person you might be a emu  
**0:34:31-0:34:49:**  person I don't know whatever you are you're not me so and this is the really big thing  I suppose when you're when you're taking the more of a holistic approach with people especially  through the lens of holistic management is that you're allowing other people to exhibit  
**0:34:49-0:35:08:**  their own and to determine their own self-determined their own context what are they what do they  want their property to or their their project to look like or their landscape to look like  etc now within all of that because of the way we work with people we certainly go through  
**0:35:08-0:35:22:**  and say you know what kind of landscape do you want do you want to have here do you want  to have it so that because some people really just like the look they get very excited about  having wall to wall cereal crops and they just that's what and you know I've met a few  
**0:35:22-0:35:42:**  people like that I mean Harry Harry Weir in New Zealand who invented techno grazing  he's yeah he doesn't see the role of a tree on his property he sees true beauty in his  techno grazing boring bloody fence landscape and that's what he gets off on but I don't  
**0:35:42-0:36:01:**  know if most people like that people like the idea of having a bit more dimension to  it and if you if you sort of and this is where we go we say look here's the palette of all  of the things that you can do sort of like a checkerboard or toolbox as someone say of  
**0:36:01-0:36:23:**  all the bits that you can make a farm do or make an agroecology do it's up to you to make  that assembly but it's not up to me to tell you what to do of course but it's really I  mean I still say gee wouldn't it be nice if you had them like this or this you know and  
**0:36:23-0:36:42:**  just sort of and sometimes it's low lowest hanging fruit but then it like I remember  years ago working with some cereal producers in northern Victoria which is where I live  here and there's lots of floodplains about about 30 40 kilometres north of where I am  
**0:36:42-0:37:01:**  here which is where we are here is quite hilly but as you go towards the Murray River it's  it's dead flat and a lot of cereals produced and it's just wall to wall cereal and it's  either wall to wall cereal or wall to wall sheep there's not much going on and some I  
**0:37:01-0:37:22:**  remember working with people years ago and talking about introducing farm forestry into  agroforestry into their operations and a big amount of reluctance and we said well why  don't you because every farm's got some land which is of a lower capability well when I  
**0:37:22-0:37:41:**  say every just about every farm has land which has different capabilities it might be that  you've got a stream or a water course running through the property for example or there  might be a stony area or you know this there's different things that are on the on the place  
**0:37:41-0:37:55:**  and you go to people will you know do you actually get anything out of that have you  actually done the if you don't when you do the gross margins on that have you determined  how much you actually make on that and when you start scratching at that you go well maybe  
**0:37:55-0:38:12:**  that's a good spot where you could go and put a block of trees in and hey you might  even be able to get a grant to do it or you know you just so that was a way of doing that  you might go well gee we only need to put in five percent of your property in trees  
**0:38:12-0:38:28:**  and that's all you actually need to do and to be quite like if if you look at it from  a limiting factor you go gee shelter is a limiting factor to production here you've  got a bare place there's lots of you know suddenly on all whatever the winds that are  
**0:38:28-0:38:45:**  and they're actually a drag on production if you put in safe you know wide spaced alleys  or this that or the other or some shelter belts and they only have to be 200 meters  apart well you can barely see them but they're there and you know you'll have that forever  
**0:38:45-0:39:00:**  and that'll be a legacy that you bring so there's lots of different ways that you can  package that conversation but still it's up to it's up to the individual as to whether  they push the go button on that at all naturally but you know for me this conversation it's  
**0:39:00-0:39:15:**  kind of making me think a lot about a conversation that we had with other guests on the podcast  and some guests are saying you know plant trees for conservation and then whatever you  reap afterwards in terms of wood timber production etc as a bonus and some other players usually  
**0:39:15-0:39:30:**  in smaller landscape places they're saying you cannot plant trees because there's an  economic crop and plant the trees that provide an economic crop you can't make too many compromises  in terms of ecology or ecosystem services because it's not going to convince farmers  
**0:39:30-0:39:45:**  and we need to be you know we need to focus here and to make the best use of our small  landscape for example so there's a notion of scale possibly but what's your take on  that I mean do you plant trees for economy is it an ideal to say you're really planting  
**0:39:45-0:40:04:**  timber trees for example for some serious economic return what's your experience yeah  well we were involved in the in the 1990s I was the chairman of the box iron box iron  bark farm forestry network and we got the big there was a hundred and thirty million  
**0:40:04-0:40:25:**  dollar federal government program here farm forestry program and our group got 850 grand  of that it was the biggest single grant of any farm forestry network in Australia and  the the fundamental reason for that was a to fund I think it was three farm forestry  
**0:40:25-0:40:48:**  extension offices but the up at the first part of that platform of that program was  to develop a feasibility study to determine if farm forestry was viable in the sub 600  millimeter rainfall area of where we are because here and other places of the world 600 650  
**0:40:48-0:41:14:**  millimeters and even really 750 millimeters is seen as a sort of a bottom level of rainfall  that you need to have productive on farm or just plantation forestry at all you just don't  get the main annual increment on let's say more common commercial species yeah so so  
**0:41:14-0:41:31:**  we looked at it a bit differently because we we'd seen some plantations that were put  in in the 1980s by the what was the precursor to the land care movement here in Australia  and that all started in this part of the world in central Victoria and we'd gone out and  
**0:41:31-0:41:49:**  looked at some of these plantings and done the assessment on their main annual increment  and what we were going actually these aren't too bad and when you looked at then the value  of those species because these weren't in the category of main commercial species that  
**0:41:49-0:42:10:**  if you went down to the timber store these weren't species that were available there  because they just weren't in plantations salt pine and fast really fast growing quite light  eucalypts lower density eucalypts these are high these are some of the densest timbers  
**0:42:10-0:42:31:**  in the world that we're talking about you know 1300 to 1700 kilograms per or 1600 kilograms  to the cubic meter and their case years and stuff that was used over time in really heavy  construction you know stuff that's f32 I don't know what your strength ratings are over there  
**0:42:31-0:42:54:**  but really you know the strongest beam timbers that you can get in the world right okay over  span so super high engineering values yes slower grown but if put through silvicultural  practices that we knew about you could grow quite short factories using particular silvicultural  
**0:42:54-0:43:15:**  processes which would give you a yield from 25 to 35 which you know if I go and talk to  someone in northern Europe about a 35 year rotation they go well whoever has that it's  like 150 to 200 if you're lucky yeah but here because of pine and fast growing eucalypts  
**0:43:15-0:43:37:**  etc I mean you start talking 25 years and it's like you're a fossil so you know so we  started to do that and we put that through the length we got a professional forester  of really high experience to lead the feasibility study and they came out and said well if you  
**0:43:37-0:43:57:**  mill if you do the silviculture yourself on farm and still pay for that like still pay  yourself and you so you do the silviculture and then you do the and then you thin to production  because a lot of these species are really good for firewood so you know you'll generally  
**0:43:57-0:44:17:**  just get a break even on the thinning and then if you mill the trees at the end on farm  using on farm mills like lucas mills and whatnot which we you know we have some great mills  here in Australia then you'll get a return of between I think it was about 13 to 17 percent  
**0:44:17-0:44:34:**  per annum which is way higher than what you would get from most forms of ordinary agriculture  like you know producing sheep or producing crops or whatever else so that was really  compelling and so you know when people said oh you can't make any money about it all going  
**0:44:34-0:44:56:**  well actually here's a you know really conservative feasibility study and yes you have to do work  but even so there's a pretty compelling commercial case notwithstanding like at that stage the  carbon conversation was pretty new it was only starting to come on but we were saying  
**0:44:56-0:45:15:**  that so well you in future it's likely there'll be carbon credit arrangements which would  add to this layer of income and secondly then there's all of the ecosystem services that  would be provided whether they're shelter for your crops or whatever which we already  
**0:45:15-0:45:36:**  knew the pastoral and veterinary institute down past where Rowan Reid lives in Hamilton  they proved years ago that as they had in New Zealand as well that you know that integrating  trees into different landscapes pastoral or cropping landscapes had a definite yielding  
**0:45:36-0:45:55:**  increase so when you started to layer that together there was a pretty good uptake plus  a lot of programs and when you that classic thing of getting key farmers who people take  notice of because there's nothing like a farmer showing something off I've never been a fan  
**0:45:55-0:46:13:**  of demonstration farms which have been owned by the government or whatever because people  go or rich people because people go in and go well gee they they all you know rural people  generally will always say first off why they can't do something that's general around the  
**0:46:13-0:46:28:**  world I've seen so if it's a farmer who's just like them and they know is just like  them because they've been in the district for a while and if you can find that person  that they're a real key person in in getting adoption you can get a couple of those early  
**0:46:28-0:46:45:**  adopter types innovator types and they have a crack and they do it well and they demonstrate  and they get people to do field days and all of that sort of thing then you can start to  get some broader adoption which is you know part what this program was successful in doing  
**0:46:45-0:47:02:**  I mean it wasn't as successful as we'd like it to be but it was a dam site more successful  I mean you go you drive around the landscape 20 odd years later 25 years later and there's  a lot more trees that have been purposely planted from a farm for farm forestry purposes  
**0:47:02-0:47:12:**  than there were before which is great you know.  And have you seen that well that's a fascinating example and I'll ask you for the for the resources  to that.  
**0:47:12-0:47:25:**  Yeah sure it's all on the workplace so I can link that to you yeah and one of the original  farm forestry offices that we that that program employed is also a member of the workplace  so yeah.  
**0:47:25-0:47:41:**  Nice fantastic another reason to get on the workplace everybody full of amazing people  to talk to but have you seen that across the world as well in the sense you've traveled  a lot you've talked to people or like from all continents doing regenerative agriculture  
**0:47:41-0:47:58:**  and etc is that a is that something that you hear of do you think there's a compelling  case at the moment for trees economically I mean this is a huge generalization but.  No no and that's a good question recently I did a presentation for the organic vitico  
**0:47:58-0:48:18:**  of sorry the regenerative viticulture symposium which was hosted by Torres the familiar Torres  in Catalunya in Liberia and one of the things I did on that like they wanted me in that  presentation to sort of show what was the state of the regenerative agriculture whatever  
**0:48:18-0:48:40:**  that means around the world integrated agriculture you might call it and I agroforestry and I  kind of went through and I used the mind map sort of graphic process to sort of say alright  well here's Asia here's Oceania I mean Australia New Zealand here's North America South America  
**0:48:40-0:48:59:**  Central America you know I just went continent by continent and looked at from my observation  at least what are the key expressions of regenerative agriculture and it's not and the agroforestry  part is not as big in some places as it is in others and then even when you look if you  
**0:48:59-0:49:25:**  look at North America for example there's parts where it's kind of there but a lot of  especially in the more humid parts of the United States for example or Canada a lot  of their agroforestry practice is more silver pastural it's about managing existing timber  
**0:49:25-0:49:45:**  because their landscape is humid so it's already you know it doesn't you just have to turn  your back or you know take livestock off and then trees just come up it's just that's because  it's a humid savory would say a non-griddle landscape so it wants to be forest right so  
**0:49:45-0:50:05:**  by that token agroforestry as an expression is silver pasture right it's really managing  the stems that are already there or that are emerging as opposed to plantation stuff which  is perhaps what we do more of here in Australia and New Zealand. New Zealand is an interesting  
**0:50:05-0:50:25:**  one because it's very humid and forest wants to come but a lot of the kinds of trees like  there's an antipathy towards the kind of succession that occurs in New Zealand because it starts  off with a lot of shrubbery and it doesn't get to the tree layer it takes too long whereas  
**0:50:25-0:50:38:**  here in Australia it gets to the tree you know eucalypts come up really quickly in the  succession so you don't have to wait so long and the same in the United States you know  you don't there's lots of you know the first emergent vegetation is stuff that you can  
**0:50:38-0:50:58:**  use whereas in New Zealand it's shrubbery you have to wait for some time until the succession  so they'll accelerate that succession by planting all sorts of stuff so in terms of like I said  you know the way people express themselves in different places is all very different  
**0:50:58-0:51:17:**  there's people like it drives me crazy when I go to places like California which is so  similar to where I am here climate wise and so on and you talk about trees and people  just just think why aren't they tree planting crews everywhere I mean the plate the hills  
**0:51:17-0:51:35:**  are so bare and barren and exposed and it's just like what are you doing here and I keep  going back there and I just keep being disappointed by by no action on that front because the  landscapes are just yeah people are improving grasslands here and there but that was a savannah  
**0:51:35-0:51:53:**  landscape like it was either full-scale forest or it was savannah with those beautiful live  oak evergreen oaks that they have over there and it's like why wouldn't you want that back  I mean you drive around parts of California and you can see pockets of where it's these  
**0:51:53-0:52:11:**  it's like Iberia you know it's like them the montado or the daisa systems or parts of north  africa other places where you've got this gorgeous parkland of widely spaced oak trees  and grasslands and whatnot underneath and it's like why don't you want that why don't  
**0:52:11-0:52:39:**  you actually do that yeah it's like but they don't yeah it's like wow okay so it really  depends on where you are I think it's tied into well I've just finished reading Simon  Winchester's latest book called Land and he's a great writer his other book of his is a  
**0:52:39-0:53:02:**  real favorite of mine The Man Who Loved China he's written a lot of books he's a pretty  well-known author in in a sort of ethnobiological space and so on an anthropological space anyway  but he was talking about a fascination of mine which leads to this point is that depending  
**0:53:02-0:53:22:**  on your ethnicity but also the fact that you know the land rush in places like the United  States and to an extent Australia was based on the enclosure acts of Britain so the enclosure  acts obviously if you're familiar with that was started in the 1500s it was when they  
**0:53:22-0:53:42:**  basically got rid of the commons so there was no common land anymore and the lords and  so on started to carve the land up and that's where the corollary of that was that the original  enclosures were living fences so it was actually it created the archetypal hedgerow systems  
**0:53:42-0:54:04:**  which are so fantastic and so beneficial to the ecologies of England and other places  where it's established and but it was the property-owning part of that that and the  subdivision part of that that when people left particularly England and to an extent  
**0:54:04-0:54:25:**  Ireland and all other one they they went with them well what preceded them was English was  largely English law and English property rights and all of that and the English expectation  that improvement meant no trees yeah yeah right so in order for you to be able to get  
**0:54:25-0:54:44:**  you know this has been the problem here in Australia we've had mass extinction here and  mass deforestation because you couldn't get the title for your land the freehold title  for your land until you improved it and improvement meant you had to remove all the trees and  
**0:54:44-0:55:07:**  so when you've got that deeply embedded part of your culture that when that's deeply embedded  as part of the the culture will then when you don't see trees in the same way and I  think there's there's a you might say almost an epigenetic disdain for for trees in some  
**0:55:07-0:55:26:**  ways in in rural parts of the world because of that so it really depends on what your  ethnicity is and what country you landed in as to what legal frameworks were there that  enabled you to then carry on so if you go to parts of the world which are which are  
**0:55:26-0:55:47:**  Spanish or French well even the way they subdivided land is very different yes the French and  Spanish in particular they subdivided the land in long strips whereas the British did  it in squares and so you know that all that all impacts how you actually work with the  
**0:55:47-0:56:04:**  landscape when you're in Greece I mean Greece is basically made up of tiny little postage  stamps of land it's also you know it started off as something bigger but with every every  generation that's been cut cut cut cut cut cut cut cut and so a big land holder has got  
**0:56:04-0:56:19:**  a piece over there and a piece over there there's nothing that's actually continuous  very careful so that'll so that'll really impact how you then will develop your land  it's all very fascinating from that perspective and something that when I go to different  
**0:56:19-0:56:41:**  places I I pay attention to and I often will ask people what's your heritage what's your  cultural heritage and you can see that if someone's been on a piece of land for some  time especially people who see people who come to courses and at this stage generally  
**0:56:41-0:56:57:**  people who come to my courses are usually innovator early adopter types so they're self  learners they're self-activated learners as people so it's not like they haven't heard  of best practices because they've already been on the internet for a long time they've  
**0:56:57-0:57:11:**  done a lot of reading they've gone to a lot of workshops you know all that stuff but if  you go to their landscape and they haven't done anything about the tree layer then it  probably then you've got to scratch a little deeper as to why that's the case right you  
**0:57:11-0:57:29:**  know what I mean yeah yeah that's very interesting yeah you don't usually we don't usually hear  that aspect I mean at least I haven't often heard about you know how deep it can go and  I find that a really interesting approach and a sense of sensitivity that's necessary  
**0:57:29-0:57:50:**  to have clearly in order to understand the context and why somebody would want or not  want to plant trees but I wanted to show you yeah yeah one thing that I I'm a pretty coarse  sort of fellow but when I get down to it I say well when you I've had a few of those  
**0:57:50-0:58:08:**  experiences myself you go walking I remember I was in England years ago and it was November  so it was really really dark moonless night and was I was in deep forest and I thought  and you just start to get scared well I did and I don't scare easily but I did I was walking  
**0:58:08-0:58:25:**  by myself you know where's the boogeyman right now that's that's not natural for me when  I walk around at night I love it I'm just soaking it up listening to sounds and stuff  but I actually felt scared and I thought well okay thought about it later after I scurried  
**0:58:25-0:58:45:**  on home my iPhone wasn't bright enough you know but but then I thought about it too at  another vulnerable moment we've all that well hopefully nearly everyone's done this if you've  gone out and you're taking a you're doing a poo in the in out outside you know you're  
**0:58:45-0:59:04:**  out in the woods somewhere and you need to go and you squat down and you hear something  you hear a twig go and you're hyper alert and you know like we say go and what why is  it that we say go behind a tree I mean the tree might be this big what sort of protection  
**0:59:04-0:59:21:**  is going behind that tree going to give you in terms of privacy or whatever else what  is it and I think that goes way back I'd love to be going into places like Africa which  I haven't spent anywhere near enough time in and say to people who are still living  
**0:59:21-0:59:41:**  relatively close to nature when you go and take a crap in the woods because they've got  animals there that can take you out and we all come from there so what's the linkage  between that and why is it then would we then I as a you know humans all over the world  
**0:59:41-0:59:56:**  have removed predators from the landscape and that's that's one thing and the other  thing that we've done is we've created we've used fire to reduce woody vegetation we don't  want to we haven't typically removed all of it but we've used fire to remove a lot of  
**0:59:56-1:00:13:**  it and I think that's so we can see and feel safe and so that when you go out in the woods  and you have a and you go and have a crap that's you being at a very vulnerable position  because when you're halfway through it you're not moving very quickly right you know so  
**1:00:13-1:00:33:**  I just find that very I find those moments as a human giving us a really close link to  where we've come from and and and I think about that in terms of our linkage with the  landscape the the the floristic landscape the woody landscape that we're a part of and  
**1:00:33-1:00:50:**  how dense that is and how we feel at that moment I think yeah I think pretty strongly  about that there's probably a there's probably a thesis there I don't know if I could go  to a I never went to university but imagining going going up to your forestry professor  
**1:00:50-1:01:12:**  and say here's my thesis I'm shitting in the woods and I feel shit scared anyway someone's  probably already done it you know looking at this this kind of social this personal  context it links quite well to where I wanted to take this next because you know to give  
**1:01:12-1:01:29:**  a bit of context to the listeners you're you're a farm planner you've developed tools and  methodologies in order to enable people to make the right decisions for their farm and  you know in agroforestry we're often talking it you know it's not just about planting as  
**1:01:29-1:01:45:**  many trees as you can it's about planting the right tree at the right place and then  on the side there's and making sure it grows which is another agronomic question but let's  not go there at the moment and so therefore you know what are the design tools and methodologies  
**1:01:45-1:01:59:**  that we have as farmers that you could you could you know present to plant the right  tree at the right time sorry the right tree at the right place apologies well and this  is making the assumption that you want to do it in the first place and then the next  
**1:01:59-1:02:15:**  step from that is all right well so so you've come to the plate and you said okay I've got  I've got this piece of land I've either had it for a long time or I'm new to it either  or I've got I'm looking at a tree change right I'm looking at integrating trees into this  
**1:02:15-1:02:36:**  landscape well the first question I would ask is in terms of what to plant is ask myself  well what what grows in the region and that that that leads you on a bit of a field of  discovery where you might you know look around your area and start to see what people are  
**1:02:36-1:02:50:**  growing already on their different on their different places so you can get a sense of  what will you know you think oh gee I'd love to grow a lemon orchard or something like  that will do you know is it too frosty for lemons or or is it too frosty for some for  
**1:02:50-1:03:04:**  some timber species that you're looking at you know what are you're always looking at  what the capabilities are in that way that's the way I do it anyway like if I'm going to  a new area I start to look around immediately at the vegetation and I've got a pretty big  
**1:03:04-1:03:19:**  big botanical knowledge so that and that that to me is really fascinating as part of the  game of it all is sort of going okay ah right that'll grow so you start to do the old analog  thing where you go oh that will grow I know that those two or those five species have  
**1:03:19-1:03:40:**  similar requirements you know you know whether they can tolerate wet soils or drought or  whatever stony whatever it is frost hot blah blah so that's a good starting point the other  thing is what sort of production are you in for are you looking because you know when  
**1:03:40-1:03:55:**  I based on your last point the thing that I thought was missing in that point was how  much time do you have because you know that all these things to get them to where you  want them to get to means that you've got to spend time on it and how much time have  
**1:03:55-1:04:21:**  you got to spend in your week or year to allocate to that so that's an addition so so so therefore  are you looking at a particular regime of non non non forest of non timber products  or are you looking at timber products either or whatever so what are you trying to go for  
**1:04:21-1:04:39:**  there and then all right so you've got that broad regime and you might have 50 species  that are sort of mapped out there and then the next step from that I think is to go and  look at the kind of platform that we've developed where you'll go and so what I've just spoken  
**1:04:39-1:04:52:**  about there is where you're looking at the climate layer you're going okay what what  are my climate climatic characteristics and then I'm looking at the geography layer so  I'm looking at what's the landscape capability what are its characteristics how wet how dry  
**1:04:52-1:05:13:**  how wet you know all of that stuff how hot how cold all of that and how that interacts  with the landscape those two going through those two layers will then have you come down  to looking at all right well what shape is your land got where are those zones you know  
**1:05:13-1:05:31:**  do you have rocky zones do you have really fertile zones you might go on so all right  well I've got this really fertile zone and it's well drained and I really like the idea  of planting olives high production olives but I also want to use that for other crop  
**1:05:31-1:05:50:**  purposes or pastoral purposes so you might go wider spacing on the olives therefore or  whatever it is I've got a I've got a higher rise here which has still got relatively deep  soil and I've got really deep soil with a metre of drainage no problem and I really  
**1:05:50-1:06:05:**  like the idea of having avocados all that sort of thing but then you go well gee actually  I don't have enough time to do all of that I've only got x amount of time I don't want  to be doing a non a non timber product I'm looking more at doing a team of product because  
**1:06:05-1:06:22:**  timber products timber managing timber plantations takes less time than than managing non timber  plant planting so you go well I'm going to have a different integration I might just  focus on my flow lines in the property which you know you determined by looking at your  
**1:06:22-1:06:43:**  geography the layout of the place I might have some higher landscapes which are quite  bare and exposed ridges and so on they might be a good place to go and put some plantings  of you know full canopy closure block plantings and so on but then I've got alleys and stuff  
**1:06:43-1:06:58:**  I've got roads that I'm building through the place and you go gee it'd be nice to have  some trees that which define that and I might do those in a particular way so that I might  plant them a bit more densely so that I can take out every two or three over time manage  
**1:06:58-1:07:12:**  the coppice that comes off that or I might turn them into chestnuts or oaks or you know  you start to really open that up and that's where it's important to go and look at the  world of what people are doing and engaging you know like forums of the type that we've  
**1:07:12-1:07:30:**  got so you can sort of put the question say hey what do you think about this but also  go around and look at what other people are doing in your area and beyond so that you  can decide what's going to go where so a it's a capability thing but b it's also your so  
**1:07:30-1:07:49:**  when I look at capability that's your capability and the land's capability and then you're  also looking at how it all fits together what's the integration because agroforestry is about  integration ultimately so it's about how you're going to fit in agricultural systems which  
**1:07:49-1:08:08:**  are you know livestock and crops and so on in with horticultural systems potentially  which is often when you're talking about the non wood the non timber forest products and  then you've got the forest sorry the timber product stuff which you're putting in there  
**1:08:08-1:08:24:**  as well so how are they all going to fit together and how well can I do all of this with the  human resources time etc that I've got and that's how we sort of look at pulling it all  together there's so many so much layering that goes on here and that's why you know  
**1:08:24-1:08:44:**  the the platform that we use is really good for that because so much of you know when  you when you study the when you put put the landscape through say a key line geographic  analysis which divides the landscape into ridges into valleys and then to primary land  
**1:08:44-1:09:02:**  units once you do that then that together with the development of some of the water  resources and roads road networks and water harvesting networks once you put those things  together then the position of where trees will go will actually follow all of those  
**1:09:02-1:09:19:**  those lines so they'll follow the the lines of the geography they'll follow the lines  of the water and they'll follow the lines of access and then from that yeah and then  from that will follow the lines of where you put fencing and and so on so that's something  
**1:09:19-1:09:34:**  that I wanted us to maybe elaborate a bit more on this when you look at your at the  scale of permanence that you've adapted from humans if I understand correctly and you've  clearly there's an order of kind of of of priority if you could say it in that way I'm  
**1:09:34-1:09:50:**  sure you've got a better way to say it yeah I say priority yeah a priority so there's  of course climate defines everything geography very difficult to change and then you have  water and then access and then forestry so why is water and access above forestry when  
**1:09:50-1:10:07:**  you're looking at what does that imply for for the design methodology what does that  mean for a farmer well I've been battling with this one a bit lately because I've been  having a conversation with Alan Sowry and Jody Butterfield about this with the development  
**1:10:07-1:10:26:**  of their own or the continual development of holistic land planning, holistic management  land planning as a framework and a lot of holistic management people thanks to myself  and others like Ian Chapman have embedded the the yeoman's or the keyline scale of permanence  
**1:10:26-1:10:48:**  into their land planning and that's not how Sowry, Alan and Jody have and others have  sort of seen the best fit they don't see because and it all depends and this is a context thing  so if you're a graze if you're a grazier then where do trees fit in all of this well they  
**1:10:48-1:11:07:**  don't right if you're a hardcore grazier then trees don't you know we're going to grow adapted  at we're going to grow animals which are adapted to grasslands right and when you look at that  methodology of farm planning or land planning it really it actually puts fencing and puts  
**1:11:07-1:11:25:**  the fencing and water layers together right they use planning circles so they'll say all  right well water point water point water point water point there'll be a circumference around  that water point which is the maximum distance that animals should have to walk to and from  
**1:11:25-1:11:42:**  that water point otherwise their production will decrease and so you fence around that  right and you have these sort of cells which go from that now now that's okay yeah if that's  how you want to roll that's how you want to roll we look at things a bit more integratively  
**1:11:42-1:12:06:**  and so we'll say okay well there's a role for looking at all of these different layers  together so you'll start so obviously climate and geography you can't do much about so they  create what i call the rules of the game yeah and they are the constitutional or foundation  
**1:12:06-1:12:26:**  layers that's how i call them because they are just that then you get the water layer  well water is the great enabler um so and keyline as yeoman's described the keyline  plan was he described it as the control of water because when you control water whether  
**1:12:26-1:12:43:**  it's like for me it starts at the raindrop what are you doing as soon as that because  the moment that raindrop hits the land surface that's when all the action happens right and  it's either bad action or it's really great action right so and you're the manager so  
**1:12:43-1:13:03:**  what are you doing about that is it hitting a canopy of of leaves and then cascading through  that canopy of leaves and catalyzing a whole series of processes is it coming down and  landing on bare soil is it coming onto a grassland that's got a mat of litter on the soil surface  
**1:13:03-1:13:24:**  yeah there's all different options there but you as a manager can take make choices about  about how that interaction will occur right and so that's a really key parameter but then  you get down to well i need water to to for myself in storage i need it for livestock  
**1:13:24-1:13:44:**  so i needed it so i need some source of water so i need to acknowledge what the sources  of water are because if i don't then it's going to make it make agricultural production  um of a of of any profitable agricultural production um difficult to to continue so  
**1:13:44-1:14:01:**  it is that's why it's there so it may all be there and therefore you don't have to worry  about it but it's positioning um especially if you start reticulating water with pipes  and all of that sort of thing that positioning of where those pipes all get reticulated will  
**1:14:01-1:14:19:**  then create a line right yeah and that line the position of that will have to generally  be based on landscape shape right on the on the on the on the geography so as soon as  you put that in then you go okay well something else is probably going to follow that line  
**1:14:19-1:14:42:**  right it may well be access so access and water are i think probably the most closely  linked layers um and then you've got um and then you've got uh so the forestry layer then  well often will follow that although the forestry layer is a bit of a funny one because it will  
**1:14:42-1:15:04:**  also have its own linkage to landscape so often for example you'll look at um putting  it well the first places that that forestry will often be integrated will be around the  edges to define the place and that's the first place to put shelter for example well this  
**1:15:04-1:15:26:**  is the way i look at it anyway because you'll have this artificial boundary called the property  boundary um depending on the scale of the property of course um which is an obvious  place to mark with trees and it protects and it encloses there's that word enclosure but  
**1:15:26-1:15:40:**  it's an obvious place to put something the other obvious place to put something are on  flow lines so where you've got water flow permanent water flow or or ephemeral flow  through your land often that's a limiting factor because you get seasonal inundation  
**1:15:40-1:15:59:**  and so on and so that's a limit that's a land capability limit and so to get land protection  and to make it take advantage of that of those seasonal or perennial flows it's a really  good place to and these are what i call biological corridors often so you can link the hills  
**1:15:59-1:16:18:**  with with the sea because the sea and the hills are linked by drainage lines so they're  only natural that if you and and if they have poorer capability it seems natural to me that  you would go and put trees into that system right as a and then they just happen to divide  
**1:16:18-1:16:34:**  the landscape up because you've got ridge valley ridge valley ridge valley so you've  got that that means you can you know you you can start to divide the landscape up by virtue  of these geographic lines and it makes it easy for you then to make decisions about  
**1:16:34-1:16:50:**  where things go it's just a matter of what those species complexes are going to be there  and then you got and then you got the rest of the landscape yeah right the ridges and  that's where you you know you might look at a whole right you know whether that's going  
**1:16:50-1:17:06:**  to be production stuff because you're a tree person or it's going to be stuff which is  more supporting what you do which is probably the more classic agroforestry approach where  you you know you're spacing trees out widely as a shelter or as an amenity planting and  
**1:17:06-1:17:31:**  so on interesting it's it's like adapting design in to the to the to what the landscape  is is calling out sure it's it's nearly biomimicry in a way with an adaptation to our to satisfy  our needs and our economy yeah and it's interesting when when we look at the way aboriginal people  
**1:17:31-1:17:52:**  in this country managed their landscapes through the use of fire in particular that's where  they left trees are not that different to where to how I just described the layout so  interesting yeah it is well because I think they understood that and still do understand  
**1:17:52-1:18:13:**  that flow lines for example are the conduits they're the connect they're the natural connections  they're the that's where that's all the nutrients flows in water so of course they're nutrient  corridors so why wouldn't you have the full floristic expression which then allows the  
**1:18:13-1:18:32:**  full biodiversity expression to actually be in those same lines right and then connect  the forest with the or connect the the hills with the ocean I had a bit of a of a challenge  understanding why the economy layer is at the bottom and to explain myself it's interesting  
**1:18:32-1:18:50:**  that you know when we look at setting up a farm business which we've done at Massey Farm  the economy is is what at the end of the day just as much as the soil I mean and they're  connected in in in very complex ways of course but the economy is also what defines our success  
**1:18:50-1:19:07:**  on that landscape or not in terms of a family in terms of a family farm and so the economy  layer has a lot in my opinion it has a lot of weight there and I was wondering why you  decided to put in number 10 and why it's not a consideration that's number nine apologies  
**1:19:07-1:19:27:**  yeah yeah yeah number 10 is energy do my homework good enough yeah that's okay well look I think  this is the problem I may may have not done enough explanation on this I mean our our  platform yes while it was adapted from yeoman's eight scale of eight layer or eight factor  
**1:19:27-1:19:44:**  scale of permanence is not a scale of permanence it's got elements to that and you can certainly  look at it that way but I look at more of his checklist and I think that with every  within every layer that you go you will consider every other layer so just because I've happened  
**1:19:44-1:20:04:**  to pay homage to PA yeomans by retaining his first eight as it were because there's a natural  logic to that I think in terms of the if you apply the scale of permanence and the way  that you will generally plan a farm out as I just said but so there's that part there's  
**1:20:04-1:20:21:**  the respect and homage but then there's also with my addition of economy and energy layers  when you look at when you go and look at the whole platform again you look at it as being  a checklist and you go okay well if I'm looking at the forestry layer I'm thinking about climate  
**1:20:21-1:20:32:**  I'm thinking about geography I'm thinking about water I'm thinking about access I'm  thinking about economy I'm thinking about energy I'm thinking about so you know so it  doesn't matter if I'm putting in a fence I'm thinking about economy I'm thinking about  
**1:20:32-1:20:58:**  it yeah you know so it doesn't matter it's not linear it's all integrated so it's just  more or less trying to have it so that we at least have a platform that considers as  much as we can because I in my in my search for platforms be it permaculture holistic  
**1:20:58-1:21:15:**  management whole farm planning on it goes in all of these different methodologies that  I've seen out there they don't they don't catch it all holistic management doesn't do  anything doesn't say anything in its land planning about how you integrate trees into  
**1:21:15-1:21:35:**  the landscape it's got nothing about that yeoman scale of permanence had nothing to  do about the economy or energy it had nothing to do with with legal issues or your own personal  context and so on permaculture it's it's you know it is what it is it had missing gaps  
**1:21:35-1:22:00:**  as far as I could tell as well particularly when it came I mean it's very community based  as opposed to individually centered and so on and a lot of its economic well the kind  of economic principles that it would support I suppose are often more to the left of center  
**1:22:00-1:22:19:**  than to the right of center so they're often more community based and then being individual  enterprise based and so on so so people will feel like and that's perfectly fine if that's  your context and then so what I've tried to do on what and that's what we tried to do  
**1:22:19-1:22:45:**  as a as a community is try to have it so that people have a broader range of options as  opposed to just following one church as it were being poly polytheistic not monotheistic  okay and I'm curious to know how holistic management because it's something that you  
**1:22:45-1:23:02:**  work a lot with as well from what I understood how does that fit into again a farmer is making  trying to make decisions as to what trees to plant what tree to plant at what place  how does holistic management help him to achieve that goal well the first thing that holistic  
**1:23:02-1:23:23:**  management invites you to do is develop your own individual context so what you as an individual  so like I said that's a very big distinction I would say from permaculture per se where  they work really well together and and permaculture holistic management and key line are really  
**1:23:23-1:23:40:**  good buddies as planning frameworks I think but I think what people have got to do is  sort of break down their natural tendency to follow one religion as opposed to multi  multiple religions and that's just the human tendency because if you've been raised in  
**1:23:40-1:23:57:**  any of the abriamic faiths for example and there's only one God right and there's only  one way to worship it or he or she or whatever it is so you know again there's a psychological  social psychological underpinning to the way that we decide about how we're going to follow  
**1:23:57-1:24:17:**  things and so we thought you know we're a biodynamic farmer you know what I mean yeah  so when we look at holistic management the first thing that I think has us consider is  what is our context what's the context of us you know what what are our core motivations  
**1:24:17-1:24:37:**  but then how they link in to the people that are around us you know usually our loved ones  our family and so on and what's and ask them the same question what's their context that  then has you if you have the right inquiry yeah I should go back a moment holistic management's  
**1:24:37-1:24:58:**  greatest coverage with people is the grazing community it's not with the forestry community  or the business community or anything like that so and if you look at the permaculture  community a lot of people in permaculture just happen to be more into horticulture because  
**1:24:58-1:25:19:**  of the perennial nature the perennial woody nature of it and where it was born and all  of the rest of it so so most people are into that so therefore for a lot of them the consideration  is straight away for the grazing plan so like there's no there's no holistic management  
**1:25:19-1:25:40:**  forestry plan at this stage even the conversations we've been having about the the land planning  in holistic management is being that it's being changed from holistic land planning  to holistic land planning for livestock so there's nothing that I can see on the horizon  
**1:25:40-1:25:56:**  which is saying holistic land planning for agroforestry but if that's your thing but  if that's your thing then the holistic management framework in terms of its decision making  framework which is sort of asking a series of questions economic and otherwise and its  
**1:25:56-1:26:18:**  financial planning frameworks and so on can all help you can all aid you to make better  decisions about about what you will plant where and why it's probably more the why questions  and the what questions and try and help you make sure that you're asking the right questions  
**1:26:18-1:26:32:**  about your economy on all of this which you know largely the permaculture space doesn't  look at I mean there's no there's nothing in the permaculture principles which talks  about your personal economy yeah right so yeah you can use those principles but there's  
**1:26:32-1:26:52:**  no permaculture financial planning framework for example right so that's where I think  again you know it's it's really useful to use permaculture principles key line the key  line plan and holistic management together it's it's you know you're picking you know  
**1:26:52-1:27:08:**  you pick your best best options to do the best things and bring that together as an  amalgam which in it cases it's like agroforestry itself I mean you're trying to assemble a  hole here yeah and there'll be a bit of this that you use and a bit of that and yeah so  
**1:27:08-1:27:26:**  holistic management I think is the best framework that I've come come across as far as answering  those and especially those initial guiding questions yeah about what are your motivations  and all of the rest and then then then you go from there and start to pick and choose  
**1:27:26-1:27:42:**  your methodologies which which will advance you further you know when you when you're  talking now about this integration agroforestry but also what what you clearly what's clearly  observable in the scale of permanence all these different elements need to work together  
**1:27:42-1:27:57:**  and the forestry and then there's you and as you call it the climate of the mind and  there's there's a lot of social context it needs to come together to create a business  that is when looking at a farm that is economically viable and ecologically regenerative at this  
**1:27:57-1:28:13:**  point we can't even say sustainable but doesn't that somehow seem like an insurmountable  task it's it requires so much complexity have you seen it in practice like happened where  there's a farm is just boom and just created this and here we are yeah they're really they're  
**1:28:13-1:28:37:**  really rare and what they require is an enormous amount of discipline there's usually yeah  this this is one of the things that I suppose I've I've been in my sort of post permaculture  period because permaculture you know really is funded is founded on idealism a lot of  
**1:28:37-1:28:56:**  this stuff is and then even yeoman's stuff was funded on founded on some form of idealism  then yeoman's was a wealthy relatively he was a self-made guy who'd made a lot of money  during the war and so on and bought a few farms and he expressed himself as a lot of  
**1:28:56-1:29:13:**  people have done over the years over thousands of years that the best way to express their  their wealth was to go and buy an estate and to develop those estates and and have managers  on there and bring their friends out and you know all that sort of stuff so he's he's just  
**1:29:13-1:29:30:**  as so often has happened in in the broader regenerative agriculture movement if you look  at a lot of the leaders of it the leading figures they're wealthy men so and often self-made  men and really driven men and that's where that's how they've been able to do that they've  
**1:29:30-1:29:49:**  been able to self subsidize their own endeavors and to prove a point and you know so they're  they're really they're you know they're individually highly driven people right and then you get  to the rest of us and I think this is where you're getting to and that's what I try and  
**1:29:49-1:30:05:**  remind people to say look you know I work really closely with Joel Salatin for example  he's a great friend and people look at what he's doing and what his family's doing and  they've done an amazing job but what they've achieved is as a is based on a whole range  
**1:30:05-1:30:28:**  of different reasons I mean their religiosity their ethnic background how the their work  ethic which is all closely intertwined and and their outlook on life you know they don't  they don't play sport for example you know then so you look at people here in Australia  
**1:30:28-1:30:45:**  for example or elsewhere you know football and cricket and different games are really  important in community life but they all take or golf all take up time or being social animals  right going catching up fishing recreation and stuff you look at the Salitans they don't  
**1:30:45-1:31:03:**  do much of that if they do it they do a lot of it on their own farm they hunt on their  farm they you know only relatively recently have afforded themselves the license to go  and take vacations so you know that those choices are reflected in the way that that  
**1:31:03-1:31:18:**  their places happen to have been developed but other people like me I like to go to the  football on the weekend when I or there's other people who are very involved in local  community life and so on so that's going to take away time that you've got from being  
**1:31:18-1:31:37:**  a land manager yeah so there's time well that's right which exactly so that's going to knock  off the amount of complexity and variability that you can then deal with so that's that's  a really big part of what we try and capture early is just how much this why I made the  
**1:31:37-1:31:54:**  point before how much time do you have yeah because if you don't have the time then don't  do it or downgrade your like if you you know if you're looking again at the forestry integration  into your into your system then just plant trees and shrubs and stuff and just do it  
**1:31:54-1:32:12:**  for biodiversity purposes and maybe a bit of firewood if you're lucky a saw log or two  because you won't don't bother trying to get the really high you know you get into Rowan  Reads and you look at what he's doing or an Andrew Stewart's or any of these sort of you  
**1:32:12-1:32:29:**  know really high high operating farms they don't get that just because of luck they get  it because a lot of bloody hard work and really strategic dedication has gone but that that's  at the cost of other well not cost but they haven't been able to do a lot of other things  
**1:32:29-1:32:45:**  in their life that others have chosen to do so that's that's where you're at and that's  where holistic management seems this is something that we've suffered from at Massey Farm and  we did not do enough planning at the beginning this is why we're drilling into the whole  
**1:32:45-1:33:02:**  planning side right now with you because you are a planning a farm planning educator and  you have a lot of experience in this so I can't stress enough for our experience how  how much we have suffered from this lack of planning and and how much we would have you  
**1:33:02-1:33:15:**  know clarifying our context our personal needs you know it's also very personal experience  like what do I want to do with my life what do I want to dedicate time to how much time  to want to give to this and that as you've just explained really well and and then when  
**1:33:15-1:33:33:**  you get engaged with a piece of land and with the project you you can't get out you're all  in kind of thing so it's it took me a while because I'm a natural innovator and that's  where it comes down to you to acknowledgement of your own personality type of whatnot which  
**1:33:33-1:33:53:**  is something I have developed over time to acknowledge but I that's what I accelerate  now when I'm dealing with people in our programs is not only understand what you want but understand  who you are so do you have a propensity to want to innovate all of the time all right  
**1:33:53-1:34:12:**  well if you have that propensity then realize what that what the implications of that are  because you know being high as I call it high on innovation all the time can cripple you  because you've got to actually have the discipline to not be you know yes be innovative but do  
**1:34:12-1:34:29:**  it do it the right amount like companies only you know the best companies in the world only  innovate to will only spend about five to ten percent of their of their income on innovation  and there's you know because if they go any higher than that then then it cripples them  
**1:34:29-1:34:51:**  it's just not economic so there's reasons for that right so I remember years ago we're  in the United States and a couple came up to us and I know about that about the same  age as us and the woman came up and said I'm so tired my my hut they were permaculturists  
**1:34:51-1:35:15:**  and you know chasing this what I would call on my asthma of outcomes you know everything  you've got to have every animal every tree you know this sort of utopian ideal and it's  trying to keep up with that complexity meant though over the top on innovation all the  
**1:35:15-1:35:33:**  time and the woman's they've been doing it for 20 years and all that said I'm really  tired I've been you know I just can't keep up like she'd realized earlier than her husband  had and she was the yeah I just caught up with her and I thought yeah yeah and I've  
**1:35:33-1:35:48:**  you know I've been the same I've had to deal with that myself but luckily I've pretty well  put that genie in the bottle and it's hard to because you get excited I mean the natural  excitement is about how you'd like a place to look and be expressed and it's an expression  
**1:35:48-1:36:10:**  of yourself and so on and yeah if you don't have the capability will then you don't so  be be at home with that if the best you can do is have a really great shelter belt and  it's you know it doesn't being pruned as well as you like and stuff I mean it's often the  
**1:36:10-1:36:25:**  thing you know people's ego comes in again here where you have people over and you start  making excuses for why things aren't as they are as they could be especially when you're  in this broader space when you know everyone's so high on how everything can be so bloody  
**1:36:25-1:36:42:**  fantastic I mean they look interesting but because they you know you look at all the  gods in this space whether it's some of the newer gods like Richard Perkins or whether  you look at some of the older gods like a Joe Salatin or otherwise or a Rowan Reed or  
**1:36:42-1:36:59:**  any number of people in this space and you go there and you go oh my god you know this  everything's so bloody fantastic and then there's me and I just can't I can't just I'm  just not that I'm just not that good well maybe it's not that you're not that good it's  
**1:36:59-1:37:13:**  maybe just making other choices in your life to do other things maybe you're a better father  maybe maybe you're a better you know you've got more time for other things maybe you spent  you see your mum more often you know you spend more time with your kids than some of these  
**1:37:13-1:37:31:**  folks do maybe they pull it off who knows you know but you know we're all into and that's  that's where I get back to again you know don't don't put yourself under so much pressure  because if you do you'll you may well be very disappointed in yourself which is not a good  
**1:37:31-1:37:51:**  feeling for sure that's very interesting I think that's a really nice way to to finish  the interview some important considerations have come out here of you know what decisions  to make for your farm how to what kind of farmer to be what kind of agroforestry to  
**1:37:51-1:38:10:**  be and I think that's these are the this is the starting point I think for a farmer that's  transitioning or for a farmer that's it's getting started from scratch and buying piece  of land it's it's a starting point well I think I think even a beaver would say don't  
**1:38:10-1:38:35:**  bite off more than you can chew you know I actually really want to do the recs training  and maybe next one starts on August the second August the second okay and how do how do we  find out more about it if we want to join well you go to regrarian.org and if you look  
**1:38:35-1:39:00:**  on our web page there's a really big sign that says recs fantastic obviously it'll make  it really easy for you that's the best okay yeah perfect yeah it starts on the it starts  on the second of August in the in your time zone so and then our time zone it's on the  
**1:39:00-1:39:18:**  third of August to the same day okay and it runs for 13 weeks continuous weeks there's  a webinar on the Tuesday or Monday depending on where you are and then another one so that's  like the layer where we introduced that that week's layer and then we and then on the on  
**1:39:18-1:39:36:**  the latter part of the week we have another one which is a Q&A where we check in and check  in on the task work that you've submitted and all of that sort of thing or any other  questions it's pretty open what's the pricing and that's also it's 95 US a month for 12  
**1:39:36-1:39:54:**  months because it's you get two 13-week programs in that period okay because it's again it's  it's it's it's us responding to what people's capabilities are because we've done enough  courses to know that even 13 weeks you know spending six hours a week which is the sort  
**1:39:54-1:40:10:**  of ultimate amount at least that you should be spending people just can't do that so we  say I'll do the first recs and you might just focus on getting your context sorted and getting  your maps sorted and you know focus on some of the key layers maybe where your pipes are  
**1:40:10-1:40:23:**  or this that or the other depending on what your interests are and then do the next one  later in the year and then you might say oh this is where I'm going to look at my because  I've spent the time looking at my land because we've taught you how to look at your land  
**1:40:23-1:40:39:**  differently and so on that's where you might interesting I'll be better equipped to start  making decisions about where trees will go or you know this that or different soil treatments  and so on even trick even how you're gonna set things up for yourself financially and  
**1:40:39-1:40:54:**  otherwise so yeah it's a longitudinal process and this is where I was saying earlier about  you're a perennial and you know our programs are perennial that's why we've got a 12 month  program okay and once you've done that 12 month program then you're you remain a member  
**1:40:54-1:41:13:**  for life of our of our workplace and the planner level so you can witness every recs that we  ever do in the future okay if you want to participate in it fully and have us involved  in our high level of engagement will then you have to pay but yeah we want we want people  
**1:41:13-1:41:33:**  who are who have become our alumni to then come and support others who come before them  because it's kind of like a barn raising everyone should be there to help each other fantastic  very interesting so thank you so much for giving me giving us the time to discuss these  
**1:41:33-1:41:51:**  important topics I really appreciate you coming on the opportunity no worries I appreciate  it all cool and old gun I'll better go and have a look at your back yeah I've got a lot  of podcasts I live in listen to this yeah maybe maybe you find a few of us interesting  
**1:41:51-1:42:12:**  I don't know hopefully objective is to make this interesting for practitioners and well  I spend a lot of my quiet time is raining and usually driving which I don't do as much  as I used to is good podcast or when I'm in the kitchen at the restaurant here so I'm  
**1:42:12-1:42:31:**  about to go back go back to doing so maybe I'll listen to some of yours in the next while  I'm baking thank you so much for making it this far it was another long one and we hope  you enjoyed it as much as we did please consider supporting us on our website you can go on  
**1:42:31-1:42:47:**  the support us page and donate very easily with a small app called gumroad that you open  up on your browser so please consider this we're doing this on the side of our jobs and  all of your support will help us to keep going and keep producing or try to produce some  
**1:42:47-1:42:57:**  high quality content so thank you so much and see you for the next episode  