### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2021-09-19)
**0:00:00-0:00:16:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  
**0:00:32-0:00:33:**  these challenges.  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Hello and welcome again to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  I'm your host Dimitri and today we had a deep dive with a farmer.  
**0:00:54-0:01:00:**  His name is Tom Wall and he has Red Fern Farm in Iowa, USA.  We wanted to interview Tom because of his very special farm where he has been integrating  a variety of crops such as chestnuts, pau paus and different other nuts together in  a commercial way in a farm where he is letting his customers pick the fruit themselves in  something that we call U-pick and therefore getting the full economic benefit of direct  
**0:01:27-0:01:28:**  selling.  So we delve into the technical aspects of agroforestry and how he plants his trees,  how he integrates them, some of his experience in the past 25 years and the tree interactions,  etc.  And we also delve into the more business and commercial side because it's a really interesting  
**0:01:47-0:01:54:**  model and as he says that enables him his main cost to be mowing his land which is something  that a lot of farmers aspire, a level of input costs that a lot of farmers aspire to.  So it was a really interesting interview.  Again his experience really comes out and you can see somebody that's been working in  his context for 25 plus years.  
**0:02:11-0:02:17:**  So it's something we always learn a lot from and we hope that you will as much as we did.  Hi Tom and welcome on the podcast.  Thank you.  I thought we could maybe get started by you know with a quick introduction of your farm,  what you produce, where you're located, on what scale you work.  
**0:02:35-0:02:41:**  Okay the number of things we produce is make a list so long that we really don't have time  to cover it all, somewhere around 75 species of fruit, nut and berry plants.  But our main ones, the ones that are commercial are chestnut, heartnut, persimmon, pawpaw,  Asian pear and hopefully soon to be honey berry.  The whole farm is 86 acres but a large majority of that is steep, rugged, wild forest.  
**0:03:17-0:03:28:**  And there's only about 12 or 13 acres that are being managed for tree crops right now.  And the rest is suited to firewood and hunting and hiking and bird watching but not for crop  production or even livestock really.  Okay maybe you could tell us a bit as well about where you're located, what's your climate  like, so we can understand a bit of the context you're in, also what's your soil like.  
**0:03:55-0:04:03:**  Okay we're located in southeast Iowa in the central United States.  Our USDA climate zone is 5B which means in average winter the temperature gets down to  around minus 15 Fahrenheit and I can't recall what that is in Celsius.  But we have seen it get as cold as minus 37 Fahrenheit which is almost equal to minus  40 Celsius.  
**0:04:35-0:04:40:**  So it can get very cold here, can also get very hot.  I've seen many days over 105 degrees Fahrenheit.  Our soils are some of the very best in the world for growing temperate hardwood trees.  Deep, fertile, moist but well-drained soils with a good balance of sand, silt and clay  particles.  
**0:05:12-0:05:17:**  Very high site index for upland oaks.  In fact white oak trees grow fast here whereas everywhere else in the world they're a slow  growing tree.  We are not certified organic and we do use herbicide when we're getting trees first established  but once the trees are established we don't use any chemicals at all.  
**0:05:44-0:05:53:**  I like to grow crops that don't require any kind of care whatsoever once they're established.  Now that said we do grow things that are hard to grow that way including apples.  I like apples and I grow them not commercially but I grow them just because I like them and  those are hard to grow without chemicals.  But everything else including all of our commercial crops, the chestnut, heartnut, persimmon,  
**0:06:17-0:06:29:**  pawpaw, Asian pears and honey berries require virtually no care whatsoever in order to grow  them at least at our own.  Not even some pruning for example?  No the chestnut trees require pruning up high enough so that we can get under the trees  with a mower but we actually don't need to do any pruning to do that.  
**0:06:47-0:06:55:**  We grow them in 5 foot tall tree shelters or grow tubes and that prevents side branches  from growing up to 5 feet and that's high enough that we don't need to do any pruning  afterwards.  There are a few trees like pawpaws and persimmons that we will do a little bit of pruning just  to keep the trees from getting too tall.  
**0:07:13-0:07:16:**  We'll cut the tops out of the trees.  With the pawpaws I might have to do that once or twice during the tree's lifetime just to  keep the fruit within reach of the ground because I don't like spraying and I don't  like climbing ladders.  So I want to be able to just go out and harvest when the time comes and not have to worry  
**0:07:36-0:07:40:**  about the trees otherwise.  So that seems like quite an ideal to reach in terms of having trees that need little  care and just harvesting and selling.  So I think in this interview we'll delve a bit into that at some point to understand  how you make that work in practice and I know you've got a really interesting commercial  
**0:07:59-0:08:00:**  strategy as well, right?  You do U-pick.  Correct.  So that eliminates almost all the work for me because the customers do the harvesting.  I do have to mow the vegetation short under nut trees before harvest but that's really  
**0:08:18-0:08:24:**  the only thing that I absolutely have to do in order to make this work besides manage  the customers.  Hmm, okay.  Do you choose special varieties of your different commercial crops in order to not have to spray  them or is your area so adapted that you can kind of plant whichever variety you want and  
**0:08:44-0:08:48:**  you can bet that they won't need too much work?  It varies from one species to another.  In the case of the chestnuts, the issue is that there are two serious insect pests of  chestnuts in North America and we don't have any of them.  In the entire state of Iowa has no chestnut weevils or chestnut gall wasps so we don't  
**0:09:14-0:09:18:**  need to do anything about them.  In the case of some of the fruit trees like Asian pear and European pear for example,  we do have to select varieties that are highly resistant to fire blight because we have enough  fire blight in the area that it would make those impossible to grow or even survive for  fire blight susceptible varieties.  
**0:09:49-0:09:56:**  In the case of persimmon and pawpaw, there just aren't any serious disease or pest problems  for those plants so they can just make it on their own for decades or centuries with  no help from me or anyone else.  Very interesting.  I actually wanted to do a little parenthesis here to mention a talk that I listened to  
**0:10:19-0:10:24:**  one of your talks on YouTube from the Practical Farmers of Iowa.  I don't know if you know which one I'm talking about and it's a fantastic one hour and a  bit talk on the practicalities of chestnut production and chestnut establishment.  I'm going to put the link in our notes for our listeners but it was an absolutely fantastic  and very technical conversation and that inspired me quite a lot to prepare this interview.  
**0:10:47-0:10:50:**  Again I advise our listeners to check it out but one of the things that I was curious about  is you talk about zero input but how do you manage fertility for example?  How do you fertilize the trees?  Well up until just recently I've never done any fertilization.  Our soil is already naturally so fertile that as far as the chestnuts go the soil may be  
**0:11:13-0:11:20:**  actually too fertile for chestnuts because in some years the crop load gets so heavy  that branches and sometimes even the whole top out of trees will break from the load.  About two years ago we added sheep to the mix so we're actually grazing sheep under  the chestnuts.  So the only fertilization they've ever gotten is from the grazing animals rotating through  
**0:11:44-0:11:47:**  the trees.  And for the other crops as well they don't need any fertilization you just plant them  and off they go?  That's correct.  Like I said our soil is very deep and fertile, moist and well drained.  
**0:12:05-0:12:14:**  I have not added any fertilizer except for just having animals underneath the trees.  So you must also be practicing a type of agriculture that doesn't degrade your land.  If you've been doing this for so many years...  Yes, well we try and mimic what would be happening in a savanna type biome with scattered trees  and animals grazing under them.  
**0:12:40-0:12:46:**  So the only thing I'm controlling is what species are present.  So yes it's regenerative, the ground is covered all the time year round with perennial plants.  Perennial plants are in the roots or in the soil year round feeding the soil microbes.  It takes care of itself.  That's very interesting.  
**0:13:11-0:13:17:**  And so maybe it's the right time to go a bit more into that aspect because we often hear  of your farm that's talked about an agroforestry farm.  I wanted to know a bit about what's your take on agroforestry.  For you what is agroforestry and how are you practicing it on the Redfern farm?  Well, academics and foresters have a long and detailed complicated definition of agroforestry  
**0:13:44-0:13:48:**  that usually runs into multiple paragraphs.  My definition of agroforestry is very simple.  It's simply the deliberate management of woody plants for agricultural purposes.  And by that definition it actually puts traditional forestry underneath the umbrella of agroforestry.  And in my opinion the ultimate agroforestry practice is growing food for humans and animals  
**0:14:21-0:14:34:**  on trees using woody plants to produce all kinds of agricultural products including food  for humans, feed for animals, fiber, building materials, fuel, medicine and all that all  together on the same acres at the same time.  On your farm, if I've understood correctly, you've mixed your species, so you're producing  a mixture of perennial crops, sometimes integrating animals underneath and you've planted them  
**0:15:03-0:15:05:**  in a mixed way, right?  You've just mixed them all together, is that correct?  Yes, like I said we're kind of mimicking a savannah biome which means there are large  overstory trees and then smaller understory trees under them, a shrub layer under that  and then ground cover on the soil surface.  
**0:15:32-0:15:45:**  So there's four levels, vertically four levels of different kinds of plants, trees, shrubs,  vines, herbaceous ground cover and I try and make as many of them as possible be something  that's harvestable.  And it is important to match the species with the soil, especially in terms of soil drainage  and soil pH.  
**0:16:08-0:16:15:**  Some trees like chestnuts for example will not grow on a lot of soils, any soil that  isn't very well drained will not work for chestnuts.  It's also important to put trees together that are compatible with each other, like  it's important not to plant a pear tree next to a black walnut tree because black walnuts  produce a hormone in their roots that can stunt or even kill certain trees like pear  
**0:16:41-0:16:44:**  trees and apple trees.  So you have to have some knowledge about what trees work well together and which ones won't  work with each other as well as what kind of sites they take.  Another thing to consider is you don't want to have two different crops that drop their  crop to the ground in the same spot.  
**0:17:09-0:17:16:**  Like for example, I wouldn't want chestnuts with pecans or walnuts because then I'd have  to sort out the different nuts from each other from the ground at harvest time.  It's perfectly okay to have any kind of fruit that's picked from the tree growing in among  other trees that are dropping their crop to the ground such as nut trees.  That makes a lot of sense.  
**0:17:36-0:17:42:**  I mean, it seems like there's quite a lot of practical implications here that again,  we'll get into them little by little.  But the first question for me again to paint the picture of your farm a bit clearer is  what's the spacing between your different crops?  And I'm sure the farm has got very different spacings all over the place, but as a general  
**0:17:58-0:18:02:**  or maybe one of your favorites, your ideal spacing that's your challenge, the one that's  worked the best for you.  Well, in the case of the chestnuts, I start them out at 20 feet by 20 feet spacing, 20  feet within the row, 20 feet between rows with the understanding that by the time they  reach 20 years of age, they will need to be thinned to 40 by 40 and then probably thinned  
**0:18:24-0:18:32:**  again 50 or 60 years down the road to 80 by 80 and then a final thinning probably somewhere  around year 500.  I'll have to leave a note for that one.  Nice.  Then I like to put pawpaws in between the chestnuts and this is North American pawpaw,  
**0:18:44-0:18:51:**  not what the British call pawpaw or what they call pawpaw in India and Australia and New  Zealand.  When the pawpaw is an understory tree, it will grow and thrive and produce fruit even  in the shade of chestnut trees.  And I'll put one pawpaw in between the chestnuts.  
**0:19:05-0:19:13:**  So along the chestnut row, there's a pawpaw every 20 feet and a chestnut every 20 feet,  but a tree every 10 feet just alternating between chestnut and pawpaw.  And then I like to put a shrub row in between the chestnut-pawpaw rows such as honeyberry  or linusris rulian.  In the case of persimmons, persimmons seemed like to grow around walnuts.  
**0:19:41-0:19:51:**  So I put persimmons and the heartnuts together, but both of those require full sun so they  all have to have their own space.  I can't put persimmons underneath the heartnuts.  Also have to be careful if the heartnut is grafted on a black walnut rootstock, then  that limits what can be planted close by, again, because of that hormone produced by  
**0:20:11-0:20:15:**  the black walnut.  But the heartnuts take up a lot of space.  When they're matured, they may be 40 feet wide or wider.  So yes, I have a lot of different spaces and it just depends on the species.  Honeyberries I put five feet apart within the row.  
**0:20:35-0:20:40:**  Honeyberry produces a little, it's kind of like a blackberry but it's kind of orange-yellow  color right?  No, honeyberry is a deep dark purple similar to blueberries if you're familiar with those.  Ah, okay, so I'm completely off.  Yeah, it's a linusris rulian is the species.  
**0:20:58-0:21:05:**  It produces, like I said, a dark purple berry but the shape can be very different from one  variety to another.  They can be banana shaped or round or cigar shaped or they can be shaped very bizarrely.  In fact, I saw some that were shaped like the mouth of a baleen whale opening its mouth.  Nice, and so going back a bit to the spacing, have you experimented with different spacings  
**0:21:38-0:21:45:**  and seen that at some point they can be too close and there's too much competition between  them?  Yeah, I have done some experimenting.  I used to put two pawpaw trees in between each pair of chestnuts at 20 by 20 spacing  and I found that was too close.  
**0:21:59-0:22:06:**  I couldn't get in between the trees with a mower and with chestnuts it's absolutely essential  to mow under the trees before the nuts start to fall.  Otherwise they can't be harvested commercially.  So now I only put one pawpaw in between each pair of chestnuts instead of two.  For the most part I researched the plants ahead of time and figured out what their spacing  
**0:22:28-0:22:31:**  should be before I planted.  I was just wrong about the pawpaws.  The first thing that somebody listening to your system may think, somebody who's more  familiar with the conventional way of planting these different crops would be that there  is some form of competition for light and for water most noticeably between these crops.  
**0:22:55-0:22:59:**  Is this something that you have observed?  In the case of the trees, the trees can compete with each other for sunlight but not really  so much for moisture or nutrients.  And that's why it's important to be careful in selecting what trees are put underneath  larger trees.  
**0:23:22-0:23:28:**  Trees that are tolerant of shade have to go under larger trees.  So they're competing mainly for sunlight not for moisture and nutrients at least at our  location.  In a place with a much drier soil, a drier climate, they might be competing for moisture  also but that's really not the case here.  
**0:23:44-0:23:49:**  You haven't noticed that the pawpaw fruit has suffered from competition with light with  the chestnut.  As the chestnuts grow, is this something that you've started seeing the trees leaning out  and trying to fetch light?  No, the pawpaws don't lean out.  
**0:24:02-0:24:11:**  In fact, the pawpaws actually prefer to grow in partial shade versus full sun.  But that said, pawpaws will produce more fruit and larger sized fruit if they're growing  in full sun versus in the shade.  But that's okay.  As I tell people, I get 100% of a chestnut crop and then 50-75% of a pawpaw crop from  
**0:24:28-0:24:31:**  the same acre at the same time.  That adds up to 175%.  Normally it's really hard to make 100% but I exceed 100% with this method.  What about the honey berries?  Do they do better in the full sun usually?  
**0:24:51-0:24:53:**  They're experimental for me right now.  I have noticed that they grow very well under shade but it seems to affect their fruit production.  In fact, they seem to produce not very much when they're in full shade even though the  plants seem to grow and thrive there.  So I think it's probably going to turn out that the honey berries will need full sun  
**0:25:18-0:25:26:**  or at least they're not going to be an understory shrub.  Maybe it would be a case of them producing in the establishment years and then little  by little needing to be removed from the system, right?  Is that an option for you?  Yes, except I probably wouldn't go to the trouble of removing them.  
**0:25:42-0:25:46:**  They'd probably just remove themselves once it gets too shady for them.  But yes, it may be that they only work when the chestnut trees are still fairly young  and small.  Looking at the chestnuts, you talked about 100% production now but what does that compare  to other chestnut growers in the region?  
**0:26:08-0:26:11:**  Because I'm relating this more to the no input strategy.  Does that mean you have less inputs but less productivity than if you were spreading some  NPK regularly every year for example?  No.  Like I said, our soil is some of the very best in the whole world for growing trees.  
**0:26:33-0:26:40:**  It's kind of hard to measure and compare the production because I have younger trees mixed  in with older trees but I'm estimating that on our mature trees, the ones that are over  20 years old, we're producing around 5,000 pounds per acre.  Compare this with other chestnut growers in other parts of the Midwest with poor soil,  they're producing much less even though they're using lots of fertilizer and I'm producing  
**0:27:10-0:27:12:**  much more without fertilizer.  In fact, for example, there are chestnuts planted on reclaimed strip mine areas that  are only producing around 500 pounds per acre with fertilizer while mine are producing 5,000  pounds per acre without fertilizer.  So it depends on the quality of the soil where they're growing.  
**0:27:34-0:27:36:**  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  That makes a lot of sense.  It's interesting to notice that even though they do have the inputs on their side and  irrigation and etc., nothing can really compensate for a good soil base to start off with.  Yeah, exactly.  
**0:27:52-0:28:00:**  In fact, research done at the University of Missouri found that fertilizer cannot compensate  for poor soil.  The fertilizer only allows the soil to reach its potential but it cannot increase that  soil's potential.  So a poor soil, even with fertilizer, will not produce as much as a good soil without  
**0:28:16-0:28:18:**  fertilizer.  How has your soil evolved?  Have you done soil tests since, I mean you started 25 years ago, right?  Yes we have.  We haven't really perfected the tests.  
**0:28:31-0:28:41:**  We tried a test for soil microbe activity called the tea bag test developed by a professor  Marshall McDaniel at Iowa State University.  But the results are somewhat inconclusive so far and I think the test needs to be fine-tuned  to make it work better.  Aside from that, the University of Illinois has been doing tests on our soil and comparing  
**0:29:08-0:29:14:**  it to conventional cropland in adjacent areas.  Someone just gave a presentation on the results of that study but I missed it.  I was away doing something else.  I'm not sure what they found.  We'll need to try to get our hands on that to see.  
**0:29:33-0:29:38:**  Is it a presentation that's on YouTube that's available for everybody or was it more of  a private event?  It was a presentation at the annual meeting of the Savannah Institute.  I suspect it was recorded and will be available but I'm not certain of that.  I think if it was the 2021 conference for agroforestry and carbon drawdown I was listening  
**0:30:03-0:30:05:**  to it.  Not all of it though so I must have missed that part.  And there should be the recordings available.  I also advise our listeners to check out that amazing conference.  It will be the report done by Will Eddy.  
**0:30:22-0:30:26:**  Okay, perfect, nice.  Thanks for the reference.  So I wanted to delve a bit into some of the decisions that you made, some of the design  decisions that you made on your farm in terms of agroforestry because as you're very familiar  in agroforestry there's a lot of integrations of animals but there's also integration of  
**0:30:44-0:30:49:**  timber species into crops and etc.  And I wanted to understand a bit better your decisions around that.  For example, have you considered using animals in between your crops for example poultry  or maybe sheep?  Was that a consideration for you?  
**0:31:10-0:31:19:**  We actually started with goats about nearly 30 years ago and I tried for about 25 years  to integrate goats with trees and I finally had to give up on it.  But now we are grazing sheep under our trees.  They're under the trees constantly moving from one paddock to another.  And we also have chickens under the trees and we've had chickens and turkeys under the  
**0:31:42-0:31:44:**  trees in the past.  So yes, we've had livestock integrated right from the start.  It was a period of several years where we didn't have anything except chickens.  We had to give up on the goats because they're too hard to fence and they love to eat tree  leaves.  
**0:32:05-0:32:09:**  The sheep are working out very well under the trees.  Is that at a commercial scale?  You sell the sheep or is it more... how does it work?  Yes, the excess lambs are sold commercially.  How many lambs do you have?  
**0:32:24-0:32:26:**  I don't have good track of it.  I think we have around 20 ewes right now and there's still several lambs that haven't been  sold yet.  We're waiting to get them up to size.  But I would say probably we're going to be selling just around 10 to 20 lambs per year.  
**0:32:49-0:32:52:**  So it's a small scale.  And the main purpose of having the sheep is to improve the soil under the chestnuts.  Okay, you've just opened a whole other chapter because I wasn't expecting us to delve into  this specific subject.  But I've been looking actually recently for somebody who can talk to me about... talk  
**0:33:12-0:33:16:**  to us on the podcast about integrating animals with fruit and nut crops.  So maybe it's time to open this chapter with you and to discuss your experience with the  sheep.  And I'd love to know a bit more about how, for example, do you protect the tree trunks  from damage?  
**0:33:29-0:33:32:**  That's something that we're experiencing quite a lot where I'm working right now and we have  to invest quite heavily on fencing out the trees actually.  Well for young trees that are not yet established, we use what are called tree shelters or grow  tubes.  It's a translucent plastic tube ventilated, five feet tall and supported with a stake.  
**0:34:01-0:34:08:**  And those did not work to keep goats off the trees, but the sheep don't bother the trees  when they are protected by these grow tubes or tree shelters.  For multi-stem shrubs that aren't suited to those tubes, we do have to keep the sheep  away from shrubs until they get established.  But once the trees and shrubs are established, then the sheep are no longer a problem.  
**0:34:33-0:34:40:**  They might browse some very low leaves on the shrubs, but they don't really do any damage  to the shrubs once they're established and can grow up out of reach of the sheep.  But in some cases you might have to keep the sheep away from the trees until they're established.  Do they ever try to rub themselves and scratch themselves on the grow tubes that you're using?  No, the tubes are smooth enough that they really aren't attractive for rubbing.  
**0:35:14-0:35:22:**  With the pawpaw trees, which we don't need to put tall tubes on because deer and sheep  don't like browsing on them, but the sheep do rub on them a little bit and they sometimes  break branches, but it's not enough damage to worry about once the trees are...  They don't even have to be fully established in the case of the pawpaws.  They do get rubbed on, but it doesn't hurt them enough to slow them down.  
**0:35:47-0:35:52:**  And so the chestnuts, once you remove the tube, for example, do the sheep ever have  a go at the bark?  Do you ever get bark damage?  Not so far.  We rotate the sheep every day or every other day to a new paddock, so they always have  
**0:36:08-0:36:13:**  access to high quality forage that they like better than tree bark.  So no, we've never had any damage to the bark of trees from sheep.  That's fantastic.  What sheep breed do you have?  To talk in animal terms.  
**0:36:28-0:36:33:**  We have Katahdin sheep, which is a hair type sheep.  They don't produce wool.  They shed their hair in spring at the end of winter, so they don't have to be sheared.  And they're also highly resistant to parasites, so we've never had to treat them for internal  parasites at all, whereas other breeds of sheep are difficult to keep alive even with  
**0:37:00-0:37:04:**  twice weekly treatments for parasites.  What kind of nets do you use or what kind of fencing do you use?  How do you move them around?  We use electric net fencing from a company called Premier One, which is located just  about a half an hour away from our farm, but they're actually a pretty large company that  
**0:37:27-0:37:31:**  supplies fencing all over the world.  But their fencing works very well.  We've only had the sheep escape one time, and I think it was when either a coyote or  dog spooked the flock and got them to stampede through the net.  That's happened once in two years.  
**0:37:49-0:37:52:**  The goats, on the other hand, would get out every day.  Really?  That must have been chaotic.  Yeah, I have photos of our goats 15 feet up in trees eating leaves.  Yeah, it's quite typical in a way, right?  
**0:38:10-0:38:14:**  In Greece we have them as well climbing onto whatever tree they can, all the olive trees  and etc.  Sometimes you don't see them on the floor, you have to look up at the trees to find where  the goats are at.  So I wanted to understand as well that you have it connected to an electric box that's  
**0:38:28-0:38:31:**  powered by, that's solar powered, right?  That's correct.  And they're usually moved either every day or at the most every other day.  When you have sheep, I mean, you're using the sheep to manage the grass, to keep it  low.  
**0:38:44-0:38:45:**  Are you happy with that?  Because sheep can be quite selective at grazing.  And so do they kind of replace your need to have to pass with a mower or is it still something  you have to complement on top of the sheep grazing?  We still have to mow and we have to get the sheep away from the trees well before the  
**0:39:10-0:39:15:**  nuts drop, but it's just a side benefit.  Our main purpose for having the sheep is to improve the soil, but as a side benefit, besides  having excess lambs for sale, they have also dramatically reduced the amount of mowing  and the cost of mowing.  Before we got the sheep we would have to spend several weeks trying to get the vegetation  
**0:39:38-0:39:42:**  mowed down in preparation for the nuts to fall.  Now just a single pass with the mower very quickly accomplishes the same thing.  That's very interesting.  I mean, there's so many things to delve into here to understand this better.  Do you let the grasses grow to a certain height?  
**0:40:00-0:40:04:**  Do you let the grasses develop themselves physiologically before you graze them, for  example, in spring before fruits are ready, or do you constantly keep your grass mowed?  I understand your question.  No, our grass gets really tall before the sheep move on to it and graze because we have  enough acres and the sheep are few enough that they might only pass through an area  
**0:40:29-0:40:37:**  two or three times a year, and so the grass gets pretty tall in between grazing events.  Okay, but just before harvest it's everything super clean, super mowed, super tidy, right?  Yeah, we actually evaluate each tree one at a time and decide when it needs to be mowed.  So when we see a chestnut tree is just about ready to start dropping nuts, then we'll go  under that particular tree and mow really short with a mower to be ready for those nuts  
**0:41:06-0:41:10:**  to fall, to make it easy for the customers to harvest.  I mean, I'd really like to see some pictures of your soil.  This is the frustrating part of the podcast is that we're just talking by voice, and also  I'm not, we're not together on your field interviewing, but maybe it's something you  can send us, right?  
**0:41:27-0:41:32:**  Do you have some nice pictures of your soil just to understand how, I mean, animals plus  the perennial system plus the grass is growing and getting mowed regularly and must have  created a thick layer of black soil on the surface?  Yeah, our soil is dark brown.  In places where it didn't suffer any erosion, it's around 14 inches thick, which would be  
**0:41:55-0:42:01:**  probably maybe around 35 centimeters or so.  40 centimeters?  Yeah, 35 or 40 centimeters thick.  And then under that is a much lighter layer of soil with a high clay content, but around  14 inches or so of very dark soil with a fairly high organic matter.  
**0:42:26-0:42:32:**  And like I said, it is, there's no soil in the world that's better at growing temperate  hardwood trees.  There are several soils that are equal to it, but none are better than what we have.  I mean, it makes me wonder, have you thought about producing more hardwood trees?  Have you thought about producing wood for timber or for, you know, have you thought  
**0:42:50-0:42:52:**  about entering that business?  Well, like I said, we have about 60 acres of our farm is already a wild forest that  is producing wood.  And we did, I do manage that for wood production.  Okay.  
**0:43:13-0:43:15:**  So what kind of wood do you harvest?  Well, our most valuable tree is black walnut in terms of wood value.  A single black walnut tree can be worth 20 to $40,000 at harvest time.  And we are growing black walnut, but we haven't had any harvest of those yet.  We also have white oak and red oak, and those would be the three main valuable hardwood  
**0:43:46-0:43:48:**  trees.  But we also have hickory and wild cherry and lots of other species.  But the main commercial ones that would be valuable would be black walnut, white oak  and red oak.  What's the life cycle of your black walnut before harvest?  
**0:44:08-0:44:21:**  Normally it takes between 50 to 100 years for a black walnut to be big enough to harvest.  And the number of years depends on what it is you want to harvest.  There's saw timber, which only needs to be 14 to 18 inch diameter, but for the highest  quality veneer, which is what brings the best price, the trunk diameter needs to be a minimum  of 28 inches at breast height.  
**0:44:46-0:44:49:**  And that could take 100 years.  Okay, very interesting.  And I just wanted to shift back a bit to the sheep.  Where do you put the sheep when you need to get them out of the orchard?  I guess you have lots of prairie fields around.  
**0:45:01-0:45:03:**  I mean, you've got a big land.  And you just move them out and keep them somewhere, keep them out of the orchard, of the nut production  zones.  Is that right?  Well, yeah, we do have some areas that don't have trees we harvest for human food and that  
**0:45:17-0:45:22:**  we can keep them grazing during the harvest period.  And the harvest period is about one month long, so that's not very long that we have  to keep them out away from the trees.  So that's a very short harvest period.  It means that you have high intense activity during that one month, but the rest of the  
**0:45:39-0:45:42:**  time it's rather low intensity.  Yes, that's true.  Between mid-September and mid-October, there's a lot of harvesting going on.  Fortunately, we have customers to do that work for us.  So that's definitely something we need to go into.  
**0:45:59-0:46:03:**  But still got a few questions about the way the system is working.  And then we'll go into the more business side of things, which is one of the very interesting  aspects, one of the many very interesting aspects of your farm.  And I'm discovering more and more as we go.  Going back to the sheep, would you be interested in increasing the size of your herd?  
**0:46:19-0:46:25:**  Well, first I need to say the sheep are actually my son's project.  So he manages them.  He gets the money from the sale of the lambs.  So he's the one who decides the size of the flock.  And right now we're still kind of learning.  
**0:46:38-0:46:44:**  We've only had them for two years, right around two years now.  So we're still learning how to do it.  But yeah, I do believe there is potential for increasing the herd size.  We obviously have a whole lot more grass than what the sheep we have are able to utilize  fully.  
**0:47:03-0:47:11:**  So we could probably double or even triple the size of the herd.  I'm sure.  There's also all the trees that you could use for fodder, especially if you've got lots  of forest, wild trees.  Is this something that you do in times of drought?  
**0:47:24-0:47:30:**  We actually haven't had a drought since we've had the sheep, so that's something we haven't  had to resort to yet.  But that would definitely be a possibility if we needed to go that route.  And legally there's no problem for you guys in terms of integrating the sheep there and  harvesting the nuts, especially from the floor?  
**0:47:50-0:47:51:**  Not for us.  There is a thing called the Food Safety Modernization Act of 2012, which normally would prohibit  having livestock under the trees.  In our situation for the chestnuts between mid-May to mid-October, which would be 90%  of the grazing season.  
**0:48:12-0:48:20:**  But we are actually what they call qualified exempt from those regulations because more  than 50% of our customers are what they call qualified customers, meaning either end users,  restaurants or grocery stores.  In our case it's all end users.  Virtually 100% of our customers are end users.  
**0:48:35-0:48:42:**  So we are exempt from those regulations that would force us to get the animals away from  the trees for that five month period.  And we still have to follow some of the regulations.  We have to post our complete address at the point of sale and we have to maintain records  showing who our customers are and that they are qualified customers.  
**0:49:06-0:49:10:**  But we're exempt from almost all the other regulations.  That would not be the case for somebody who's selling chestnuts to a broker, for example,  or to a co-op.  Then they just couldn't do it.  They couldn't do the grazing between mid-May and mid-October.  
**0:49:25-0:49:30:**  Which kills their grazing, any grazing plans they may have.  Which is another argument for doing U-pick because 100% of the U-pick customers are qualified  customers.  Do you agree with the health and safety logic behind this law?  From a person that's coming from the ground, that's experiencing it?  
**0:49:54-0:49:56:**  The law has no science behind it.  In fact, recent studies have shown that all of the benefits from moving animals off of  the land occur in the first five days and after that period the population of the pathogenic  microbes crashes in the first five days and then remains steady after that.  There is a good argument, a good scientific argument for moving the livestock off at least  
**0:50:25-0:50:31:**  five days before harvesting, but not beyond that period.  What about parasites?  Parasites are usually very species specific.  The parasites that would affect the sheep, for example, aren't even able to survive in  cattle, let alone humans.  
**0:50:48-0:50:53:**  No, that's not a concern.  Very interesting.  We do move the sheep off well ahead of the harvest season, we just don't move them off  120 days ahead of time.  So integrating timber trees in your fruit and nut production or around close to them,  
**0:51:13-0:51:18:**  is that something that you do?  The timber production is nearby but not in the same area as the fruit and nut and berry  production.  The whole farm is 86 acres and about 60 of those acres are just wild forest.  So you don't really have the need to mix them together, you don't see any real purpose for  
**0:51:40-0:51:41:**  that?  No.  Actually, we do have black walnuts mixed in among our crop producing trees, but they're  grafted varieties of black walnut that produce a larger, thinner-shelled, more easily cracked  nut.  
**0:51:57-0:52:03:**  But because they are black walnuts, they also produce valuable wood, but it's going to be  many decades before those are large enough to be harvestable.  Even though they are grafted and even though they are variety selected for nuts, they are  still valuable for wood, that's right, huh?  Some grafted varieties of black walnut don't have a growth form conducive to harvesting  
**0:52:27-0:52:35:**  for wood, but the ones that we have can serve both wood and nut production.  Maybe we can move on now to looking more at the economics and the business side, which  is something we focus a lot on the podcast because naturally, if agroforestry doesn't  work for the bottom line of the farmer, it's not something they should be even considering.  That's something we talked about together in the short call that we had before this  
**0:52:53-0:52:54:**  one.  Again, looking at your presentation, I really enjoyed your approach, the other presentation  I mean.  I really enjoyed the way that you were addressing this economic aspect and that you were communicating  it with the farmers.  
**0:53:08-0:53:14:**  One of the things that you did say in this presentation was that chestnut is a really  interesting crop economically.  You've maybe touched upon this a bit until now, but it might be worth repeating or building  on to what you've already said.  Why is that the case?  
**0:53:24-0:53:26:**  Why do you say that?  Well, compared to other nut crops, like in the US, the main nut crops are pecan, hazel,  almond and walnut, Persian walnut compared to chestnuts.  Chestnuts are much more productive in terms of pounds per acre.  They're more reliably productive.  
**0:53:53-0:54:00:**  They tend to produce a full crop every year, whereas these other nut crops tend to be biennially  productive.  They'll produce a good crop one year and then a poor crop or no crop at all the next year  and sometimes a couple of years before having another good crop.  They're also much more valuable per pound.  
**0:54:14-0:54:21:**  We're getting as much as $3 a pound for chestnuts without having to pick them up.  Our customers do the harvesting for us, whereas the other nut crops are often maybe somewhere  around $1, $1.50 a pound, sometimes less than $1 per pound.  So chestnuts produce twice as much as the other crops and sell for two to four times  more than the other crops.  
**0:54:46-0:54:49:**  And they do it every year.  So chestnuts in Iowa are approximately 10 times more profitable than pecans in Georgia  or almonds or walnuts in California or hazels in Oregon.  And that's what makes our system work because the chestnuts are just so valuable and the  demand is so high.  
**0:55:12-0:55:17:**  The gap between supply and demand is so large.  And then they're easy to harvest and they're ready to be sold the moment they hit the ground.  Because some of the other crops have to be processed in some way before they're marketable.  So why are people not doing more chestnuts?  Well, in the case of North America, we lost our native chestnut species about 100 years  
**0:55:46-0:55:51:**  ago to a fungal disease that came from Asia.  And today there are practically no Americans left who even remember chestnuts, except for  people who are around 100 years old or even older are the only people who can remember  American chestnuts.  And so the only thing Americans know about chestnuts is you roast them on open fire at  
**0:56:14-0:56:17:**  Christmas time.  There's a Christmas song, in fact the title of the song is the Christmas song, that talks  about chestnuts enough.  All Americans know about chestnuts.  Most Americans have never seen one, let alone tasted one.  
**0:56:31-0:56:37:**  And our market is mostly to people who were born and raised in other parts of the world  where chestnuts are known and loved.  Americans just don't know anything about chestnuts.  So there's quite a small market for chestnuts?  No, it's a very large market.  
**0:56:49-0:56:53:**  There are enough people in this country who were born and raised in other parts of the  world that there is a huge market for chestnuts, it just isn't to Americans.  The Americans want one pound of chestnuts at Christmas time, whereas our typical Bosnian  customers for example want 300 to 800 pounds in September.  Much rather sell 800 pounds of chestnuts to one Bosnian in September than make 800 one-pound  
**0:57:23-0:57:30:**  sales to Anglo-Americans in December.  I did some calculations a few years ago based on the average number of acres of chestnuts  being planted in the US per year and based on the market for those.  I came up with a figure that it would take 285 years before we have enough chestnut trees  in the ground to meet the demand we had back in the year 2000.  
**0:58:00-0:58:05:**  So if demand remained flat for 285 years, that's how long it would take for us to grow  enough to meet demand.  But demand doesn't remain flat, it's growing much faster than the acreage of chestnuts.  That's fantastic statistics, amazing that we're able to hear these calculations on the  show.  
**0:58:20-0:58:23:**  Does anybody produce chestnut wholesale?  And I mean on a large scale and that sell it wholesale in the US, at what price do they  sell their chestnuts?  I'm sure there are a few.  Even the largest growers aren't really large on a scale like almond and walnut growers  
**0:58:46-0:58:54:**  in California or hazel growers in Oregon.  But I know there are some wholesalers and I think they're getting somewhere in the range  of $3 to $8 a pound or so, which is much higher than any other nut crop in the US.  But is it easy to mechanize?  The harvest, just trying to understand, and how do you do it actually on your farm?  
**0:59:20-0:59:22:**  How do you harvest the chestnuts?  So how do your clients harvest the chestnuts?  We use a machine called a nut wizard, which is a wire basket about the size and shape  of a football that rolls on the end of a pole.  And when it rolls over the nuts, the wires squeeze apart and the nuts pop inside the  
**0:59:44-0:59:45:**  basket.  And then they're easily dumped into a bucket or other container.  And we have a fleet of those, we have 20-some of those, and we loan those out to our customers  and they use them to harvest and then they give them back at the end of the day when  they're ready to check out.  
**1:00:03-1:00:06:**  And those work really well for us in our situation.  There are machines that harvest chestnuts also.  There's a machine made in Italy called a FACMA.  I've seen work, but I'm not tempted to swap out my nut wizards for a FACMA machine at  all.  
**1:00:25-1:00:26:**  Why is that?  Well, the machines I use don't require any fuel or oil and they don't make noise and  at the end of the day they go home after they pay me.  Very interesting.  Okay.  
**1:00:46-1:00:47:**  Nice.  Yeah, well, they're much more adapted, the nut wizards are much more adapted to your  system because you've got clients coming in and picking them themselves.  You're not going to give them a machine.  But I mean, another way to do it would be for you to use the FACMA, for example, harvest  
**1:01:07-1:01:13:**  the nuts relatively efficiently, I expect, and then to have them on boxes for your customers  to come in to just pick them from the box.  Is that an alternative that is worth considering?  Yes, we used to do it that way, but we don't need to do that now.  All I have to do now is mow the grass and collect the money.  
**1:01:32-1:01:38:**  Why would I want to go to all that extra work of harvesting and boxing the nuts when I have  customers who are willing to do that for me?  That argument is difficult to argue with.  I would not consider going back to the old way.  Not at all.  
**1:01:51-1:01:53:**  Is the FACMA efficient at all?  I remember somewhere you may have mentioned, you did some calculations again looking at  the efficiency of the FACMA VS a team picking up with the nut wizard.  Is that correct?  Yes.  
**1:02:08-1:02:14:**  I got to the sales rep for the machine and I can't remember exactly what he said.  I asked him about the acres per hour or hours per acre or whatever.  I figured that five people with nut wizards could stay ahead of that machine.  Okay, nice.  Maybe on the same topic of the economics of your system, how do you define if the crops  
**1:02:41-1:02:46:**  that you do sell commercially at the moment, you've got 70 different species, but three  or four of them are your main commercial species.  You've talked about chestnut now, but what characteristics in the crops are you looking  for or have made you choose these species as your commercial ones?  Was it more a demand side thing?  
**1:03:00-1:03:02:**  Was it more a production side thing?  How did you decide these are my commercial species and that's what I'm focusing on?  It's a combination of supply and production and demand.  The species has to be productive, has to produce enough, and then I have to be able to sell  it for a high enough price to make it worthwhile.  
**1:03:27-1:03:38:**  Also the need for post-harvest handling and processing is another important consideration.  For example, in the case of hazelnuts, which I do not consider to be a commercially viable  plant, it's not because there isn't demand, you can sell hazelnuts, but the kind of hazels  we are able to grow here are a bush type hazel that do not drop the nuts to the ground.  So the nuts have to be picked from the bush and to do it commercially has to be done by  
**1:04:02-1:04:03:**  a machine.  Then you have to have another machine to remove the husk and then you have to have another  machine to size the nuts before they go into a cracking machine.  Then they have to be cracked and then you have to have another machine to separate the  shell and kernel before you have a product ready to sell.  
**1:04:23-1:04:28:**  With the chestnuts, as soon as they hit the ground, I can have a customer come and pick  them up and they're sold without the machines, without the processing, and they sell for  a much higher price and they produce more pounds per acre.  In the case of the hazels, it costs $4 a pound to harvest and get something ready to sell  and then you can sell it for less than a dollar a pound.  
**1:04:53-1:04:58:**  So with hazels you lose money on every pound you grow.  And you're competing with highly mechanized systems that can produce it very cheap.  Right.  Yeah.  It's a no brainer really.  
**1:05:08-1:05:09:**  Yes.  Although you'd be surprised at how many people with PhDs after their name are trying to figure  out how to grow hazels profitably and totally ignoring chestnuts.  I'm quite excited.  Do you know Russell Smith?  
**1:05:31-1:05:32:**  I'm sure you do.  The book that he wrote, which the title escapes me now.  Tree Crops.  Jay Russell Smith.  Tree Crops.  
**1:05:39-1:05:40:**  There we go.  Tree Crops.  It's quite exciting to consider the idea of chestnuts as a carbohydrate source for our  society, a perennial one that doesn't need fantastic soil conditions to thrive.  It needs actually, sometimes as you said, the soil can be too fertile for chestnuts.  
**1:05:59-1:06:03:**  It does well on slopes that are well drained, but not too well drained.  So it's opening a whole vast area of a potential area of production to feed a source of carbohydrates  to the population.  Something which, for example, hazelnuts or almonds, they're not so rich in carbohydrates.  So it's more protein and fat.  
**1:06:27-1:06:29:**  So what do you think about this?  What do you think about the potential of scaling chestnuts in order for it to be a staple?  Well, chestnuts, as you say, don't require really good soil.  In fact, they can thrive on fairly poor soil, although they are more productive on better  soils.  
**1:06:49-1:06:51:**  But they are picky.  They do have to have well drained soil.  They will not tolerate poor drainage at all.  We found that out in 2018, where we had some planted on less than very well drained soils,  and those died from too much rain.  
**1:07:07-1:07:14:**  But yes, there are millions of acres in the US that could be growing chestnuts and producing  high income for the farmer.  And instead, they're planted with corn and soybeans and wheat when they could be producing  a very high value crop that does not degrade the soil.  Then the limit is demand.  
**1:07:35-1:07:36:**  No, but that's not the limit.  I apologize because you've just explained to me the calculation that there is a huge  demand.  Yes.  I've been told that chestnut is the number three nut in the world in terms of demand  
**1:07:50-1:07:53:**  behind coconuts and peanuts.  And neither coconuts or peanuts are true nuts.  The peanuts are a legume, and coconut isn't even an angiosperm.  It's a gymnosperm.  So that makes chestnuts the number one nut in the world in terms of demand.  
**1:08:12-1:08:15:**  The number one true nut.  The demand for chestnuts is absolutely huge, both in the US and all over the world.  And there aren't near enough of them being grown.  That's very exciting potential.  Just maybe to convince some of our farmer listeners that may be getting a bit excited  
**1:08:32-1:08:37:**  about this, how long does it take for a chestnut to start producing?  Yeah, I've had chestnut seedlings that were still in pots trying to produce nuts, although  that's not normal.  In our conditions, with a tree shelter and on a good site, you start seeing chestnut  production on average in three to four years, sometimes as early as two years.  
**1:09:04-1:09:13:**  You can start seeing commercial-sized harvests in year six, usually around six, seven, eight,  before measuring your harvest in hundreds of pounds per acre.  And they can reach, on the best soils again, 5,000 pounds per acre by the time they're  20 years old.  Very interesting.  
**1:09:30-1:09:31:**  Okay, thanks for that.  I wanted to talk a bit about the U-pick.  That means that you're selling directly to the customer, but the challenge of that is  often to find enough customers.  So how did you manage to get enough customers to distribute your production?  
**1:09:50-1:09:54:**  And maybe before that, we need to understand, if you're willing to share this information,  how much chestnuts do you produce on an average year?  We really don't have enough years to save for certain in terms of production per year,  and most of our trees are still young.  We only have an equivalent of about one acre of really mature trees and about nine acres  
**1:10:18-1:10:24:**  of trees that are just coming into high production, and then a few more acres that aren't in production  yet.  But in terms of how we got our customers, it was totally by accident.  In 2013, we had some customers who begged us to let them come and pick their own, and  I did not want to do it.  
**1:10:44-1:10:50:**  I was afraid of liability, but they were good customers, and the dad was dying of cancer,  and he wanted to pick chestnuts one more time before he died, because he's from a country  where he picked chestnuts from the time he was a toddler.  I couldn't say no, so I told him, okay, but don't tell anybody that we let you do this.  And within three days, we had a list of 20-some people who wanted to come and do U-Pick.  
**1:11:10-1:11:19:**  A year later, it was 70-some, and today we have a list of 360 names, each one representing  usually an extended family of people who want to come and do U-Pick, and we have the ability  to serve maybe 40 of them a year.  So we have way more customers than we can serve, and our list gets longer every year.  It gets longer and longer, and we have actually been referring customers to other farms with  
**1:11:45-1:11:48:**  chestnuts.  So there's actually four farms around us that are doing U-Pick now, taking over our overflow,  and it's still not enough.  So there's huge unmet demand for U-Pick chestnuts.  And is it a bit challenging to have people walking around your farm?  
**1:12:07-1:12:11:**  Is that something that you ever have like damage, or animals get scared, or get fed  things they shouldn't get fed, or I don't know.  It seems to be a potential concern with this system.  There are certainly problems, some problems, but none of them are insurmountable.  There's some amount of littering going on.  
**1:12:31-1:12:38:**  Because it's a nut farm, I set squirrel traps, and I thought, as long as I kept them up out  of reach of small children, that I wouldn't need to tell adults not to stick their hand  into a squirrel trap, but it turned out I was wrong about that.  So we had a customer get injured by a squirrel trap once.  But the biggest problem is just scheduling customers and making sure they show up for  
**1:13:03-1:13:07:**  their picking appointments.  But it's a lot easier than what we used to do, which was do all our own harvesting and  then haul them to the co-op.  Yeah, naturally.  So you're scaling up your system now to try and meet the demand, right?  
**1:13:23-1:13:25:**  Or have you stopped planting chestnuts?  Let's see.  I haven't completely stopped planting more, but I'm running out of acres where I could  plant them.  Most of the farm is too steep and rugged to manage for harvesting chestnuts.  
**1:13:41-1:13:46:**  If you can't mow under a tree, if it's too steep to mow, you can't harvest there, and  any chestnuts there would be for wildlife only.  But I am not trying to meet demand because there is absolutely no hope.  If I owned 10,000 acres of land, I still would not be able to meet demand for chestnuts.  I'm not trying to meet demand.  
**1:14:08-1:14:12:**  I'm pretty close to where I want to be.  I don't want to really grow much beyond where we are right now.  That's interesting.  But what's really crazy about it is that there's so much demand for you pick.  One thing is demand for people going to grocery stores and supermarkets and getting hold of  
**1:14:31-1:14:36:**  chestnuts there, where they usually go shopping, but demand for going on the farm and spending  their time to pick the nuts and on top of that paying for it.  It's clearly tapping into some need of the customers that goes beyond just the chestnut  as well.  Yes.  
**1:14:58-1:15:02:**  Our customers seem to be much more excited about picking their own than they are about  buying them already picked.  Part of that is the fact that the chestnut harvest is occurring at a time of year when  it's very pleasant to be outside.  The weather is usually absolutely beautiful.  
**1:15:22-1:15:33:**  Plenty of shade under the trees and people just have a very good time picking chestnuts.  Also I think in the case of a lot of our customers it's reminding them of being back in the old  country because most of our customers are coming from other parts of the world.  Okay, nice.  For me I'm just trying to think a bit looking at my notes.  
**1:15:51-1:15:53:**  I wanted to look a bit at pawpaw in your other crops.  So that's also you pick, right?  You're selling everything on your farm you pick.  Correct.  Pawpaws are the second most popular crop.  
**1:16:08-1:16:16:**  Last year we only had around 100 trees that were producing fruit, but from those 100 trees  the customers picked 2,500 pounds of fruit which would be just under a metric ton.  And we sold them for $3 a pound or it was over $7,000 from what was equivalent of one  acre of trees.  And these were growing mostly underneath chestnut trees.  
**1:16:50-1:16:57:**  So it's additional income from the same acre that's producing income from chestnut trees.  And again last year we had way more customers than we were able to serve.  We had to turn lots of people away because we did not have enough pawpaw trees for everybody.  We have a lot more pawpaw trees coming into production this year, but we're still not  going to be able to meet demand.  
**1:17:21-1:17:24:**  You're choosing your crops well.  Yes, but it's all by accident.  Because it's quite a big coincidence that they are on one hand trees that don't need  a lot of inputs, trees that have a good selling price, trees that have a lot of demand, trees  that don't need minimal pruning.  
**1:17:44-1:17:49:**  This is all nearly too beautiful to be true in a way when you're listening to this from  the outside.  I'm sure some of the listeners are listening to this and saying, I can't make that work  in my context.  That might be true in some contexts.  
**1:17:58-1:18:05:**  In other parts of the country they have insect pests of chestnuts that have to be managed  or you can't sell nuts.  We don't have those pests here, not yet anyway.  It does almost sound too good to be true.  Even if you have a bit more spraying to do in the year because of climate change and  
**1:18:20-1:18:24:**  et cetera and the shifting, everything that's happening at the moment, it wouldn't break  the bank either.  No, but like I said, I really don't like spraying or pruning, so I like to grow crops that don't  need either one.  No, of course, naturally.  
**1:18:39-1:18:41:**  Great.  What went behind the choice of the honey berries?  It's a new crop you're experimenting with.  Is there a big market for those as well?  They're experimental right now, but I actually acquired honey berries about 25 years ago.  
**1:18:58-1:18:59:**  I really liked the taste of them.  I thought they were absolutely delicious.  The trouble was these were wild type bushes that produced berries that were about the  size and shape of a grain of rice.  It took about a half an hour of picking to get a teaspoon full.  
**1:19:19-1:19:27:**  Even though they tasted really good, they weren't good enough to justify that much work  for such a small reward.  So I gave up on them and neglected them and they eventually died out from neglect because  they were growing in a dense brome grass sod, which is very competitive against trees and  shrubs.  
**1:19:46-1:19:56:**  But some big advances in honey berry breeding were done by Dr. Maxine Thompson from Oregon  State and Bob Borsch from the University of Saskatchewan.  Now there are honey berry berries that are about the size of the end joint on your thumb  instead of the size of a grain of rice.  They taste even better than the old ones.  
**1:20:20-1:20:26:**  In fact, there are varieties available now that produce berries that are twice the size  of what was considered a large size berry five years ago.  They're absolutely game-changing varieties.  I like the taste of them.  They taste like a cross between a blueberry and a black raspberry.  
**1:20:43-1:20:50:**  Now that they're productive enough to be worth it, I'm experimenting with them.  I'm not ready to definitively say these are going to be a good crop, but when customers ... I've let some customers do some U-pick on them and they preferred them over blueberries,  roseberries, redcurrants... They were very excited about them anyway.  So I think they will be very popular, but it remains to be seen.  
**1:21:24-1:21:25:**  Very interesting.  We'll have to follow that and to see how that evolves.  I wanted to ask you maybe just to finish off on something quite technical and agronomical  because I know that you have a lot of experience with this and you're very knowledgeable about  this subject.  
**1:21:41-1:21:48:**  That's what I perceived from the talk that I saw that I mentioned earlier.  How do you manage the grass?  Not how do you manage it, but more like what grass do you choose to grow in between your  trees and for what reason?  That's actually a very good question because some grasses are very incompatible with trees.  
**1:22:08-1:22:15:**  For example, a smooth brome grass is extremely competitive against trees.  When I'm giving people recommendations, I tell them don't allow brome grass to grow  within 100 feet of where you want to grow trees because the root system of brome grass  can go underneath a highway and come up on the other side and they will kill trees.  But brome grass is not tolerant of close, frequent mowing.  
**1:22:43-1:22:49:**  So in a case where trees are planted in brome grass, you can get rid of the brome just by  mowing it very close and very frequently and it will eventually be replaced by another  species of grass that's tolerant of close, frequent mowing, such as bluegrass.  And bluegrass is compatible with trees.  But if I'm starting with a bare field, I have a very specific recommendation for a ground  
**1:23:14-1:23:21:**  cover but it's very local and it might not work a few hundred miles away.  But I recommend a mix of turf type perennial ryegrass, a creeping red fescue or some other  fine leaf fescue and then Dutch white clover, which makes a very low ground cover that doesn't  need much mowing and is very compatible with trees.  It works very well in the upper Midwest but it might not work elsewhere.  
**1:23:45-1:23:51:**  Naturally, yeah, it needs to be adapted.  I can't make recommendations for other parts of the world as far as ground cover except  you want something that's very low and not competitive against tree roots.  So they need to have a lighter root system and also the mowing right, the mowing will  reduce the density and the length of the root system of the different grasses and legumes,  
**1:24:14-1:24:15:**  right?  Yes.  Yes.  And it will also cause a shift in the species present.  If you mow close and frequently then the taller species with a deeper root system will be  
**1:24:29-1:24:36:**  forced out and replaced by things with a shallower, less competitive root system.  When you say a close mow, could you give us some specifications?  How many inches are we talking about?  If you can not let it get much over five or six inches tall and when you mow it, mow it  down to three inches or so, kind of like what you see in lawns, that would be ideal for  
**1:25:06-1:25:08:**  the trees.  And then you just leave the clippings, the grass clippings on the floor.  You don't rake them out, you just leave them there.  That's correct.  They're adding to the soil carbon if they're just left.  
**1:25:22-1:25:30:**  But now we prefer to have sheep to do that because they're not only leaving fertilizer  behind in addition to just organic matter.  Some people would say that a three species mix for a ground cover is quite light and  actually for a variety of reasons.  There's actually interesting science about this that says that the higher diversity,  
**1:25:49-1:25:55:**  we're completing more functions in the soil in terms of feeding specific microbiology.  We're gaining more resilience as well in the grass or in the ground cover.  I'm curious to know your experience and your opinion about this.  One thing is what you read in studies, what people talk about.  Another thing is what somebody in their context has been observing for 25 years.  
**1:26:14-1:26:20:**  When I recommend a three species ground cover, I'm talking about getting trees established.  Once they're established, then I bring in more species and also just naturally more  species will come in like if I plant the two grasses and the clover, almost immediately  there are dandelions coming in and other species.  But during the tree's establishment period, which is going to be a minimum of three years  
**1:26:51-1:26:57:**  and probably more like five to seven years, I want to minimize competition from other  species.  But once the trees are established, they don't need my help anymore, at least the species  that I pick.  I can let as many species as want to come in and I can bring in species.  
**1:27:11-1:27:18:**  In addition to the 75 species of fruit, nut and berry plants, we also have somewhere around  two dozen or so perennial vegetables planted among and beneath the trees.  We usually don't bring those in until the trees are established.  Getting the trees established is the top priority and I'm willing to do whatever it takes to  get the trees established and then let nature take its course after that.  
**1:27:44-1:27:53:**  I quite like how you are, on one side you're managing an extremely diverse agroecological  system but before that you are using a herbicide, oust herbicide, which is a forestry herbicide,  you're using that to get the trees established.  The first years.  It's like a bit of a compromise that you're ready to make in order for proper tree establishment,  
**1:28:13-1:28:18:**  getting your economic model running and then letting, as you said, nature take its course  and clearly with that diversity and that management plus the animal integration, you must be,  you know, you're taking a lot of the boxes of what we consider to be regenerative agriculture.  Yes, and there are alternatives to oust herbicide, for example, for people who are absolutely  rabidly opposed to any kind of chemical usage.  
**1:28:40-1:28:49:**  They can use a combination of landscape fabric topped with coarse wood chip mulch and that's  at least as effective as oust, near 100% effective at weed control but it also adds $1,000 an  acre to the cost of the tree planting and I can plant a lot of extra trees for that  $1,000 and I would rather do that than stay chemical free and then I only need the oust  until the trees are established.  
**1:29:13-1:29:17:**  After that I don't need any more chemicals.  So how long do you need to have your trees clean at the base?  It depends on the species but three to seven years, minimum of three years, maximum of  seven years.  Chestnuts have higher needs than pow-pows, for example, of a clean base.  
**1:29:42-1:29:44:**  Just understand.  It depends on where they're being grown.  Pow-pows planted under the shade of chestnut trees, for example, can get by without any  weed control at all because the shade limits the other competition without limiting the  pow-pows but species that do require full sun do have to have some kind of weed control.  
**1:30:12-1:30:19:**  You're just wasting your time trying to grow these trees without weed control.  Wasting time and wasting money, wasting labor.  We just talked to a person that was advocating, and we've heard this many times in our podcast  actually, advocating for using woodchips because they do add an extra cost but they also add  an extra growth to the tree which compensates for the cost because you have earlier production,  
**1:30:46-1:30:48:**  higher growth, etc.  I do suspect that it depends on your soil conditions as well.  If you have more difficult soil, you may need to give it more organic matter amendments  and organic matter to initially transform the soil whereas if you have a very good soil,  you may be able to put it off with, for example, less investment in fertility.  
**1:31:10-1:31:14:**  I'm interested, have you used woodchips as mulch?  Solely woodchips, not tarp, not any fabric in which it's on top, just woodchips?  Whenever I have used mountains of woodchips, before I started using oust, I used woodchips  but always with landscape fabric.  The woodchips by themselves are not effective weed control.  
**1:31:37-1:31:42:**  The weeds will grow right through the woodchips.  I always use landscape fabric.  Also, the woodchips will rob nitrogen from the soil and actually slow the tree's growth.  Providing that barrier in between the woodchips and the soil surface will prevent the woodchips  from robbing the nitrogen from the soil and slowing the tree's growth.  
**1:32:03-1:32:08:**  The answer to your question is no, I never use woodchips alone.  I would not consider doing that.  Okay, fantastic.  Tom, we're going to stop here because I want to be not too disrespectful of your time.  We've gone on for a good hour and 40 minutes now, so I think it's...  
**1:32:29-1:32:36:**  Thank you so much for taking the time to talk to us and for a fantastic interview.  It was really interesting.  You're welcome.  So, we hope you enjoyed this interview.  Thanks for making it this far.  
**1:32:46-1:32:50:**  Again, if you want some more to check out more of our work, please look at our social  media, we're starting to be a bit more active there on Instagram, Facebook, and LinkedIn.  You can also get lots of information on our website.  You can reach out to us very easily and ask us any questions, give us some recommendations.  It's always very welcome.  
**1:33:06-1:33:10:**  And don't forget to consider donating and supporting us if that's something that you  wish to do.  So, thank you so much.  