### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2021-19-08)
**0:00:00-0:00:16:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  
**0:00:32-0:00:33:**  these challenges.  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Hello and welcome to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  I'm your host Dimitri and today we interviewed Francisco Alves from Portugal.  
**0:00:53-0:01:01:**  Francisco is the manager and owner of Herdade de San Luis in Portugal where he manages 700  hectares of montado.  This is a very interesting episode because not only are we delving into one of the most  traditional and old agroforestry systems still alive in Europe which is the montado savanna,  but on top of this Francisco started holistic grazing his animals amongst the system.  
**0:01:26-0:01:35:**  And so what we have is a combination of agroforestry and dynamic grazing system together which  is fascinating for us to get into.  So I hope that you enjoy this episode.  Okay hello Francisco welcome to the podcast.  Hello Dimitri and thank you for the invitation.  
**0:01:49-0:01:52:**  My pleasure.  So I thought that maybe we could start with a quick intro as to how you got into farming.  What's the story of your farm?  So the story of the farm beginning a few generations ago with my grand grandfather and my family  was a family of farmers and my parents work all life in the farm and I start working the  
**0:02:25-0:02:29:**  farm at 20 years old.  And at the beginning the child I always like the farm like animals and in the middle of  the college I decide to don't make the whole course, the whole college and to do different  formations in different areas of farm and start early to work in the farm.  My life in the farm beginning is like this at the 20 and work with my father the first  
**0:03:18-0:03:30:**  years and then I like the life of the farm and then now I work in the farm at about I'm  39 years old so at 19 years I work here.  Okay so the farm started was in your family's hands generations ago.  Yes the family of my father are a family of farmers and started this farm with my grandfather  where in this time horses, cows, a little number of cows and pigs.  
**0:04:06-0:04:16:**  But in 17 years ago the farms changed a lot and when the grandfather passed the farm for  my father they changed everything, they continued with the cows and with the pigs because in  the time of my father the cows and the horses are to work the land.  Yes and so the people don't eat meat of the cow, the meat is for work and eat very meat  of the pigs but with the times all change and in the time of my father the production  
**0:04:54-0:05:07:**  of cows increased a lot and now I am in the transition of a number of cows to a different  species now in the farm.  So in the last 90 years the farm has been passed for three different management.  Okay I think throughout the interview we'll get into these changes because this is what  we want to understand right is like why these changes happen and etc but before that maybe  
**0:05:33-0:05:38:**  we can delve a bit more into understanding your farm.  So could you tell us a bit about the scale you're working at, what soil you're on, what  system you're on.  Yes the farm, we're a farm of montado, the Spanish is a farm with a lot of trees, corn  trees, the home oak and the oak hole, it's in the name of Portuguese is azinara and subreiro,  
**0:06:07-0:06:14:**  subreiro is the tree that you have to improve the cork and the corn and so it's an aggressive  opus ristum system.  We only end in the 700 hectares, we only have 25 of flat area with no trees, the most of  the farm is a lot of trees, we have a density, average density of 14 trees per hectare but  we have areas that we pass the 17 trees per hectare.  
**0:06:43-0:06:51:**  With different water lines in the farm, we are in the microclimb, we are in Lentejo near  the centre of the north south of Portugal, it's a microclimb, it's a different Lentejo  because Lentejo is an area of very long landscape, flat area and the farm are in the microclimb  with the most degliff areas with a lot of trees and so we have a very complex system  with very trees, rain much more than 50 kilometres more south in our place, rain a little more.  
**0:07:39-0:07:45:**  So it's a complex system, it's a montado, it's an aggressive opus ristum system, you  can do the animals, you have the part of the florist, so you can do everything you imagine  here.  What you want to do, it happens, if you want to do cereals in a small land, a flat area,  you can do it, if you can put more trees, do fruit trees, management animals, different  
**0:08:15-0:08:17:**  species of animals, you can do it.  It's a good farm because you have different kind of things that it supports.  Very interesting.  Just confirming one detail, you said 40 or 14 at the beginning, it was 4-0, right?  4-0.  
**0:08:36-0:08:41:**  And what's the soil like?  Would you consider it for the region, is it quite high quality soil?  Yes, you have two different, the farm is divided in one row and you have 315 hectares of one  side and the other of another side and they are a little different because of the right  side of the road, the farm have more the clives, more mountains and more density of trees.  
**0:09:18-0:09:23:**  So the soil is not happening so much sun.  We don't, the management of the animals, we can do it different because you can't put,  it's very difficult to create a good impact when you have a lot of trees.  So the soil is more complex here.  You have more weeds to grow, you have more difficult to put more organic matter or do  
**0:09:50-0:09:55:**  correct management in the part of the tree.  But the complex of our system is that, because in this part you have a lot of corn, a lot  of food in the winter that the trees give you, a lot of shadow in the winter, in the  summer and a lot of, it's like a home in the winter for the animals because it's amazing.  You have good things and bad things in this context.  
**0:10:26-0:10:34:**  And the other side is a more flat area, more easy to work, more easy to put animals, more  easy to do a great impact, more rest in the soil.  So we have the two scenarios in the farm.  The soil is a clay, yes.  And in the best part of the farm and the other farm is a more acid soil with more rocks.  
**0:11:05-0:11:11:**  It's a less profiled soil and so it's more poor.  Okay, more poor.  Okay, nice.  Very interesting.  And so maybe we could understand a bit better what you're producing.  
**0:11:20-0:11:25:**  So we talked about earlier on in our other conversation, you said cows, there's pigs,  there's goats.  Could you give us a bit of a quantity maybe just so we know how many animals are on your  landscape?  For you to understand, when I start, more or less the interest for generative agriculture,  
**0:11:42-0:11:47:**  we change the species or we increase the species.  We don't change, but we increase.  When I start in the farm, only have pigs and cows.  And when I learn about the principles of generative agriculture and I know what the potential  of the farm, I increase the chips and the goats.  
**0:12:09-0:12:18:**  And now we management for different species because the farm wants to want it.  I think it's the correct way to management the farm because we have a lot of different  pieces of plants and the cows don't eat all of them.  And we have lots of dry matter that the cows don't eat and we increase the different species  to win more kilos with these different plants that the cows don't eat.  
**0:12:47-0:13:05:**  So now we have 230 cows, we have 70 goats, 120 mothers of pigs and 30 sheep.  30 sheep, okay.  We are in the balance of the different species.  I want to grow in the chips and in the goats.  I think the balance of the cows and the chips, we are already in the correct number.  
**0:13:24-0:13:33:**  Then I want to increase the chips and the goats because we have a heterogeneous farm.  It's not the same in all sense, they are very different contest in the farm.  And I think the chips are doing amazing job.  The goats too because it's hit everything that another species don't eat.  For the fire, the fire is an amazing animal to eat a lot of biomass that we produce.  
**0:14:10-0:14:19:**  I want to keep with the four different species and perhaps in the future, I want to put birds  to chicken eggs or pasture chicken.  Very interesting.  I think the farm support everything and beneficiate with different species, not project the farm.  I think it's the way.  
**0:14:38-0:14:41:**  Interesting.  If I understood correctly, you rotate these animals following the techniques of Alan Savory  and holistic management, right?  Yes, I made a different course that I tell you and what I learned is you have to respect  the precipiles of the Christianity of the Greek culture.  
**0:15:08-0:15:12:**  And so we have a different species.  We have to have the most profit in the land with the capacity of the different species.  So in the cows, we do the rotational management with the intensity at some seasons of the  year because in the summer it's impossible.  It's 14 degrees.  
**0:15:35-0:15:39:**  You can't move the cows three times per day.  It's a crazy thing.  You have the protein is very low on the pasture.  I think it's not in my contest.  I think it's not the better way to do it.  
**0:15:52-0:15:57:**  And the goats, now we are working the water lines.  We do the electric fence near the water lines and they go forward and back.  And I have a lot of grumbles in the farm because the water in the soil.  And so the goats are amazing for eating the grumbles.  And we work with the goats and with very, very good results because in the past, in  
**0:16:28-0:16:34:**  the time of my father, when we only have the two different species, the cows and the pigs,  my father don't ever till the soil, don't put pesticides, don't do anything bad for  the land.  But the management is a traditional management.  And the cows are in the big fence with no impact in the soil.  
**0:16:55-0:17:03:**  And he has four different groups of cows that are pregnant, that are not pregnant, maybe  with the little cows.  And so when we start with this system, we put all together and it's very easy to understand  the benefits of this management because you have a lot of rest in the fence.  You move one day in one fence, the cows, we work in the montado under the trees.  
**0:17:30-0:17:34:**  We can do it one day, seven hectares.  It's the average inside the montado and the flat areas.  You can do 0.3 hectares per day.  It depends on the season.  The chips, we start because my father 20 years ago started different management of the pigs  
**0:17:54-0:18:05:**  and he projects a maternity system who allows to a mother of pig have 800 square meters  for one mother.  And so my father put the mother pig in this box and stay two months with the piglets.  But in summer when the box are very time at rest, we have a lot of grass, dry grass and  the pigs don't hit the dry grass.  
**0:18:34-0:18:38:**  So we are very afraid of the fires.  And so we start with the chips to eat, to clean the summer maternity of the pigs in  summer and to improve more quality of the soil, to fertilize the soil.  The pigs we have 220, we change the management too.  We start with two groups of mothers.  
**0:19:06-0:19:10:**  Now we have three because with a small group we manage them better.  We control better all the situation.  We don't buy animals in other farms.  We made our own genetic.  We want only animals that have the capacity to have a good conditional cooperation in  
**0:19:37-0:19:39:**  the only heat grass.  We don't animals who need to depends off supplements of flowers.  We don't want it.  So a few years ago we started to choose only the animals who have the capacity to eat grass  and the corn.  
**0:20:01-0:20:09:**  In summer we made the different mixes of pumpkins, surrogate grass, mustard, different things  that allows us to do a rotational management and the mothers heat this mix.  We buy potato, soup product or anything like that to feed them in the summer.  The only stage that we give a supplement is a mix of cereal.  It's when they have the piglets because you imagine eight piglets with the mother and  
**0:20:46-0:20:51:**  it's a crazy thing for the pig.  She has a lot of space but she needs help in these two months.  And then we keep the pigs and we start to rotate the fence like the cows.  They go behind the cows or in the summer they go to these different mix.  I want to create a balance with different species but the correct number is the number  
**0:21:24-0:21:32:**  that tells me that I don't depend on to buy food in the exterior.  So I think I'm now in the balance with the cows and the pigs and I want to grow in the  other two species.  A few years ago what's happened is we have a lot of sanitary problems in the pigs.  Our prophylactic plant is very very heavy.  
**0:21:56-0:21:59:**  We have to vaccinate every month.  It was a crazy crazy thing.  One time I have 40 mothers of piglets that are not productive for abortions or they hit  the piglets or they are very skinny.  I tell my father, today this group of mothers we put in the most distant fence of the farm  
**0:22:30-0:22:37:**  where they have corn and they put it with three males and three months later we go there  and view what is pregnant or not pregnant and what is not pregnant we fed them and sell  to the hams.  And three months later we put in the coral to see what happened and 38 are pregnant.  So in this moment the management in the farm changed completely.  
**0:23:06-0:23:16:**  We don't in the last seven, eight years do any intervention in the pigs, we don't vaccinate  with nothing.  Only rotate the animals, only give space to the animals and so the change is the hate  for hating.  It changed a lot.  
**0:23:31-0:23:34:**  It's the day for the night.  We don't do any nothing, nothing.  Rotate animals, keep the animals who are genetic better with the morphology.  Our pigs compared with the Spanish pigs are much more little with much more capacity to  put fat and the Spanish pigs are a lot bigger with the capacity to put muscle.  
**0:24:04-0:24:07:**  Our pigs are more...  How do you say it in Portuguese?  Not so big.  Not so big.  Not so big.  
**0:24:21-0:24:22:**  That's small.  Okay.  Yeah, small.  Sorry.  Sorry my English.  
**0:24:26-0:24:31:**  Yeah, no, for me I wanted to, I saw on a lot of your resources online and also on the  Ray Gerens platform that you're really using the pigs to prepare the soil as well.  If we look at the functions of the animals, you're using the cows to graze the grass,  especially in the winter and spring.  The goats and the sheep to do more impact on shrubs and on brambles, et cetera.  
**0:24:49-0:24:55:**  You're also using the pigs to use, of course, all the whole milk and the cocoa producing  acorns but also you're using them to work the soil, right?  Maybe you could tell us a bit more about why you're using them in this way, how it went  for you, what were some of the results there?  I went to have four different species now because I went to tell, I have four different  
**0:25:14-0:25:20:**  species but because they allowed me to do things that one species don't allow.  So the pigs, the crazy thing with our farm is a pig farm.  We have different species but the farm is a farm with lots of acorn production.  So it's a pig farm.  And so the management that my father designed of the materialities is unique in Portugal.  
**0:25:53-0:25:59:**  Many people go to the farm to view the materiality system.  And what we are trying to do, I start with the pigs and then we go to the other species,  it's to tell the people that the pig can do regenerative impact in the system because  the pigs in Portugal are very, in Portugal and I think in the rest of the world, the  people don't like the pigs.  
**0:26:24-0:26:29:**  The people think the pigs do always negative impact in the system.  So we want to prove the opposite.  We want to work with the pigs with the correct way that the pigs are one species who do part  of the ecosystem and you can get very beneficial when you management correctly.  And so we start with a different experience.  
**0:26:49-0:26:58:**  I start with a small area then I put the pigs to do the impact in the first layer of the  soil and then I seed after the pigs and I watch what's happening.  The seeds go very, very well.  And one year after I do a bigger study with three hectares, I put 18 pigs one day when  they rain a lot and in one day to 12 hours of impact, it's good for seed.  
**0:27:29-0:27:42:**  And in another fence, near this fence, in another fence with the same area, I seed with  the direct seed and it was amazing the difference of production went with the impact of the  pigs and another of the direct seed.  So I think I don't tell the pigs are better than the direct seed.  No, I don't want to tell you this, but I want to, it's more to show that if you work  
**0:28:12-0:28:17:**  correctly with the pigs, you can do amazing things.  You can do a great impact in the brambles.  You can't remove the layer of the trees because the core tree goes down a very, very number  of leaves.  Sorry.  
**0:28:36-0:28:38:**  Yeah, leaves.  Sorry, sorry, leaves, corn goes on a lot of leaves into the soil covering this is difficult  to grow grass in the, if you put the pigs in correctly, they disturb the first layer  of the soil and the grass happen.  So we can use the pigs for different ways.  
**0:29:07-0:29:13:**  We can put the pigs behind the cows and the pigs three or four days behind the cows and  the pigs broken the manure of the cows helps to disintegrate, help you to discompact the  soil when the soil, I think it's amazing what the pigs can do it.  And I don't know any species, neither the cow, the goat or the sheep who have the capacity  to produce so much with so little.  
**0:29:43-0:29:51:**  What I'm trying to tell it, the porco leche, it's similar to Ibaric pig, but when a genetic  more ancestral and not modified because the Portuguese farmers who have the pigs have  small productions and don't modify the genetic to industrial.  And so the genetic are very, very ancestral.  And so the animal is amazing.  
**0:30:11-0:30:18:**  They can produce with four degrees to 14 degrees in the fields.  You don't have to do nothing and with the minimum of feed, the minimum of inputs that  you give to the animal, they produce a lot.  It's amazing thing.  And the capacity to put kilos with the corn and the magnetic products that you give is  
**0:30:36-0:30:40:**  a unique thing.  Today's everything talk about the more meat.  It's the infiltrate grass, but the genetic of the pig allows that the animal do it with  only with grass and the corn.  For me, it's an amazing thing.  
**0:31:01-0:31:02:**  Yeah.  For sure.  If you give a little of certain, it's an amazing animal.  The goats, we work with Portuguese breeds, the goats are Portuguese breed, the sheep  are Portuguese breed, black marino, the sheep is black marino, it's a rustic breed.  
**0:31:25-0:31:36:**  And the goat is a Portuguese breed too, who have the capacity of milk and meat.  But we only keep the animals to the meat.  We don't want animals with a lot of production of milk because it is a problem when you keep  the little goats.  So we management and we choose the animals who have the capacity to produce more meat.  
**0:32:00-0:32:13:**  In the cows, we have the base of our cows is a Portuguese breed too, very rustic with  the capacity to cross with everything you want and they don't have problems in the burst.  They can cross with everything.  And we put the angles to do a better quality of meat and we put bulls cross with BBB, the  blue-blonde cows to give more muscovy, to give more morphology, more growth, more fast.  
**0:32:45-0:32:54:**  And now we are in this stage, we only keep with our animals.  The sheep is the only thing I buy to another farm because I have a small group.  But this is the difference management than we do in the farm.  It's working to these different species and try to recover the soil, try to do more productive  and more profit things with the different species.  
**0:33:22-0:33:30:**  And the results, it's happening.  If I tell you the easy thing to understand, I increase more two species in the farm and  I don't put more people to work.  So I think this is the beginning of understanding the capacity of the farm allows us to do more  profit things with the same work.  
**0:34:04-0:34:09:**  If you have to do two or three new fence, we do it.  But the results in the kilos of the production of the new species pay the new infrastructure.  And the farm benefit with this because you don't have to put the tractor to cut the rumbles  or you have the small risk of fires.  When you start to view our farming in a different dynamic, I think I can put more different  
**0:34:51-0:35:01:**  species because you have space, you have lots of pasture that stay in the farm year after  year in different areas that the cows don't eat.  So you think you could increase the amount of cows?  Is that what you're saying?  You could have more cows, more animals?  
**0:35:16-0:35:18:**  I don't want to increase the number of cows.  I want to increase the number of the other species because what I'm trying to do in the  farm is the montage of farms like our farm have a problem in Portugal and Spain.  In Portugal, these appear per year, 5,000 of trees in Portugal, of corn trees in Portugal,  5,000 of hectares disappeared every year in Portugal.  
**0:35:50-0:35:52:**  So it's a crazy thing.  The certification, bad management, a lot of things.  And so I don't want to put my farm like I want to increase the possible numbers of the  young trees that the farm produces.  Some people can tell, no, but 30 or 40 trees per hectare is good.  
**0:36:23-0:36:27:**  Yes, but we don't have the young trees.  You understand me?  You only have trees with four or five years.  We don't have trees with 20 years.  And the old trees that we have with the farm have 200 years.  
**0:36:38-0:36:45:**  So we have to start now to change very fast the things to have more and more young trees  because we don't know how much time the old trees are alive.  So I want to do the things to increase the much possible of trees in the farm.  So I think the cows are in a good number.  It's much more important to increase the number of chips to enter behind the trees and do  
**0:37:13-0:37:18:**  a good impact and the correct impact in this soil.  But also, the more oaks you have, cork oaks you have, and the more ilex oaks you have,  also the more acorns you're going to have for your pigs, right?  And that's one of your main production.  Yes.  
**0:37:29-0:37:32:**  And the corn, I have amazing thing.  All the species eat the corn.  The cows eat the corn.  The corn.  Yes, all of the species.  
**0:37:38-0:37:44:**  If you put chickens, the chickens eat the corn behind the pigs because the pigs broken  the corn and the small pieces, the old birds and the old animals who live in the farm like  montado eat corn.  Corn is a dry matter, it will follow free in the soil for all animals.  So it's amazing.  
**0:38:06-0:38:08:**  It is really amazing.  It's so rich.  It's such a rich food full of different micro elements, proteins, etc.  It's very fats as well.  It's very interesting food source.  
**0:38:21-0:38:31:**  Yes, I think another thing that I don't understand why people don't start with this kind of agriculture  in Portugal is Portugal have everything.  The agro-civil-posterites system that you have in Portugal, every guy in the world want  to have it.  The Australian guys, what's happening in Australia, they put trees in the system.  
**0:38:48-0:38:52:**  Very trees, very number of trees.  In Brazil, when the people want to put a correct number and the correct species and the correct  management in the place, there are very, very number of trees.  So in Portugal, we have the perfect scenario for this kind of multi-species and the farm  projects with these different management.  
**0:39:24-0:39:32:**  So I think you have to do it for the good of all.  You said right now that you would like to have more and more trees.  And I understand that one of the reasons is the food produced and the other one is also  rejuvenating your montado system.  But is there any other reasons why you want more trees?  
**0:39:49-0:39:58:**  And what other ways or more subtle ways do the trees benefit your farm?  I think if you have 30 trees per hectare, you produce much more grass.  To a silver-posterite with a cow, with a lot of chips, 30 trees are perfect, 30-40 trees  are perfect.  But the different clives of the farm don't allow that you have 30 trees and another place  
**0:40:33-0:40:37:**  you have 70.  If you increase the number of trees, you will see the corn, you will see the cork, you sell  more cork.  But I think the most important thing is to maintain this unique ecosystem in the world.  I think it's the first thing you have to have in mind.  
**0:41:09-0:41:11:**  We have to maintain this.  It's not happening in another part of the world.  In Spain, Spain is our neighborhood and the farms are not so good as in Portugal.  Portugal is the most productive part of the world of cork.  So you have a unique ecosystem and you have to preserve and it's dying.  
**0:41:41-0:41:46:**  The whole year after this, millions of hectares.  So I think we have to do anything to put more trees in the system.  The benefits for the animals.  Imagine if in 7 or 8 years I have a lot of trees, I can reduce the cows and put more  sheep or more pigs.  
**0:42:13-0:42:17:**  Your decisions are made for your context.  If my context changes, I change the way I do the things.  I don't have to do cows for my life.  The balance I tell you of the different species is for more context now.  If the context changes, I rebalance the way I produce.  
**0:42:43-0:42:49:**  But that's where also you have such a diversity and market channels that you've established  to sell the different breeds and the different animals that you're raising on your land.  It gives you flexibility.  Because you have a system in place, you have selling systems in place.  So if for example there is more pasture developing or there is more oak tree developing or even  
**0:43:08-0:43:13:**  you're diversifying with other types of trees, you can just adjust the quantities of each  animal adapting to the evolving context.  So that diversity gives you also flexibility.  When we start with the chips and the goats, we start with a small number to understand  how it's the best work with a small group and then grow, grow, grow slow and not put  
**0:43:37-0:43:40:**  more people to work.  But do the things more in the correct way with more good decisions and more infrastructure  that's allowed to not put more people and grow in the number of the animals.  We start to sell the meat of the goats and the sheeps to the restaurant by direct sales  because in Portugal it's very, very difficult to do it with the cows because I don't have  
**0:44:14-0:44:18:**  the infrastructure to fed the calves.  And so in my management I prefer to sell the calves and fed the little ruminants, the goats  and the sheeps because the carcass is more easy to work for the restaurant and for the  chefs and we start to work with them with the sheeps and the goats.  And it goes very, very well because we don't do any supplement, any flower to the sheeps  
**0:44:53-0:45:01:**  and the goats and we sell in medium 6, 7 months of life.  We don't sell small animals and the meat makes a big difference and more restaurants are  interested in this kind of different production.  So I think if the farm allows me to produce different species, if I grow slow and if I  have more sheeps or more goats now I sell it whole.  
**0:45:36-0:45:43:**  I want to grow little by little because I don't want to sell any sheep or any goat to  a conventional market or to a guy who has fed them in the farm.  I want to sell the direct and I want to grow slow because I want to catch my partners,  more people, more restaurants and more chefs.  Another thing we do in last year, we did a Michelin chef, the name is João Rodríguez,  
**0:46:19-0:46:27:**  it's very good in Portugal and they have a crazy project to show the better producers  of Portugal and the different kinds of products that we do in Portugal.  And then we do a open day in the farm with different chefs and three different chefs,  one cook the lamb, another cook the goat, the other cook the pig.  And very people go to the farm, we made a visit of the farm for the different systems,  
**0:47:01-0:47:06:**  explain the management, explain the benefits of every animals in the system, explain that  the cows don't, it's not the cow, it's the cow.  And the people stay very happy and very comfortable to think that a beef is not a crazy thing.  And I see in the visit a couple and the guy tells the girl, you see, it's not a problem  to eat a beef of the cow because the cow is not a problem.  
**0:47:36-0:47:44:**  So I think this kind of thing is very good to change the mindset of the people.  It's very good.  And now we receive a lot of people in the farm who are interested in this management.  And I think it's the beginning of things, of different things happen.  I think it's very good.  
**0:48:00-0:48:01:**  Very interesting.  Yeah, that's, it's fascinating to zoom into also the way that these practices, they transform  into communication and they are attractive.  You know, you're managing a native, beautiful and respected ecosystem with your animals.  And so it's just a story that people must really jump on and enjoy.  
**0:48:22-0:48:31:**  But I wanted to zoom in a bit on the interaction between, you know, the animal production side  and the montado system and the oak tree.  And, you know, one of the first things that comes to mind is when you're looking at holistic  management and moving these animals around because you're constantly moving them, you  know, a bit here, a bit there.  
**0:48:49-0:48:54:**  How does the trees there that are not spaced in lines, you know, they're big trees are  dotted around the landscape.  How does the movement of the animals?  How does it interact with the trees?  Does it make things much more difficult?  
**0:49:05-0:49:09:**  Do you have to adapt the way that you move the animals to this tree system?  I'm talking about the logistics right now.  The logistics is a crazy thing that's invented that allows you to do that.  It's electric fence.  Electric fence is amazing thing.  
**0:49:24-0:49:31:**  When you want, you design the fence in the cycle, in the triangle, what you want and  the animals respect them.  But I tell you a little story that we have a fence with 14 actors and we divide the fence  three actors per day.  And we have in these fence a lot of young trees and we put the cows in the morning.  
**0:49:54-0:50:02:**  We open at eight o'clock and at four or five o'clock, we change for another fence of three  actors, 200 cows.  And we do different fence at the finish of the old fence of 14 actors.  The little trees, it's not one broken for the cow in the small fences where they do.  The cows don't broke any little tree.  
**0:50:35-0:50:46:**  In the last day, I thought, if you made a lot of small fences, now I can put the cows  one day with the old fence with no electric fence.  And in the last day, they broke three or four little trees.  So what happened?  They run for all the fence and they don't hit like a group.  
**0:51:15-0:51:29:**  They walk separate and three hours after they hit the grass, they think, now what I'm doing?  Now I'm hitting a little tree or I have to rub myself.  This is the little experience that tell you it's not the cow, it's the how, it's the management.  If you put in the place that we have a lot of young trees, you put the cows concentrate  a little number of hours and then in three, four hours, we look and if it hits, we move  
**0:52:04-0:52:05:**  them.  And this place is after this day, rests six months, six or seven months.  So not any problem with the cow, with the young trees, but with the cow and a lot of  old trees, it's more difficult because when you have the poor soil, a lot of old trees  don't produce a quantity of grass who allows you to do impact with the animals.  
**0:52:39-0:52:47:**  So in the winter, you can do well-dressed and you put hay here, it's what's happened,  what are we doing now, we put the hay in the winter and to put impact to create a disturbance  in the soil and function.  But I think after the cows, if you put the sheep, the soil, it's going better.  So the cows are amazing animals, are the most efficient animal, the most heavy, the species  
**0:53:15-0:53:20:**  that hit more quantity of food, it's amazing for doing impact.  But I think with another different species behind, the benefits are big.  Interesting.  Just to clarify, when you say you don't manage to have a lot of impact, I understand that  it's a question of quantity of grass and the amount of cows and the amount of time they  
**0:53:45-0:53:46:**  stay on the same place.  But what's the objective of the impact?  Why are you looking for impact?  Because the soil is very poor, the production of grass is very low, the soil they have 100  years of bad management, so you have to do a great disburd to disperse the soil.  
**0:54:15-0:54:19:**  To wake up the soil.  So I think in our contest, in our farm, it's more easy to do in the winter.  In the winter, with the rain, the soil is better for doing impact.  When you put the hay, we do the belt raising, you distribute the hay in the area that we  make the impact and then we change the electric fence for other place and we do a rotational  
**0:54:51-0:55:00:**  management only with the hay because we want to create a lot of impact because the soil  is very compact, don't grow anything.  And I have videos and photos of the seeds of the hay we brought, born a few days ago,  a few days behind the cows.  It's amazing.  
**0:55:24-0:55:29:**  I think it's the correct way because I don't want to till the soil, I don't want to till  because the roots of the trees.  I want to do it with the animals.  The cows give lots of manure in this compact, in this high density of number of the animals  grouped.  
**0:55:50-0:55:54:**  But I made a different experience.  I made with the cows, I made with the pigs.  The pigs disturb the first layer and then we put a lot of seeds and the function, the  different experience results well.  But the farm is very big and the problem is if you can't, one month or two months of the  
**0:56:22-0:56:32:**  year, you can't catch the cows of the neighborhood to do more impact in one month or two and  then give the cows again.  You walk fast.  In Portugal it's a crazy thing to do that.  So you have to do when the species, the different animals that we have in the farm and you have  
**0:56:52-0:56:54:**  to walk slow.  Interesting.  You just brought up lots of questions for me.  One of the things is have you seen that in these poor areas or in general on the farm,  have you seen that after this impact, after this bale grazing for example, bringing in  
**0:57:10-0:57:15:**  like nutrition converted into manure and etc.  Do you notice the trees benefits as well?  Because you talked about pasture now, but there's also the cork oaks all around.  Have you seen them respond to this impact or are they kind of on another cycle?  I think the most important thing for the quality of cork is the time of rest.  
**0:57:34-0:57:44:**  If you have a great impact, I think it's where we are talking about one hour and we talk  about three days and I tell you that I think the most important thing is the time of rest.  You will do a great impact, but then it's the time of rest who allows you to do the  soil recovery.  I think for the cork, it's very good for the trees, the rest time.  
**0:58:08-0:58:16:**  If you have the animals in all the months or two and two months, go to the fence, not  with the management, not with the electric fence, not with the density of animals.  The animals go to the tree and hit any leaves and broken a young tree.  This is the worst thing you can do.  When you give rest time, everything changes.  
**0:58:40-0:58:52:**  And so this year we have cork season, we produce the cork and it's the better production we  have.  Interesting, very interesting.  Because you have the big layers of cork and another thing that you tell you your production  of cork is bad or not is the small pieces.  
**0:59:12-0:59:26:**  Because the tree, when you go with the hex at the tree, if the cork goes entire, it unwraps  itself in a whole piece.  Yes, in all pieces, very good.  We do a lot of small pieces.  It's not good because the tree doesn't want to give the cork.  
**0:59:39-0:59:47:**  So this year it's the better production that we have.  That's really interesting.  What about the acorns?  Have you also seen changes since you've been managing this way?  In your most difficult areas, are you seeing acorn production changing?  
**1:00:02-1:00:12:**  The acorn production depends on the elix and the cork.  Because when I have three different fruitifications, the cork has three different fruitifications  and the elix only has one.  And for the pigs it's better the cork of the elix because it's more sweet and we have more  percentage of fat.  
**1:00:32-1:00:39:**  But the perfect thing is when you have the two things because you have much more acorn  for a long time.  And so I think if you have water in the soil, if you have the ecosystem more resilient,  much more capacity to drink the water of the rain, to reserve the water, the production  of the corn is like the olive, it's like the almonds.  
**1:01:08-1:01:11:**  It's a tree fruit.  The corn is a tree fruit, the elix is a tree fruit.  So if you treat them well, if you have a good quality of soil, nutrients and water, the  production are good.  You view that when you have a year that's rain a lot, you have a good production.  
**1:01:34-1:01:40:**  If you have a spring that rains a lot in the autumn, you have a good production of fruit.  So it's a tree animal or a plant, they need all the same.  They need to have a good quality of life and then the disponibility of nutrients, they  have time to rest.  When you see a plant or a tree, you have to see equal and we look at the animal.  
**1:02:18-1:02:20:**  I try to do it.  Yeah, yeah, for sure, it's interesting.  We talked about the pasture earlier on and too many trees that are too high density which  compromises the pasture.  For you, what's an optimum tree level to maintain a pasture?  
**1:02:42-1:02:48:**  For example, if you have an open field, an open pasture, how many trees can you put on  there without seriously diminishing the quantity of pasture production?  Do you have an idea?  I think 30 to 40.  That's your optimal for pasture production.  
**1:03:02-1:03:08:**  I think it's good because when you have open areas, the beaks are much more trees than  you have very number of trees.  If you have number of trees, the trees are small.  If you have 30 or 40 trees per hectare, you have big trees.  We have a lot of big trees in these areas with this number of trees per hectare and  
**1:03:26-1:03:33:**  they are very productive and they are very healthy because they don't have a tree to  push another tree.  They don't have to fight for the sun.  So I think 30 or 40 trees per hectare is a good number.  Not only does it let more light go through, but it also has a strong acorn production.  
**1:03:56-1:03:58:**  It's the best of both worlds.  Yes.  Indeed, the best quality of cork is better too.  It's better too.  Okay, interesting.  
**1:04:09-1:04:15:**  When you have, oh, let me start again.  What's the interaction between the oak in general and the pasture in the sense, do you  see the pasture around the oak be better or worse depending on the years, right?  Because there's drought years and then there's non-drought years, but how does it impact  on a micro level?  
**1:04:39-1:04:49:**  In the beginning of summer, you have more green pasture at the beginning of the summer  behind the tree.  In the winter, when you follow the ice, behind the trees, you don't have ice.  So the grass grows more fast.  So it's very good.  
**1:05:10-1:05:19:**  And if you look at the pasture behind the tree or inside the tree, it's completely different  because behind the tree, it's a different ecosystem.  It's a different...  Microclimate.  Yeah, this pointability of the nutrients of the rain, of the sun, it's different.  
**1:05:32-1:05:38:**  So it's very, I have photos of this, it's an amazing thing.  You, the green pasture behind the trees, it's green more 20 days than the other.  But if you go to the 70 trees per hectare, they disappear first.  What about on a drought year?  When there's like a drought spring?  
**1:06:14-1:06:15:**  What is a drought?  A drought is when there's no rain.  It's a much less rain than normal.  It's a drought.  Yes.  
**1:06:25-1:06:26:**  What happens?  The first green grass appears, it's behind the trees.  So if the grow is more fast in the winter, in the spring, you have more green tea behind  the tree.  So if you have a dry year, you have more production behind the trees.  
**1:06:56-1:07:03:**  But better production, more production, I don't know.  It's difficult to respond.  I think you have more quality behind the tree, but you can have more production because the  if you have a few days of rain, the grass who have inside the tree can grow.  Can grow, we can put a very density.  
**1:07:33-1:07:44:**  But if you talk about a very dry year, you only have a little grass behind the trees  because they have the microclimbing with the leaves, the shadow of the trees, improve the  water to grow fast and early.  So even in terms of drought, you have a better, this is a big generalization, but a better  production of pasture.  
**1:08:07-1:08:09:**  Yes.  Even in dry years.  Is that right?  Yes.  No, the trees only give benefits.  
**1:08:20-1:08:23:**  You have only benefits with the trees.  But when you pass a number, it's complex and it's a challenge to management and get good  results in the soil.  For you, it may seem more obvious this, but for people that are coming from an outside  system that are a lot of people now establishing trees on their pasture, they're not managing  
**1:08:52-1:08:58:**  old in the sense that the system that you're managing in Portugal now, the Montado system  is what some people will be managing in 20, 30 years when their silver pastoral systems  have got big trees, established root systems.  So it's very interesting to look at those details of these interactions to give a bit  of an idea for these people, for the people planting trees right now, how they're going  
**1:09:17-1:09:24:**  to, how their management and how their capital, their natural capital will change in the future.  So yeah, it's really fascinating to talk to a person with your experience on that.  I think the people are doing this today in 30 or 40 years.  The farms of them is the much productive farms you have in the world, if you management correctly,  because you design the system, you have a number of trees who allowed you to do a perfect  
**1:09:55-1:09:56:**  management.  So I think it's a crazy thing, I think it's the future.  It's the perfect contest, it's the perfect way to produce different species of animals.  They can do what they want in the system like that.  You can do anything, vegetables, cereals, any cover crop, and you can't put any animal,  
**1:10:24-1:10:25:**  any species.  So I think it's the future and I think it's a very, very good investment.  You put the trees correctly because the trees are amazing.  When a farm without trees, it's not completely farm.  Interesting.  
**1:10:42-1:10:48:**  And when you say put them on correctly, do you mean, is the main thing the quantity of  trees or are there other things that you would like to tell these people?  I think it depends on the contest.  The wrong thing we can do in this kind of agriculture is to mimic anyone.  We don't have to mimic anyone, we have to mimic the system and the nature of our contest.  
**1:11:12-1:11:21:**  You have to mimic it, we have to see what you have in our area and you have to organize  it and then management.  The only work for the man is management.  It's not invented different than the crazy things.  I think it's more important you stop and view what you have around and in our area that  
**1:11:44-1:11:52:**  you go to the YouTube and see a lot of videos and a lot of confusion and a lot of things.  This guy has this and I want to have this.  I think it's the wrong way.  If it depends on the contest, depends on what you want to do, you can put trees to feed  the animals, you can put trees to produce fruits.  
**1:12:11-1:12:19:**  It's a decision you have to make and the decisions today have consequences in 13 years.  So you have to think a lot about what you want to do and what is a serious decision.  You have to understand and then when you decide, you have to work the better way to resolve.  I wanted to understand a bit better what feed does the system, the tree systems produce.  We mentioned acorns, which as you said, all animals eat the acorns.  
**1:12:55-1:12:59:**  They get them from the ground and they eat them there.  Is there any fodder that's produced?  Do they also eat leaves?  Is there any biomass from the tree that they also eat?  You can in a specific season of the year, you can clean the tree.  
**1:13:16-1:13:25:**  You can do a very soft clean the tree and the cows eat the leaves.  So it's a help for winter season, very important because it's fiber.  You give fiber for the animals.  Imagine if you have an ear that doesn't rain or rain very low.  You don't have food.  
**1:13:44-1:13:48:**  The corn starts to fall.  If you only have a corn, it's a problem for you because the cows go crazy behind the trees  to eat the corn.  The first corn is not mature, it's a green fruit and causes a lot of problems in the  stomach of the cows.  
**1:14:14-1:14:25:**  If you clean the tree and you give fiber to the goats, these problems don't happen.  So it's a reserve that your system produces.  If you have to do it, you do it.  Some guys think they are not good to clean, soft or not soft, no touch in the tree.  Other guys tell you, no, but it's a fruit tree, every fruit tree you have to cut, you  
**1:14:55-1:14:56:**  have to management.  It's not a problem.  Different opinions.  When we do it, we do very, very soft.  I've seen in Portugal, they create a lot of open, V-shaped or U-shaped, cup-shaped oak  
**1:15:20-1:15:21:**  trees.  Do you do that or do you leave them there, their central leader?  No, I do it open.  You do an open cup.  Open cup.  
**1:15:30-1:15:40:**  What we want is not the very big tree.  You want a circular tree.  You want more down and more circular to produce more shadow, to produce more…  And the fruitification happens more when you have a tree, a circular tree and more down  tree.  
**1:16:02-1:16:06:**  You don't have so much problems with the wind.  When you have very old trees, the wind is a problem because if you don't balance the  height of the tree with the wind, they're broken very easily.  So it's a problem.  So if you clean the trees that are not balanced, they have more height one side or the other,  
**1:16:39-1:16:40:**  help the tree.  I think there is little management.  It's good for the trees.  You know, when we're looking at the fodder of trees, especially oaks with their tannins  and etc., there's a lot of people that talk about the benefits for parasites, animal parasites.  
**1:16:59-1:17:02:**  How do you manage parasites on your farm?  Do you see a benefit?  Do you use them as a tool for parasites or is it not effective?  No, the corn is first for the pigs, for the fat season of the pigs.  The name is Montagnara.  
**1:17:21-1:17:32:**  Montagnara is the four or five months of you have a corn in the farm and the pigs enter  in October in Montagnara with another 100 kilos and save four months later with another  18 kilos.  So they eat seven kilos of corn per day and two kilos of grass.  It's an amazing thing.  
**1:17:49-1:18:01:**  And I think we don't put ivermectin in our animals long years ago.  I think the secret of the parasites is the rest time in the fence.  When you put the long rest time in the fence, it's impossible to the parasites grow and  multiplicate.  So I think for me, it makes more sense to do it this time because I need to fat the  
**1:18:28-1:18:29:**  pigs too.  For example, depend on the species for species because we know different plants that are  toxic and the cows go and touch these plants to repel the insects.  But the goats eat them.  So depend on the species.  
**1:18:57-1:19:08:**  The goats are very clever, the goats discover any plant they need to not have parasites.  The cows, I think it's better to do the rest time in sanitary empty fence for a long time.  The pigs, I don't have problems with the pigs.  We made very very rotation with the pigs and very long times of rest to in the fence.  And if I see an animal who don't fat or have a problem, we sell it.  
**1:19:41-1:19:43:**  They don't stay in the farm.  So the capacity of the pig, it's very different of ruminant.  They put kilos and kilos very fast.  So in my experience, I don't see any problem with parasites in the pigs.  So you don't treat animals for parasites?  
**1:20:03-1:20:04:**  No.  No.  Okay.  You don't give vaccines, you don't treat for parasites?  No.  
**1:20:11-1:20:15:**  When I stop to use, I want to stop at all.  I don't, if I have a serious problem in the animal, of course I treat them.  But I want to choose the better animals, the more adaptable animals to stay in the farm.  And the others, yes, then the others, we have to sell it.  Very interesting.  
**1:20:42-1:20:44:**  Fantastic.  I wanted to talk, to finish off on the subject that I find really fascinating is the way  that you're using the impact of the animals to bring back.  I mean, I've seen some pictures and hopefully we can share some of these pictures to our  listeners on our social media as well to show them a bit visually what this means.  
**1:21:04-1:21:12:**  But I saw some amazing pictures where you have a montado with, so the oaks are there  with brambles and small trees.  It's hard to say exactly what it is, growing everywhere.  And with the impact of the animals, you've just taken them all down and you've reestablished  a pasture.  
**1:21:24-1:21:28:**  So, I mean, maybe you could tell us a bit more about what animals, what species, what  tool do you use to make it happen?  Depend off the area, depend off the area.  Imagine, like I said, in the water lines, I don't want to finish the brambles.  I want to hit and I want the brambles to grow again and I want to hit again.  
**1:21:47-1:21:52:**  In the more flat areas, then we have a group of brambles.  I want to transform the brambles in pasture.  So I do intensive impact.  And I start in the winter with the cows.  I put hay in the middle to the cows, broken the brambles and hit the hay in the middle  
**1:22:10-1:22:11:**  of the brambles.  Then I put the pigs.  The pigs are amazing because they like to eat the roots.  And so when you have the brambles down, they catch the roots because the roots have humidity,  they have water and they broken them.  
**1:22:33-1:22:41:**  The hay that we put has seeds, so with the start, the beginning of the rain season, the  seeds grow.  The seeds grow but the brambles have an extraordinary capacity to recover and the brambles recover.  Imagine if you have, you don't kill the brambles, hold the brambles, you don't kill 20% or 30%  or again and re-row again.  
**1:23:06-1:23:11:**  And then when the brambles re-row, we put the goats.  And the goats are specialized to eat like a medicine guy with a history.  They eat leaf by leaf to the brambles.  And then I think it's the better way to control the brambles.  Three different species that changed your landscape.  
**1:23:37-1:23:45:**  The soil behind the cow, behind the brambles is amazing.  It's a crazy thing.  It's black, black, black.  It's a crazy thing, very productive.  And I think if I can do the correct management after the cows broke and after the pigs broke  
**1:23:58-1:24:06:**  the roots, after the goats hit the rip-rods, if you can put the sheep to fertilize the  soil, I think it's amazing.  And I do a little experience and the photos that you are talking about, you can view what  you are talking about here.  It's amazing.  
**1:24:24-1:24:27:**  It's very fast.  If you do in the winter, next spring you have results.  It's very, very fast.  It's a crazy thing.  But how many cycles of this would you need to do to really take out brambles?  
**1:24:37-1:24:39:**  Or is that not even your objective?  No, no.  In the flat areas it is.  In the water lines, not.  But in the areas that it's better for me, produce grass and brambles, I want to change  
**1:24:52-1:24:53:**  for pasture.  I think in one year and a half you change it.  If you begin in the winter, imagine now, if I can share photos of the system that you  talk about, beginning in October.  Now today I see this place and we have the 30% of reward of the brambles.  
**1:25:27-1:25:29:**  Then I put the goats.  I put the goats in the beginning of the summer.  So the goats hit the brambles and in the summer, I think in the beginning of the winter, only  5% of the 30% of the goats hit, only 5% grow again in the beginning of the winter.  So these 5% in the winter, when I put the cows again, disappear.  
**1:25:57-1:26:04:**  We are talking about one year because I start in October, but we can talk about one and  a half year.  I think it's a very short time for a big and complex transformation in the soil because  the color of the soil, the smell of the soil behind the brambles is a crazy, crazy thing.  I want to put vegetables in the soil.  
**1:26:33-1:26:35:**  You can really use the brambles in your rotation.  I mean, because it's such a fantastic tool and they grow so fast.  They have an impact really fast.  Yes, but the brambles don't grow in very poor areas.  The brambles are very clean.  
**1:26:49-1:26:50:**  Too dry.  Yes, too dry and the brambles don't grow.  We have a different plant in the dry areas, in the poor areas, but this plant is very  important to feed the cows in winter.  If you give hay in winter, in these areas that we do a very intensive impact in winter,  
**1:27:16-1:27:28:**  you have a plant that is very good for equilibrating the digestion of the cow.  When you do an impact only without this plant, the manure of the cow is one thing.  Then when you change the fence and you have this kind of plant, the manure changes completely.  You have two months of young leaves after the first rain and the cows eat everything.  I do impacts in the fence and we can finish with them and put the productive soil.  
**1:28:08-1:28:19:**  But you have to be patient and you have to do small areas all the years.  I can't do it in four or five years.  It's a long journey.  But I think with different species, I can walk fast.  And you need the cows of the neighbor in these strategic moments.  
**1:28:39-1:28:40:**  This is what you're saying.  It's like in these strategic moments, you need to have a bigger impact.  You need more animals, but then they need to get out before the summer where the resources  drop a lot.  Yes, because we need a lot of cows, a lot of number of cows to a great impact.  
**1:28:57-1:29:02:**  But then the farm doesn't produce so much food for all the cows.  So if I can put the cows in winter and do a great impact and then give the cows to the  neighbor again and do a lot of rest, I walk more fast.  It's more fast to recover the soil.  But when we walk slowly, it's good too.  
**1:29:28-1:29:32:**  We understand the different things.  We learn a lot and it makes us to improve different things and to grow and to learn  more and not have in a comfort area.  You have to run, you have to do anything.  You have to work, you have to learn more.  
**1:30:05-1:30:06:**  It's good.  We don't have to have the proclification to walk very, very fast.  It's the job you choose and you have your life to do the better day by day.  Very nice.  I think in our farming experience in Greece as well, going slow was something that we  
**1:30:40-1:30:48:**  didn't do enough of and going slow to learn, to make the mistakes on small scale.  Yes, but when I tell you to walk slow, it's different than don't make nothing or wait  for the change happening like a miracle.  Like a miracle.  You have to get this pump.  
**1:31:22-1:31:36:**  So I know that my decision, the good and the better, I walk slow but every day I want to  do more and more different things.  I want to put more chips, I want to put more goats, I want to start when I can, I want  to start with the chickens, I want to do different things.  But if you have the thinking, I go to the fence and the fence is equal to one ear.  
**1:32:02-1:32:06:**  So you don't feel good in your work.  You have to do different things.  When you do different things, the different things happen and you walk more fast than  you think about.  It's great for this.  
**1:32:19-1:32:26:**  You have to put a starter, you have to start with different things and then you learn and  different things happen and the things change and in one ear you walk more fast than you  imagine.  Nice.  I think it's a great place to finish the interview, Francisco.  
**1:32:49-1:32:52:**  Thank you so much for coming on.  Thanks for the invitation and sorry for my English.  But you can view our page on Instagram.  We shared our work in the farm all week with photos and different things that we do.  So thanks Dimitris for the invitation and when you come to Portugal, you have to visit  
**1:33:20-1:33:22:**  us.  So that's it for today's episode.  I hope you enjoyed it and please consider supporting us on our website and don't hesitate  as always to get in touch.  We're always happy to receive emails and exchange with our listeners.  
**1:33:37-1:33:47:**  Thank you very much.  