### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2021-54-27)
**0:00:00-0:00:16:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  
**0:00:32-0:00:33:**  these challenges.  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Today I'm interviewing Ben Raskin who's leading the implementation of various agroforestry  systems on Eastbrook Farm in the UK.  
**0:00:53-0:00:57:**  You'll get a really clear understanding of why and how trees were planted on Eastbrook  Farm.  I really enjoyed Ben's passion for woodchips and we got into the details of how much to  apply, the results they have achieved with them and how to supply them in the future.  Ben is also able to give a detailed comparison of the different options for protecting trees  
**0:01:11-0:01:16:**  which is such a crucial component of establishing silver pastoral systems.  I really hope you enjoy the episode.  Hi Ben, welcome to the podcast.  Hello there.  Thanks for joining us today and let's get started with an introduction on who you are  
**0:01:27-0:01:30:**  and how you got interested into agroforestry.  So I'm Ben Raskin.  My main role job at the moment is working for the Soil Association.  I head up their horticultural and agroforestry work.  My background is as a vegetable grower so I was in mostly commercial vegetable production  
**0:01:49-0:01:52:**  for around 12 years.  And at the moment I'm also managing an agroforestry plantation in Wiltshire in southwest England  and then I do other bits and pieces of advice and writing to keep me off the streets.  And when's the first time you heard about agroforestry or that you started experimenting  with it?  
**0:02:14-0:02:17:**  I'm not sure if I'm honest.  I've been trying to think about this recently and so around, when was it, around 10 years  ago I planted up a very small agroforestry system which I can tell you about in more  detail.  It ended disastrously but and I'd been interested for a couple of years before that.  
**0:02:40-0:02:47:**  So it's sort of I guess sort of 12, 15 years but I can't remember what it was that got  me interested.  There was no sort of there was no eureka moment where I suddenly thought this is it.  You know I've got to do this.  I think it was a sort of a drip, drip really about the interactions between trees and initially  
**0:03:01-0:03:02:**  vegetables anyway.  Well I can't help myself but be interested by disasters so what happened in that first  project?  Well it had so much potential.  It was an old, a big old glass house and polytunnel nursery that had gone bust and there was a  
**0:03:21-0:03:27:**  vision of creating an eco center, you know horticultural eco center.  So there was someone there who was growing flowers and someone else who was producing  plug plants and I rented two acres.  It was really, really good soil and that was what attracted me to it.  It was some fantastic soil and I rented two acres outside space so I wasn't growing under  
**0:03:48-0:03:56:**  cover and spent, I can't remember, about four thousand pounds on fruit trees mainly.  Got them all planted and started growing some crops in between.  I planted some squash and artichokes I think initially and then unfortunately the landlord  went bust and I was very nervous about losing all the trees so I went and dug all the trees  up again and moved them to another site.  
**0:04:22-0:04:27:**  The disastrous bit in a way, I mean that was quite disastrous, but it also coincided with  the birth of my second son and my wife was in hospital with complications for a while  and so the trees were sort of last thing on my mind really.  So I didn't protect them properly and they got eaten by rabbits and they got flooded  in the field that I putted in and so when I finally got back to them, I think out of  
**0:04:45-0:04:50:**  the sort of 250 trees that there were initially or something, there were about eight left  that were still alive.  So it was interesting and I learned things but ultimately it was not what I had imagined  it was going to be.  It does raise an interesting point about implementing agroforestry systems on rented land and maybe  
**0:05:07-0:05:11:**  that's something we can come back a bit later in the interview.  But yeah, first I was thinking, I've seen your name associated to agroforestry in reports  of the Soil Association and it seems that you're also working on that theme through  the organization.  Can you tell us a bit about that, your work in there?  
**0:05:25-0:05:26:**  Yeah, absolutely.  So at the time of that failed experiment that I just described, Helen Browning joined the  Soil Association at a similar time as the chief executive and she'd been interested  in agroforestry and basically had said that we were talking about doing more agroforestry  with the Soil Association and I basically put my hand up and said, oh I'd like to do  
**0:05:54-0:05:56:**  that bit please.  And so gradually over, you know, from around 2012 we started planning how we were going  to build more agroforestry work within that.  And sort of jumping ahead a little bit as well, that then coincided with Helen starting  to do the planting on her own farm and asking me to help plan and implement that.  
**0:06:19-0:06:21:**  So that was in 2016.  So it's been a sort of gradual evolving really from a little bit that was of interest but  not key to my role to now where I'm probably spending more time on agroforestry than I  am on the horticulture.  I'd love us to come back to your work with the Soil Association but first it'd be great  
**0:06:39-0:06:43:**  to understand what you're working on at the moment.  From what I've gathered online, you're currently implementing agroforestry practices on Eastbrook  Farm and maybe you could give us a bit of an overview of that project.  Yeah absolutely.  So Eastbrook Farm is the farm that's run by Helen Browning who's also the CEO of the Soil  
**0:07:00-0:07:01:**  Association.  The most of the farm is rented from the Church of England.  So it's a 1500 acre, so what's that, 700 hectares roughly, farm.  It's quite long and thin.  It's about 8 kilometres long, the farm.  
**0:07:22-0:07:28:**  Because most of it is rented, she wasn't initially able to plant many trees.  The Church of England who owned it were at the time not very keen on trees being planted  on their land.  They seem to be changing now which is great, maybe partly because of what we've been doing.  But anyway, at the time she was hampered really a little bit by that.  
**0:07:48-0:07:54:**  But just before we started planning, she inherited some land.  So 200 acres which is sort of at the bottom end of the existing farm.  And so that's when we were able to start really putting trees in on her own land and really  starting to have the freedom I guess to implement a system or to experiment with systems that  she wanted to.  
**0:08:13-0:08:17:**  And what was her interest in planting trees in the first place, her motivations?  So that's a good question and I think it's one that anyone thinking about agroforestry,  you do need to go right back to that.  What is your main objective from planting trees because there's so many things they  can achieve.  
**0:08:29-0:08:35:**  And for Helen, there were probably two main reasons and some supplementary ones.  So climate and business resilience was a big thing.  So we know that the climate is going to throw all kinds of things at us.  Everything's getting more extreme.  We're getting colder periods, hotter periods, some colder periods, lots of wet periods,  
**0:08:54-0:08:58:**  lots of dry periods, weird times a year.  And being able to mitigate that a little bit with trees was really important.  But also that longer change in the climate offers threats to existing crops and opportunities  for new crops.  So for instance, we've been planting things like almonds and apricots, which are not traditional  
**0:09:20-0:09:24:**  in North Wiltshire.  We were, speculative I think would be a good word for it.  But who knows in 10 years time or in 20 years time, the climate might have changed sufficiently  that they're perfectly suited for those crops.  So it's testing the ground a little bit for some novel trees as well as trying to build  
**0:09:42-0:09:46:**  resilience into the farming system.  And the other big driver for Helen was around animal welfare.  So she's always been at the forefront of finding ways of farming better for animals.  So we know that trees provide shade, shelter, food, all of those things that can improve  an animal's life as well as the productivity of the system.  
**0:10:08-0:10:12:**  So those were the two main drivers.  And beyond that, things like improving soil health, improving biodiversity are also things  that she's passionate about.  And finally, I think she just loves trees, as probably we all do.  And just having more trees about, there's parts of her farm where the hedges have been  
**0:10:32-0:10:36:**  ripped out in the period following the Second World War.  There's bits where we've really got quite bare fields.  There's big fields, they're exposed.  And when you've got livestock up on them, it's not in the winter, it's not the best  place to be.  
**0:10:47-0:10:54:**  So just being able to make the landscape more treed was another big driver.  So I hear all these reasons rooted in production and in the farm itself.  But of course, both of you also have another dimension to your work with the Soil Association.  Is there also a dimension of a bit research and having a bit of a pilot site, or maybe  not pilots, but showcasing these different practices?  
**0:11:15-0:11:22:**  Or is it really about the farm and just the farm business rationale is enough in a sense  to justify these systems?  I suspect, and I can't speak for Helen, but I suspect she would have done it anyway.  But I think being able to act, as you say, exactly as an experimental farm, as a demonstration  farm of what to do and what not to do.  
**0:11:41-0:11:45:**  We're very happy to share things that haven't worked.  Allows us probably to be more experimental than if we were purely looking at it for business.  You know, on a very basic business level.  And the work that both Helen and I do actually between the Practical Work and the Soil Association  work are very interlinked.  
**0:12:03-0:12:06:**  And they both inform and help each other.  So Helen is very keen for people to come and visit the farm.  She's very keen for scientists to come and study the farm and researchers to come and  study it.  We've got in some of the fields, we're using the app, SectorMentor app, and we've got individual  
**0:12:23-0:12:29:**  trees tagged and where we can find the time we're measuring yield per tree and disease  and things like that.  So yeah, we're absolutely very keen for it to be of wider use as well as helping the  farm business.  That's great because if you can perceive knowledge as an output of the farm beyond production,  
**0:12:47-0:12:51:**  it helps put a lot of mistakes in perspective because you kind of tell yourself at least  we're learning from this and so are other people.  That's something we definitely relate to on Massey Farm.  And yeah, I think it's a good way of keeping motivation even in tough times.  Now that we have quite a good understanding of this, maybe we should look a bit more in  
**0:13:09-0:13:12:**  practice what these different systems look like.  So maybe you can give us an overview of the different agroforestry systems you've implemented.  Yeah, yeah, absolutely.  So first off, it's worth saying that this part of the farm is entirely livestock at  the moment.  
**0:13:25-0:13:27:**  So it's a silver pastoral system.  It's flat and it's mostly flat.  There's one field with a slope and it's heavy clay, most of it.  So it is croppable.  There have been crops on it in the past, but it's very wet and heavy.  
**0:13:43-0:13:52:**  And particularly in the spring, finding windows to cultivate the soil ready for crops is tricky.  So with some of the systems that we've implemented, we're allowing the potential for cropping,  even though it's currently livestock.  So if I run through maybe in the order that we've been planting them, that's probably  the easiest way.  
**0:14:10-0:14:18:**  So the first field that we planted up is called Barnfield, very imaginatively named because  it's next to the barn.  And that is probably you describe that more like an extensive orchard.  So it's relatively close spacing.  It's 10 meters between rows.  
**0:14:32-0:14:41:**  And we've got a mix of, I think around 23 or 24 species at the last count of tree fruit,  nuts and bush fruit.  Mostly each row is mostly one type of tree interplanted with one type of bush.  And we had quite a lot of debates about how much to mix everything up, you know, because  on the one hand, the more diverse everything is, the better from a sort of biological point  
**0:15:06-0:15:12:**  of view, but from a management and practical point of view, it gets more complicated.  So in the end, we erred towards the simpler management.  And it's still very diverse, but each row then is sort of its own row.  At the moment, we're cutting that grass for silage or hay.  But what we'd like to do is to have poultry in that field.  
**0:15:31-0:15:34:**  We did have a little bit in the first year.  And ideally what we'd like is someone to come and run a poultry enterprise.  So maybe one of your listeners could come and run some poultry for us.  So that's that field.  The next field we did is going to be a grazed woodland.  
**0:15:58-0:16:02:**  So we've planted it up with mixed native trees.  We'll let them grow on for 10, 15 years until they're big enough to be able to cope with  the cattle in.  And then we'll open that up and thin it out a bit.  And eventually that will be a grazed woodland.  
**0:16:17-0:16:23:**  And there's some interesting learnings there in terms of establishment and mulching, which  I can maybe come back to later on.  Then the field above that, which is around 46 acres, so around 20 hectares, we've got  an alley cropping system in there.  So we've got straight lines, straight parallel lines, 27 meters apart.  
**0:16:45-0:16:49:**  So that's following this kind of spacing calculations that Stephen Briggs did, where you end up  with a 24 meter strip effectively, which because 24 is divisible by 12, 8, 6, 4, 3, 2, you  can use any piece of machinery.  So effectively it keeps all your options open.  And what we've done in that field is we've put a single strand electric fence on each  
**0:17:10-0:17:12:**  side of the trees.  So we've created effectively sort of 18 paddocks between the rows.  And we're now mob grazing between each row.  So whereas before it was grazed, I think in two halves from memory, it's now done on a  rotational basis.  
**0:17:27-0:17:33:**  So one of the interesting things for me is not only have we got the changes that planting  the trees are bringing, but we've also got the changes in farming practice that the system  has produced.  And certainly in the first year or two, I think Helen was pretty convinced that the  productivity of the grass had gone up significantly by the change in the grazing routine, even  
**0:17:54-0:18:00:**  before we really saw, you know, likely to see any impact from the trees.  And the trees in that field are mostly peri-pair trees.  So peri-pairs are a small, hard pair that you use for making a drink like cider.  So they're like cider apples, but they're pairs.  They grow quite big, they're big trees, and we've interplanted them with willow and alder,  
**0:18:20-0:18:27:**  which will coppice and use either for wood chip or for feed for the animals.  There's also some timber trees in that field.  So we've put a few oaks, cherries, hornbeam, wild service, and there's some sea buckthorners  into plant as well.  So we've grown quite a lot of sea buckthorn, quite interested in that.  
**0:18:43-0:18:47:**  There's a developing market in the UK for it, it's still relatively unknown, but there's  a couple of companies we're working with, one to, assuming we get enough harvest at  some point to supply that.  And the main objectives of those trees there were just to find trees that had economic  benefits, or were there some parameters given that you were selecting trees for an alley  
**0:19:10-0:19:11:**  cropping system?  Yes, that's a good question.  We wanted trees that were big enough to provide some benefit to the livestock.  We wanted them to be productive.  And when we were doing that initial research, peri-pairs were one of the things that there  
**0:19:30-0:19:31:**  was a demand for.  So there's lots of people growing apples, and at the moment in the UK, the cider apple  industry is on its knees.  There's lots of, well that's not quite fair, it's not on its knees, but there's an oversupply  of apples at the moment.  
**0:19:44-0:19:49:**  So we didn't want to go into something that we knew was already oversupplied.  So peri-pairs seemed like a good idea.  We knew there was still a strong demand for it.  It's still a relatively niche product, so there's not going to be hundreds of people  going out and planting lots of peri-pairs.  
**0:20:02-0:20:07:**  So we were fairly confident that we would be able to sell them.  And then the timber trees is a very long term, as you know, very long term project.  So that's not really looking about the immediate market, but we wanted something for the longer  term and some big trees in that field.  So for that field, the main objective, well the two main objectives, one was to try and  
**0:20:30-0:20:31:**  dry the land out.  So we're hoping that having these trees will reduce the flooding a little bit, make it  drier, particularly sort of in the spring when we might want to crop it, but also then  to provide shade and shelter for the animals.  So except in Barnfield where you have like an orchard system, for the two other agroforestry  
**0:20:51-0:20:58:**  systems, the needs of the animals that are already on the farm remain a central preoccupation  and kind of design.  Yeah, I'd say that's a good analysis.  And the field that we're, the sort of the next on the list as it were, is quite a long  field.  
**0:21:13-0:21:16:**  So it's a kilometer long.  And it's, if you look back at the historical maps, it was actually three fields.  So we're reinstituting the old hedges in that field and splitting it up again into three.  We've also put in some browsing blocks.  So these are, I got sort of this concept from Steve Gabriel, the American silver pasturist.  
**0:21:39-0:21:44:**  And it's a tightly planted block of, in our case, we're using willow and poplar at the  moment.  And that's what we've suggested in mulberry as well.  And you effectively let it grow and then bring the livestock into that area to then they  coppice it, they browse it down.  
**0:21:55-0:21:59:**  So you take them in for quite a short space of time, bring them out again before they  totally kill the trees, we hope.  So that's the idea with that.  We've got two small areas that we're trialing of that.  We haven't got, they're not old enough yet to have been browsed.  
**0:22:11-0:22:14:**  So we don't quite know how the system's going to work.  But there is apparently someone doing something similar down in Somerset where they've got  the old willow plantations for basket weeding.  So I'm hoping to learn a bit from that.  Yeah, the idea is once the animals come in and let's say, take some leaves, and you have  
**0:22:31-0:22:35:**  maybe some branches that have been stripped of leaves, you just don't prune the tree at  all.  You just leave it as such and then leave it to continue.  Yeah, I think that's the idea.  I mean, I think we might experiment with different options as well, because the other option  
**0:22:46-0:22:53:**  is you actually coppice it yourself, but let them browse it from the ground or throw it  over the hedge for them.  So that allows you to do it maybe in a more controlled way, but obviously has higher labour.  So what we quite like to do is maybe try and split the block into two and manage it in  a slightly different way and see, you know, with a lot of the things that we're trying  
**0:23:09-0:23:14:**  to do, we want to see if we can do at least two different management techniques or ways  of doing it just to see what happens, because often it's the mistake sometimes, isn't it,  that teach you something new as well.  But it's so interesting because, you know, it's a bit premature to talk about this because  you're only at the beginning, but, you know, hopefully we can get you back on the podcast  
**0:23:29-0:23:35:**  one day and get some information from that, because it seems certain that on terms of  fodder trees and this whole theme of using trees to feed animals, the question of how  you bring that food to them in a time efficient manner compared to, you know, hay or anything  grass related is so crucial and seems like such limiting factors.  So I'm really excited to hear that you're testing this out and I hope for my sake, at  
**0:23:56-0:24:01:**  least that you succeed and I can inspire myself in your work.  Well, we hope so, certainly, and I think inevitably when you're trialing these things, it's inefficient,  isn't it?  You know, it's like in the same way that, you know, cutting hay probably was pretty  inefficient when they first started doing it.  
**0:24:14-0:24:19:**  But now we've got combine harvesters and silage makers and all the rest of it, you know, so  it's, you know, if we know that it works and we know when to cut it and how to feed it,  then we can find ways of making it more efficient, I think.  But as a general rule, I think, you know, if you can bring the animal to the food, then  that's likely to be cheaper and quicker than having to bring the food to the animal.  
**0:24:40-0:24:41:**  Sure.  While we're on the theme of tree fodder, coming back to the grazed woodland system, have you  included in that some fodder species?  So we have, yeah, it's a real mixture.  So we've got things like, you know, oak that will end up being, you know, probably the  
**0:24:59-0:25:01:**  long term framework.  But we've got a lot of willow and so what else have we got in there?  I can't even remember all the species.  Certainly there's quite a few things.  I'm saying willow because I was there yesterday.  
**0:25:14-0:25:20:**  And the willow is sort of the one thing that seems to be doing the best in that plantation.  We planted it in 2018, which was very dry in the UK, I don't know about the rest of  Europe, but and we lost quite a lot of plants.  And it surprised me in some ways that the willows were the ones that survived because  you would think that maybe they wouldn't.  
**0:25:40-0:25:45:**  And I don't know whether they just managed to get their roots down quicker and therefore  survived.  So there was even in the height of the drought, there was water in the very lower levels.  But where the trees hadn't properly established, we did lose a lot.  And we had, I mentioned earlier, sort of accidental experiment.  
**0:26:01-0:26:05:**  I know we're going to talk about woodchipping a bit, but one of the things that sort of  really got me excited was we dumped a load of woodchip that we'd made over the fence  into this bit of the graze woodland, sort of meaning to go and spread it out and mulch  a whole load of trees and never got around to it.  So there was a little patch of trees in the corner that had sort of nearly a meter of  
**0:26:24-0:26:26:**  woodchip mulch around them.  And you would think that that wouldn't be great for them.  But those trees are now sort of nearly three meters tall and the ones next to them planted  on the same day with only a sprinkle of mulch are only sort of up to my waist.  So there's a real sort of powerful demonstration of the power of kind of keeping in, particularly  
**0:26:50-0:26:55:**  in that year, I think, the keeping in the water and keeping the weeds down.  When you say one meter, you mean one meter thick?  I mean, yeah, the mulch was a meter deep.  Wow.  In places, you know, which is ridiculous.  
**0:27:07-0:27:09:**  I wouldn't replicate it.  But in that instance, it happened to be just what the trees needed.  And your analysis of it is you think it comes down to moisture retention or weed suppression  as you're suggesting?  I think in that year, I suspect the main factor was water retention.  
**0:27:27-0:27:31:**  We know that mulching obviously keeps down weeds.  It can modulate extremes of temperature as well.  So it might well be that in that very hot year, it kept the roots cooler, which enabled  them to grow more.  I don't think we had a particularly cold winter.  
**0:27:43-0:27:49:**  So I think, you know, the keeping the soil warm wouldn't have been a particular benefit.  There's also, you know, we also know that the wood chip mulch boosts the soil biology.  But I don't think in the first year after planting, that would have been the main factor.  I suspect it was mainly moisture.  Well, you are right, we're gonna talk more about wood chips.  
**0:28:02-0:28:08:**  But before we do, I just wanted to finish a bit this understanding really, the different  systems and if I understand you correctly, then the grazed woodlands, the main purpose  there is shelter and shade for the animals and really making good grazing out of grass,  but you know, using the tree as more climatic.  Let's say how could you say that buffer, I guess?  
**0:28:30-0:28:31:**  Yeah, I think that's fair.  I think we might end up coppicing or pollarding some of the willow if we think that we can  do it and it's useful and the stock will benefit from it.  So we might end up managing some of the trees within that system.  But mostly it will be just established trees to provide shade and shelter.  
**0:28:59-0:29:05:**  Well since I feel this passion in you for wood chips, I think we should avoid the topic  any longer.  Maybe you could actually before we go specifically into wood chips, tell us about your strategy  in terms of mulching.  I don't know if you've only put wood chips or if you've tested out different techniques  
**0:29:20-0:29:24:**  or materials to suppress weeds, etc.  We have.  We've tested a few.  And I would say at this point as well that I was quite heavily influenced by an American  researcher called David Granatstein, who's well worth looking out for.  
**0:29:37-0:29:43:**  And he's done quite a lot of research on weed control in orchard systems in the States.  And I came across a presentation of his that looked at various strategies.  And in all the cases that involved an organic mulch, and particularly wood chip, the yields  from the trees and the establishment was made up for the extra cost of putting it down.  So that immediately kind of made me interested.  
**0:30:08-0:30:17:**  And I'd had various experiences with wood chip using it as a mulch in pots and using  it very well composted wood chip as a soil conditioner.  So sort of in the back of my head, I had it as an interesting product.  But when we started establishing the trees at East Brook, I tried some mulch mats.  So the Hessian mulch mats.  
**0:30:38-0:30:43:**  And then also they did deliver some Hessian with a plastic backing one by mistake that  I hadn't ordered, which I tried as well.  And I have to say I'd really, really dislike mulch mats.  I would not recommend them.  For us anyway, they provided this fantastic home for voles, a lovely waterproof roof.  
**0:31:00-0:31:04:**  And if you then mulch on top of that, you're insulating their home for them.  So you're giving them this perfect little microclimate under there and then they can  munch away at your roots without any fear of predators.  What we found is if you put the wood chip directly onto the soil, I don't know if it's  because it falls into the runs of the voles or they just don't like the texture of it,  
**0:31:24-0:31:30:**  but we've got very little damage where we mulch directly on the soil.  So those were our two main strategies.  Obviously being certified organic, we couldn't use herbicides even if we'd wanted to.  And the other options really were strimming, which we did a little bit of, but you risk  damaging the trees and it's just so expensive.  
**0:31:49-0:31:52:**  So we've mostly avoided that.  So we've come down now really to trying to get a really short grass or whatever's growing  there initially, and then a good mulch of wood chip to get it established.  One thing we are interested in trying is cultivating and harrowing a strip, which we then sow with  a low growing grass seed mix.  
**0:32:23-0:32:30:**  I'm still nervous with our soil that that won't give us good establishment as the mulch,  but it is something that I think we should look at because one of the problems with the  wood chip mulch is it doesn't control perennial weeds very well.  So we do get thistles and docks come up through it, which are a short term problem because  once the trees are big enough, then we'll be able to graze or mow in between them.  
**0:32:51-0:32:57:**  But for a lot of farmers having that level of weed in their field, I think would be a  problem.  We do look at it and think, oh, that looks really messy, but look at all the gold finches  on it, you know, the butterflies and you know, we got hairs nestling in there.  So, you know, the the wildlife that it brings in is amazing.  
**0:33:11-0:33:19:**  But equally, you know, there's definitely an element of knowing that farmers will be  put off if they look at that and go, oh, is this what it means if I have to plant trees  on my farm, I'm going to have all of these weeds and other farmers are going to be looking  at me thinking what a weedy field.  One issue we had with mulch was couch grass and all the kind of rhizobial grasses.  
**0:33:36-0:33:41:**  I don't know if you have it in the climate in the UK, because we do.  Oh, yeah.  And we really found that when you exclude, you know, all others, the ones that are able  to kind of move laterally really came in, then whether that's detrimental or not, or  more than another one, like we don't really know.  
**0:33:56-0:34:00:**  But that's definitely something like something against not against.  But yeah, a problem with with mulching we saw.  Yeah, I would agree.  I mean, I think the it really depends on what you're trying to grow.  So I think for most trees, it's not a problem.  
**0:34:13-0:34:17:**  And you know, or it's a minor problem for some for some of the crops.  I mean, things like we have got raspberries in a couple of rows.  And you know, some of the perennial weeds for raspberries are a nightmare.  And that's where the chickens actually really came came into their own.  They were brilliant amongst the raspberries.  
**0:34:31-0:34:38:**  Whereas, you know, even on something like sea buckthorn, it's big enough and vigorous  enough that it could cope with couch grass pretty well.  And, you know, we might have to stream around them once a year just to stop them getting  too out of control.  But we're we're hoping, I mean, the other thing to say about which, you know, we're  
**0:34:54-0:34:56:**  not intending to mulch every year.  It's very much an establishment technique.  So it's not it's not a permanent ongoing management tool.  And I think there's a there's a potential risk of, you know, nutrient imbalance if you  if you keep piling on wood chip every year.  
**0:35:11-0:35:16:**  So it's, you know, it's it's two or three applications during the first four or five  years, I think is how we're seeing it.  I'm curious about, you know, you mentioned the study were saying that the increase in  yields and growth kind of counterbalance the cost.  But I assume that only applies for kind of high value production, such as fruit trees.  
**0:35:33-0:35:38:**  And then wouldn't necessarily be the case for kind of more biomass or wild species that  you'd be planting.  Yeah, it's a good question.  I'm sure you're right.  I'm sure I'm sure that effect is is definitely more in high value crops.  
**0:35:47-0:35:55:**  But I mean, again, what we've the speed of establishment, it depends what you want, what  you want it for.  So if you know if if in fact all you want is shade to stop your cows overheating in  the summer.  Well, actually having that barrier a year earlier, you might well find that you've paid  
**0:36:08-0:36:09:**  that back.  You know, if you're if your milk production goes up by 10 percent, that might well pay  for the cost of the wood chipping.  So I think I think it's hard to know on some of those lower value stuff.  But certainly the the speed of establishment and initial growth that I've seen in a lot  
**0:36:29-0:36:36:**  of our plantings using the mulch, I think would justify in most circumstances.  But it would be interesting to it would be interesting to do those figures on the lower  value trees for sure.  And some organic orchards use some kind of light tillage to suppress weeds.  Was that never an option then for you?  
**0:36:50-0:36:52:**  We did consider it.  I mean, again, interesting looking at David Granatstein's figures, the tillage didn't  do that well.  You know, it was good at controlling weeds, but effectively you're destroying the soil  every time you go through it.  
**0:37:03-0:37:09:**  It's you know, it's quite it's quite destructive, really.  And the machinery that you need to do is quite expensive.  I think we were looking at 18000 pounds or something to buy to buy the machine and we  just it didn't quite fit right with us for the system.  The other thing for us in particularly where we've got the electric fencing is we can't  
**0:37:25-0:37:31:**  get close enough to the trees to to do that operation anyway.  So in some of the situations, it wasn't even going to be viable.  And now that you've okay, you've understood that woodchips are probably your best option.  Do you use it systematically as you plant new systems out?  And what is the kind of typical amount you lay on the tree for it to be effective?  
**0:37:51-0:37:52:**  So we do.  It's a short answer, assuming that we've got enough of it.  So we're quite lucky.  We've got a couple of tree surgeons that give us their woodchip and then we also produce  some of our own.  
**0:38:06-0:38:12:**  So we as we go forward, we didn't do very much planting last year.  We had a what do you call it?  A consolidation year, which was quite useful sometimes, I think, to take a step back for  sure.  But yeah, we're certainly planning going forward to mulch where we can.  
**0:38:28-0:38:33:**  Certainly looking at is I've just written this book on woodchip.  So I've done quite a lot of research into various studies about thickness of mulch.  And the consensus from various studies seems to show it's about 10 or 15 centimetres deep  is you see any less than 10 and you don't really get enough weed control effect.  You can go more, obviously, but how much woodchip have you got and how much time have you got  
**0:38:59-0:39:00:**  to put it down?  You know, so it becomes probably more expensive than it's worth doing up to a point.  So 10 to 15 centimetres is the normal amount.  But it does depend a little bit on the woodchip and how small the chips are, what species  it is, how well rotted it is.  
**0:39:20-0:39:24:**  So there's a few things that might affect how deep you put it on.  And for applying the woodchip, you're just able to drive in between the tree lines and  kind of do it in an effective manner with a big trailer.  Or how do you proceed?  So we've done it in two main ways.  
**0:39:40-0:39:46:**  Where the trees are closer together, we've done it with a tractor and a trailer and forks  shoveling off the back, which again is expensive, but you can be very accurate.  And particularly if you've got a tractor that you can load the trailer up with, you know,  the heap, that makes it much quicker.  The other way we've done it is with using a silage feeder wagon, which worked brilliantly,  
**0:40:09-0:40:12:**  as long as the chip is very even.  So where we produced our own woodchip from the willow, and we knew that it was all the  right size and didn't have anything else in it, that worked brilliantly.  And the farm manager just sort of put a little extension on the distributor and we sort of  hooked it over the electric fence and drove down.  
**0:40:30-0:40:36:**  And that once we got the speed right and how much was coming out, that worked fantastically.  We did a whole row, you know, in a 400 meter row we did in 15 minutes.  So that was great.  But as soon as you get the woodchip from the tree surgeons, where it's different species,  there's bits of long branch in it, you know, we've had the occasional chainsaw helmet and  
**0:40:54-0:40:58:**  pruning saws left in the pile.  So the farm manager quite rightly was rather reluctant to risk his machine with that.  And how does that perform as mulch then?  It performs fine.  Chainsaw helmets are great, you just lay them around the tree.  
**0:41:11-0:41:17:**  One thing that pops into my mind is that, you know, at the moment, anyone using woodchips,  or at least, you know, you're lucky enough to be surrounded by tree surgeons.  And since you're innovating, and maybe not that many people are using woodchips, you're  able to access all that biomass.  But if we were to imagine that woodchips were to become mainstream, let's say, how do you  
**0:41:36-0:41:40:**  see the possibility of scaling such a technique?  Because all of a sudden, you know, there'll be much less matter available, and it'd be  a real, real issue.  Yeah, I think that's a really good question.  I think it's all I think it might even be starting to happen already.  
**0:41:54-0:42:00:**  So I've heard in some parts of the country, it's getting harder to get hold of woodchip.  I think part of that is the biomass industry, which is sucking a lot of woodchip.  But I think also where it had been seen as a as just a waste, people are beginning to  to see its value.  Obviously, after they've read my book, the demand will go through the roof.  
**0:42:20-0:42:30:**  So you know, but I think for those, for farmers, I think we need to be starting to think about  producing our own and building it into our agroforestry systems.  That's to me, I think where it becomes a sustainable resource that you know, whether you're using  it to build your soil health or use it for livestock bedding, or you know, use it for  mulching, but actually thinking about, okay, well, I'm planting, I'm going to plant some  
**0:42:51-0:42:57:**  rows of coppice specifically for that purpose, and I'm going to manage them for that purpose.  It becomes more efficient.  And and it you know exactly what's in it.  So you know, one of the risks of all this stuff from the tree surgeons is you don't  quite know what's in it.  
**0:43:07-0:43:12:**  You know, probably it's all fine, but it might have some diseased wood in it might have,  you know, something that you just haven't seen, you know, we did get a bag of rubble  in it once, you know, he just said, Oh, really, you know, and it's that it's not a massive  problem, but it's still something that's out of your control.  And I think as farmers, we should, any input to our farm is an area of risk.  
**0:43:30-0:43:35:**  And if we can be producing our own in a controlled way where we know what's going into it.  And there's also it's not an area that's been that well researched, but there's there is  evidence that single species wood chips can have particular effects.  So we did a innovative farmers field lab with the Soil Association looking at using willow  wood chip to help control scab in apples.  
**0:43:55-0:44:02:**  So the salicylic acid, which aspirin basically seems to stimulate an immune reaction in trees  against the disease and make them better able to withstand scab.  And I suspect there's lots of things like that that are going on within, you know, the  wood chip accident or the whatever it is that we could start to play around with if we've  if we've got control.  
**0:44:19-0:44:24:**  And at the moment, most wood chip just comes in as, you know, a whole mix load of stuff.  So that's that's where I think it gets interesting and where it fits particularly into agroforestry  systems is giving the farmer their own valuable resource.  You know, it brings all the other benefits that we've talked about in terms of biodiversity,  animal welfare, soil health, etc., etc., as well as that that on farm resource that might  
**0:44:46-0:44:49:**  replace something else that you had to buy in.  And how have you designed that future supply on the farm then?  Well, we haven't yet is the short answer.  But we are talking about it.  So we have, you know, it's a big farm.  
**0:45:00-0:45:02:**  There's quite a lot of trees.  There's, there's actually an 18 acre woodland that Helen planted up nearly 20 years ago.  So there's there's actually quite a lot of wood at the moment that we could be chipping.  But equally, we don't want, you know, it's really important that wood is left in situ  as well.  
**0:45:22-0:45:25:**  We don't want to mop up every bit of tree and turn it into wood chip because that's  not helpful either.  So part of it is identifying trees on the farm that might supply that.  So we have, for instance, a lot of willows along our riverbank that historically were  pollarded.  
**0:45:40-0:45:41:**  So that's quite a good start.  And that's where we got a lot of wood chip from two years ago.  But then I think it's also building in these very specific.  So, so far, we haven't put them in.  But it might be that our next alley planting, for instance, is specifically done for wood  
**0:45:58-0:45:59:**  chip.  But we have, I would say we haven't yet done those calculations about, about what we want  to use it for, how much we'll need and how much it could supply.  So for instance, Helen's got, you know, there are two dairy on their farm, they've got two  dairy herds at each end of the farm.  
**0:46:17-0:46:24:**  At the moment, they're not using wood chip for bedding, but they could be.  But that would be a whole, you know, a whole another project to work out what exactly how  much wood chip would we need?  Where we get it from?  Do we have enough trees already?  
**0:46:32-0:46:34:**  What, you know, what do we need to plant?  So it's a, I think, particularly for a big farm, it's a big, it's a big decision because  you need to make sure that, you know, if you've got to have many animals are in the two herds,  I can't remember 300 dairy, you know, you've got to make sure you've got a good supply  to make sure you don't run out and it's got to be good quality and you know where it comes  
**0:46:53-0:46:54:**  from.  And I think the design is so important in that respect, because for example, the area  where I am in France is a mountainous area away from, you know, any cereal production.  So they're having to truck in all the straw for the bedding.  And it makes a lot of sense to be using wood chips.  
**0:47:11-0:47:17:**  But then once you've said that, to actually harvest in a time efficient way, wood chips,  and to have it at a cost where it's competitive with straw at the moment is really difficult,  because I think it's, it's one thing to design and think out a system which is made to be  harvested easily, easy to mechanize, you can bring a big chipper in and try and do things  on a bigger scale.  
**0:47:33-0:47:38:**  But then, you know, going here and there and hedges and trying to pull branches to the  chipper.  And that's a bit what we've done on Massey Farm in Greece, and I can tell you, if you  measure the price of the cubic meter of wood chips, it is, it is, if you're producing it  yourself and not just, you know, taking advantage of the residue of another activity, such as  
**0:47:52-0:47:54:**  wood surgeons, it's a big theme.  So I think that's, that's really interesting, actually, designing these efficient, smart  ways of harvesting that biomass is crucial.  Yeah, you're absolutely right.  And I think the other bit of that picture is, is how farmers can collaborate.  
**0:48:10-0:48:15:**  So on your own, you know, maybe you can't afford the machinery to make it happen.  But if there's a group of 10 of you, or you know, one of you sort of acts as a contractor,  or there's a cooperative, then actually you can start to introduce some of that scale.  But it, you know, particularly in hilly areas where it's not so easy to harvest efficiently,  it does, it becomes a challenge for sure.  
**0:48:33-0:48:38:**  Well, as much as we could sit here and talk about wood chips all night, there are a few  other questions on my list.  So the next one, I guess, is, you know, when you think trees and you think livestock, they're  not necessarily an easy combination and easy things to put together, especially when the  trees are young.  
**0:48:54-0:49:01:**  So my question now is, how have you dealt with protecting the trees from the livestock  and how has that kind of integration of young trees into a livestock business been?  So we do spend quite a lot of time talking about protection and fencing.  And ultimately, it's a discussion about cost and risk.  How many trees can you afford to lose?  
**0:49:23-0:49:29:**  And at what point is it worth spending lots of money on expensive fencing and tree guards?  So we've done and we've worked, I think, at both extremes.  So when we planted up a few of the alleys in the first year as an experiment just to  see how they grew and we hadn't put in the electric fencing.  So we just put in individual tree guards, six foot, so two meter tree guards with a  
**0:49:53-0:49:54:**  post.  We have a lot of deer.  So deer were our main concern.  And those guards seem to work really well.  But in that first year, we hadn't got the livestock there.  
**0:50:06-0:50:11:**  So year two in that field, we put in the electric fence.  So we've got a single strand of electric fence at about waist height.  And that's set up to a mains electric, so 10,000 volts.  And it's we've got one one strand on each side of the tree row.  And that works really well.  
**0:50:28-0:50:32:**  We've had no damage from the cows.  They I think in hindsight, we would have the fences slightly closer.  So we've got them 1.5 meters from the tree on each side.  I think we could go down to 1.25 meters or possibly even one because we've ended up with  quite a wide strip where they're not grazing under the wire, which is a weed problem for  
**0:50:56-0:50:57:**  us.  And so ideally, what we'd want is that wood chip strip and then grazed.  And at the moment, we've got a grass bit in between that, which is the worst weed bit.  Some fields, so Barnfield, which has got all the different fruit and nuts in and the grazed  woodland, we've deer fenced the entire field.  
**0:51:18-0:51:21:**  The grazed woodland, we got a grant to do that.  And Barnfield, we just decided that the value and number of the trees in the field was worth  spending the money on.  We also rabbit fenced that field because we got a lot of rabbits, which seemed to work  for the first two years, but then they found a way in, I say tend to.  
**0:51:40-0:51:45:**  So we then ended up having to go around and put a spiral guard on each of the trees in  that field as well.  And speaking to other people, that's quite a theme where you think you've done it well  enough, then you have to go back and do it again.  So one of the things I would say is to buy the most expensive, biggest stake you can.  
**0:52:02-0:52:08:**  So certainly in the first field, we put in the recommended stake and it was useless and  we've had to go back and restake pretty much every tree.  And we should have just spent the money in the first place to do it.  So yes, it's spending as much as you can without, what's the best way of putting it, spending  as much as you can without wasting your money, because you can put too much protection in.  
**0:52:39-0:52:42:**  And the question you have to ask yourself is how many of these trees can I afford to  lose and where we had a big field with fewer numbers of trees and less valuable trees,  we figured we could lose quite a few before we had to spend £25,000 on deer fencing.  It was more interesting to put deer fencing with the cost that comes with it than spending  on good quality tree guards on each individual tree?  
**0:53:07-0:53:11:**  So, yeah, it's a good question.  I mean, how good a quality tree guard does it have to be?  And the beauty in a way of the deer guard is it gives you that confidence that they  just can't get in until the trees are big enough.  Whereas with individual tree guards, you're always going back and having to check.  
**0:53:36-0:53:40:**  Maybe it was more expensive than it needed to be.  But when you're spending in that field, a lot of the trees were £15, £20 each.  So that once you've spent money to plant them an establishment and you've got the cost of  that, that adds up.  We've got 800 or so trees in that field.  
**0:54:01-0:54:08:**  I can't quite remember what that figure is, but 800 times 20, it's quite a lot.  So I'm not saying we got it right.  I'm not saying we made the right calculation every time, but it's thinking and often you  make a decision.  It's easy to say, oh, we can't afford to do that.  
**0:54:22-0:54:29:**  And then two years down the line, you realise that not spending that money up front is costing  you more money now.  So as an example, when we talked about the electric fencing on the alleys, there was  some discussion, well, we could use temporary electric fencing and just move it every time  we needed to move the animals.  
**0:54:43-0:54:47:**  And the farm manager said, well, hang on, if we have to do that, we'll never move it.  We won't get around to it.  Whereas if I've got permanent electric fencing with a bungee at the end of each alley, when  I want to move the cows, I just lift the bungee and move them.  So we'll move them all the time and say the management will be better because it's easy.  
**0:55:02-0:55:07:**  Whereas if I've got to faff around moving 400 metres of electric fence every time I  want to move them, it won't happen or it'll happen less frequently and it will cost more  money and labour's expensive.  So it's those decisions in a way.  And I don't think there's necessarily any right answer.  
**0:55:22-0:55:27:**  I mean, we're interested now in these cactus guards as well, which I think seem to come  down a bit in price, if I'm right.  I think we were looking at them at the weekend and sort of £13 each.  So yes, you know, actually you could buy quite a lot of individual guards at £13 before you  got to £10,000 on a deer fence.  
**0:55:43-0:55:48:**  So it's, yeah, I think it's a good decision.  I think the available products are changing all the time as well.  I think that there's more things available now than there were five years ago even.  So actually, although my question started with the livestock, it's not the wildlife  is much more of a challenge than livestock is really because you've just dealt with that  
**0:56:07-0:56:12:**  with a single line permanent fence, which isn't that expensive.  And then you're...  Yeah, yeah, absolutely.  So I mean, because we've only got cattle at the moment in that farm, single strand is  fine.  
**0:56:19-0:56:25:**  I think from memory that was £1.20 a metre, which compares to £12 a metre for deer fencing.  So, you know, significantly cheaper.  If we had sheep there as well, we'd probably want a double strand.  So that would put it up by £20 a metre or something.  But because, yeah, it's quite cheap, the electric fencing.  
**0:56:41-0:56:49:**  And you can plan for the cattle in a way, whereas wildlife is sometimes less, you know,  less able to plan.  So we've, you know, we're keeping out the big deer with that electric fence.  That works quite well.  But we also have muntjac deer and we have hares.  
**0:56:58-0:57:04:**  So we do still have to guard the individual trees behind that electric fencing, or certainly  until they're bigger.  One theme that I find interesting is knowledge and, you know, the relationship to knowledge  when you start working with agroforestry, because, first of all, it requires a whole  new skill set.  
**0:57:19-0:57:24:**  And it seems that in your case, they've kind of tackled that by hiring you.  And you know, you're a dedicated person on the farm.  But you know, how are you, how is that new skill set kind of articulating with the rest  of the farm?  And how is it to integrate different techniques and different viewpoints on an already functioning  
**0:57:39-0:57:40:**  farm?  A fascinating question, because I love that interaction.  And I think, again, I'm lucky in that Helen has quite a large farm.  So they already have lots of enterprises, they're used to a complicated farming system.  Having said that, you know, I think there probably were people on the farm team that  
**0:58:02-0:58:09:**  were questioning her sanity when she started planting trees all over the place.  And understanding the effect that your trees have on the rest of the farming system, I  think is really important.  I mean, I talked earlier about the fact that with the alleys, we change them to a rotational  grazing system.  
**0:58:25-0:58:30:**  And I think one of the things that, you know, although the farm manager at the time perhaps  wasn't that excited about having trees planted all across his field, he had been really keen  to trial rotational grazing.  And so, in a way, we sort of, we enabled that and created a system.  I mean, obviously, you can do it without planting trees across the farm, but in this instance,  
**0:58:47-0:58:54:**  it opened that opportunity, it sort of almost forced a move into that, that hopefully then  is beneficial in the long term.  I think the opportunity for new entrants into agroforestry, I think is one of the things  actually that really excites me at the moment.  A lot of farmers want trees, a lot of farmers, you know, some farmers are really keen to  
**0:59:14-0:59:20:**  do it themselves and learn about it, but a lot of them aren't, you know, or love the  idea of it, but don't want to do it themselves.  And so being able to bring in people, either that already have some experience or that  are just keen to focus on the trees is such a great opportunity.  And I think where, one of the things we're seeing at the Soil Association is a real interest  
**0:59:42-0:59:49:**  in people wanting to come into farming, particularly into horticulture, but into farming as well.  But it's not easy to find a way in.  It's not always easy to get the experience or to persuade people to let you do things.  And I think with trees, there's an opportunity to learn in a lower risk way.  You know, if you've got to deal with animals, you've got to know what you're doing or the  
**1:00:07-1:00:10:**  animal suffers.  And even with veg, you know, it mostly needs looking after on a day to day or week to week  basis.  Whereas trees are pretty forgiving.  You know, you have periods of the year when they need stuff, but most of the time you  
**1:00:23-1:00:25:**  can just let them get on with it.  And that's quite a nice way of bringing new people or part time farmers or, you know,  forest people, community groups, maybe they want to run trees.  So there's ways of creating partnerships on farm that I think is not so easy in some other  sectors or crops.  
**1:00:46-1:00:50:**  It's interesting how you approach it because, you know, farmers already have to master so  many skills just doing their everyday job.  And then, you know, agroforestry kind of needs you to add another layer and new skills and  you really see the way of tackling that through bringing new people in.  And I think it's really interesting because it's not often answered here.  
**1:01:06-1:01:12:**  And of course, it has its own individual issues, like every time you bring in human relationships  and social structures.  But it's definitely a really interesting way of looking at it.  Well, we know that diverse farming systems are more complicated to run, but in theory,  they're also more resilient.  
**1:01:25-1:01:29:**  I think they tend to be more interesting.  A farm, you know, farm the size of Helen's, you know, if it was just an arable farm, it  could potentially employ two people and some big tractors.  And instead, I think Helen was saying there's 28 people employed on the farm, you know,  so that's a much, much more exciting place to be than fields of cereals that are being  
**1:01:50-1:01:52:**  shipped off to the commodity market.  Instead we've got, you know, we go up and we see our produce in the pub or, you know,  it just becomes more interesting.  I think it's more interesting for the farmer.  And I think if you can, if you could make it work financially, but again, there's opportunities  
**1:02:08-1:02:11:**  to share that risk and reward.  You know, we're looking at maybe renting out the trees, you know, we establish the trees  and then we rent them out to someone to make an enterprise.  And when, you know, it can be share farming, it can be subletting, you know, there's all  kinds of arrangements.  
**1:02:26-1:02:33:**  There's some really interesting work at Dartington in Devon looking at different tenancy models  of how you sort of cope with that multi-layered ownership potentially.  But those are technical difficulties in a way.  And I think the opportunity to open up the countryside, to open up farming to a much  wider range of people is, I think it's exciting anyway.  
**1:02:54-1:03:00:**  But we do need a project like yours, you know, sharing that knowledge because just last time  I was talking with the director of the French Agroforestry Association and he was, you know,  putting the limiting, the main limiting factor to the lack of expertise and the lack of enough  people who have that knowledge that are able to, you know, manage successfully agroforestry  systems or advise them.  
**1:03:19-1:03:25:**  So I think there's a huge amount of work to be done on developing those skills and properly  training these new people that we can bring on then to farms.  Well, and if it's a problem in France where you've been doing it for much longer than  we have, then yeah, that problem is more so I would say in the UK.  Yeah, there's not many people that have been doing it.  
**1:03:40-1:03:44:**  You know, I'm still very new to this really, you know, relatively speaking.  So it's, we're all on a very steep learning curve.  And you know, still on that theme of knowledge, I was wondering, you know, how do you personally  manage to keep track with all these learnings and that knowledge generation?  If it's not clear, the reason why I ask that is, you know, when you're constantly testing  
**1:04:04-1:04:10:**  new things out and, you know, you have numerous tests and a lot of knowledge is being generated,  it's not always easy to keep track of that, you know, while also managing all the practical  aspects.  What makes you think I'm keeping track?  Yeah, I'm not sure that I am keeping track is the short answer.  
**1:04:26-1:04:32:**  So we, I'm, you know, I'm fairly typical, I think, of farmers and I'm not very good  at keeping records.  You know, I talk about the importance of keeping records, but I'm not that good.  The app that I'm using helps a bit.  So it's relatively easy to record stuff, but you still have to record it, you still have  
**1:04:44-1:04:46:**  to do that work.  So I guess my solution, I think, is to talk about it a lot and hope that I see it reflected  back at me at some point.  And I think the trick sometimes is understanding what the important bit is.  But of course, that might be different for different people.  
**1:05:12-1:05:17:**  So you know, what's sort of struck me as being really interesting or really important actually  might be different to what someone else spots.  And that's why it's important that we're open and that we share what we're doing.  You know, I want as many people to come around the farm as possible, partly because I want  to share what's worked and what hasn't.  
**1:05:32-1:05:37:**  But also I learn every time someone comes around the farm, they'll spot something else  that I haven't noticed or ask me a question about why I've done something.  And I have to think, well, that's a good question.  Why did I do that?  You know, sometimes it isn't something I've done.  
**1:05:47-1:05:49:**  Sometimes it's something that's happened by chance.  But yeah, how you keep track of it, I think is a good question.  And I think the more we can get researchers properly involved on farm, the better.  I think so much research is divorced from the reality of farming and bringing the research  properly onto farm, measuring things that farmers really want and need, I think is a  
**1:06:20-1:06:22:**  good way as well of keeping track.  Effectively, it allows that collaboration to properly record what's happening.  Because it's me just whether I happen to make a note of something one year or not, or else  it's gone out of my sieve headed brain.  Yeah, a bit linked to this question of knowledge, there's the idea of diversity on the farm.  
**1:06:47-1:06:50:**  And you've already mentioned that there's a great diversity in the orchard, but you've  also added a whole other lot of trees that you've planted in different systems.  That's obviously a lot of different types of trees and of different behaviors and different  patterns to keep track of.  And I'm just wondering, how are you finding working with so much diversity?  
**1:07:09-1:07:12:**  I know there's advantages to it on an agronomic level.  But as you mentioned before, there's also a lot of complexities that come with diversifying  so much.  Yeah, the answer is that I'm an amateur of all of them.  And I think that's probably inevitable.  
**1:07:28-1:07:31:**  So I've always been a generalist.  So when I was growing vegetables, I was growing, you know, for box schemes and farm shops,  I was growing 50, 60 different crops.  So inevitably, I'm never going to be as good at growing any particular one as a specialist  in that.  
**1:07:49-1:07:58:**  And the other risk of having so much diversity and complexity is that it's actually just  much harder to keep track of everything.  I mean, I have a time challenge as well.  So at the moment, I work half a day a week at the farm.  I started doing a day a week, I'm now doing half a day.  
**1:08:10-1:08:16:**  So that doesn't allow me enough time to check every tree, you know, every week, which is  really what I should be doing if I was managing it in a way that a commercial orchard grower  would manage.  And I think what we're trying to demonstrate is not necessarily best practice for each  particular crop.  
**1:08:32-1:08:38:**  Well, for sure, it's not best practice for each particular crop, so that was certainty.  But it's, you know, what we want to demonstrate is that you can have a low input and potentially,  I mean, I say this advisedly, but potentially sort of lowish skill system and still be productive  and useful.  So, you know, as an example with my almond trees, I mean, apart from the fact I don't  
**1:09:02-1:09:07:**  think there are any very many expert almond growers in the UK anyway, or certainly not  in UK conditions.  There's opportunity to be the first expert almond grower of the UK, the advantage of  niche climate change crops.  But I, you know, I don't know what I'm doing with almonds because, you know, I've never  
**1:09:24-1:09:25:**  planted them before.  I mean, I know a little bit more than I did four years ago.  So, you know, I know roughly what they want and what they like, which isn't what the English  climate gives them most of the time.  So, you know, two years running, we had a late frost, which hit the blossom.  
**1:09:42-1:09:45:**  We know that's the main, one of the main risks of growing in the UK.  My hope is that, you know, the risk of frost in spring is getting less as climate change  happens.  So we might get that less often, but it still happens.  This year we got an even later frost and not only did the blossom get hit, but the foliage  
**1:10:01-1:10:02:**  got hit as well.  You know, well, oh man.  And they're getting peach leaf curl disease, which the first year I picked off every leaf  and you know, we got 60 trees.  It's not, it's not a big, but it's enough that, you know, quite quickly you can't start  
**1:10:18-1:10:22:**  picking off every leaf, but they seem to grow through it.  So what I'm growing, I hope is a low maintenance crop that occasionally will give me a crop  of almonds.  And if I'm lucky, it will give me a crop one in three years, or maybe eventually two in  three years or three and four years.  
**1:10:42-1:10:47:**  If it's also giving me a habitat for the chickens when we've got them, or it's improving my  soil health or it's draining the land, then the profitability or the success of any particular  tree crop is less crucial.  I mean, of course we still want it to work.  So I, you know, I do still prune, you know, some of the trees and, and I, you know, I  
**1:11:04-1:11:09:**  look after them and I try to notice if they've got a problem, but the reality is I'm not  going to spend a lot of time spraying them or, you know, giving them an intensive management  regime that you would do if you were a purely commercial orchard of that particular tree  that you had to make your entire living from.  So they perform a slightly different function.  
**1:11:26-1:11:34:**  And so in a way, my, my generalist approach potentially becomes an advantage because I'm  looking at the entire system and I'm looking at how the soil is and how the animals are  underneath.  And, you know, so I'm trying to take in that whole picture rather than thinking that I  need to be the world expert almond grower.  
**1:11:47-1:11:51:**  The other aspect of diversity is that, you know, once you have all these crops, which  is already a success, you know, then you have to sell them.  And in your case, that's those additional productions are easily absorbed and sold through  the existing commercial channels.  Yes.  
**1:12:03-1:12:10:**  So certainly so far, everything we've produced has been sold through the village pub, which  Helen's partner runs.  The I suspect at some point in the, in maybe two or three years, we'll have more than they  can cope with, at which point we have, we have options.  So there are a number of local box schemes, for instance, that we could potentially sell  
**1:12:35-1:12:37:**  produce to.  There's a agroforestry specific market stall in London that again, might take some of the  more unusual stuff.  We also, Helen has a lot of experience in creating products and marketing.  So it might well be that we then start to look at creating, you know, juices or value  
**1:13:01-1:13:08:**  added products that again could be sold through the farm shop and the pub in the village.  So there's, I think we're in an unusual position in that sense, and that there's already some  markets opportunities there, but also an understanding within the business about product creation  and marketing that not necessarily every farm would have.  The other last thing I wanted to clarify a bit is that you mentioned at the moment you  
**1:13:30-1:13:34:**  have between half a day and one day on the farm.  So you actually kind of oversee a lot of the design and the strategy, but then you have  other people on the farm also kind of helping in the management, like I guess mowing and  all the maintenance that has to go with it.  Yeah, you're right.  
**1:13:51-1:13:54:**  You spotted that I don't do any of the work.  That's not what I meant.  So yeah, so at the moment, Paul, my colleague does a lot of the actual work.  So I mean, again, we're trying to set it up as relatively low maintenance.  So the main jobs are mowing, mowing and strimming and sort of remulching some of the trees at  
**1:14:18-1:14:20:**  the moment.  And then obviously harvesting and a bit of pruning.  But as the system expands, we're definitely needing to find people to take on bits of  it.  So it becomes, and again, I think this is where the opportunities for new entrants come  
**1:14:39-1:14:40:**  in.  We now have in Barnfield, for instance, we now have eight acres of established trees  just about to start coming into some kind of full production.  That could be a fantastic opportunity for someone to come in and run.  So we're the, I think you're right.  
**1:15:05-1:15:11:**  In a way, my role is around the development and new design, but we do also need to make  sure that we properly maintain and manage them and make them fulfill their potential.  And that's an interesting challenge, which is becoming more important as the system establishes.  And I guess to always have the management and the design closely linked together, because  if you're ever going to be improving the systems, and it seems that every year with experience,  
**1:15:33-1:15:39:**  you're learning things and putting new things into place, it's really valuable to have those  aspects working closely together.  Yeah, it's crucial.  And we're moving more slowly than we had initially anticipated.  So when we looked initially at the 200 acres, we thought we might plant within five or six  
**1:15:53-1:15:54:**  years.  And after five years, we've planted just under half of it.  But actually, that was quite a deliberate decision to slow down and to learn.  It's also an expensive business.  So there's a cost factor to that as well.  
**1:16:12-1:16:17:**  But every year is different.  So we've had wet years, we've had dry years, we're starting to understand what does well.  The cherries initially did really well.  And then we had a horrible wet year.  And a quarter of the field, they all looked horrible and started to drop it out because  
**1:16:31-1:16:32:**  they didn't like it.  So let's really understand what's still doing well after five years.  And then we can be pretty certain that we can plant that with confidence.  And we're refining our management techniques, where we invested in a small flail mower this  year to just to speed up some of the keeping the grass down a little bit.  
**1:16:57-1:17:03:**  And in some ways, it didn't matter because we would get the big kit in.  But you're not in control of that.  You know, we're at the mercy of the weather.  And you know, we're one little field at the edge of the farm.  It's never the priority for the rest of the farm stuff.  
**1:17:13-1:17:20:**  So having our own little flail mower means we can sort of pop out when we need to and  actually get around the field.  So as the system progresses and starts to bring in a little bit income as well, so we  can justify spending a bit more money on it.  I think it will become easier to manage.  
**1:17:33-1:17:44:**  But part of it, I guess, is understanding when to invest and what to invest in and how  valuable these crops are.  We did a 25 year business plan at the start, which, you know, in some ways is almost not  worth the paper it's written on.  But it does give you an idea of cash flow and when you might expect income to come in.  
**1:17:57-1:18:00:**  But yeah.  OK.  And you know, we started the conversation, you mentioned mistakes.  And you know, that's definitely almost some of the most interesting things that we can  discuss because there's so much, so many things that can be learned for our listeners.  
**1:18:17-1:18:22:**  And do you have any kind of standout mistakes or some that you think would be particularly  relevant to people setting up systems out there that you like to share with our listeners?  Yeah, absolutely.  I mean, I guess one of them is sort of almost a mistake and almost not, in that it was planned  that it would be a mistake, which is the fact that we planned so many different things knowing  
**1:18:40-1:18:44:**  that some of them would fail.  And I guess one of the bits of advice is to plant a few things immediately, even if you're  not sure what you're going to be doing, actually just plant a few trees of a few different  species and see what grows, particularly if you're being more experimental.  So one thing you can do is look around you and see what's growing well.  
**1:19:03-1:19:08:**  But if you're trying to grow unusual things, you might have no idea.  I think it's worth trialing it.  I think the climate particularly is changing so quickly.  The historical wisdom about what works and what doesn't work is not always worth listening  to anymore.  
**1:19:20-1:19:27:**  But we've certainly had some trees fail and some of them predictably so, like the cherries  in the heavy clay.  But then almonds are not supposed to like clay either.  And they're doing very well, although they're not fruiting that well, they're growing very  well.  
**1:19:37-1:19:39:**  So that's one thing.  The other thing we, so we, as I said, we've got this heavy clay, it's quite hard to plant  into.  It's quite hard work.  So we created a slit using a subsoiler.  
**1:19:50-1:19:56:**  So a single slit through the soil to plant into, which worked brilliantly.  It was really easy to plant, speeded it up, no end.  And then we had this really dry year in 2018.  And the crack opened up where we'd created the slit.  And we had a meter and a half deep crack at some points.  
**1:20:11-1:20:14:**  I mean, it was really, really deep.  And of course, this poor little tree is sitting there at the top of the slit with no water  and no root development.  So we definitely learned from that.  What I think we'll probably do, I think we would still create the slit.  
**1:20:28-1:20:34:**  But what we would do is plant maybe 15 centimeters to one side of it so that you're not right  in that slit.  And the other thing we found was the trees that we planted in January mostly survived.  The ones that we planted in March, beginning of March, mostly didn't.  So even having an extra six weeks or so to develop seemed to make a difference.  
**1:20:56-1:21:03:**  And then the ones that we mulched pretty much all survived and the ones that we didn't failed.  So I think we could still use the slit planting method because it made it so much easier.  But we would offset it and mulch.  So those are probably the two big ones.  And the other thing, and again, I'm not sure if we could have predicted this, but in one  
**1:21:20-1:21:26:**  aisle, for instance, we've got quince trees, which we've interplanted with sea buckthorn.  And the quince have done so badly that the sea buckthorn are now bigger than the tree.  So we probably should have had it the other way around.  But again, I don't know if that's a mistake or just the learning.  Yeah, well, thanks, Ben.  
**1:21:39-1:21:41:**  Thank you so much for sharing all of this with us.  And I learned a lot and I'm sure our listeners will as well.  We hope we can get a place in your busy schedule for another episode sometime in the next two  years.  Yeah, definitely.  
**1:21:53-1:21:54:**  Okay.  Goodbye, Ben.  Goodbye.  Thanks very much.  Thanks for listening to the episode and we really hope you enjoyed it as much as we did.  
**1:22:00-1:22:05:**  You'll find all the relevant links just below the episodes and please feel free to reach  out to us with any comments or suggestions for other episodes.  