---
title: 29 How Trees Can Increase Livestocks Welfare And Productivity With Lindsay Whistance
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2021-10-05)  

**0:00:00-0:00:16:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:23-0:00:27:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  these challenges.  
**0:00:33-0:00:38:**  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Hi and welcome back to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:00:48-0:00:50:**  I'm your host Etienne.  I greatly enjoyed talking with Lindsay because so far we've often focused on the farmer's  perspective on silvopasture, how to establish trees and how to manage them for example.  
**0:00:59-0:01:03:**  This time we take a different angle and look at trees from the animal's perspective.  Through the interview we get a systematic and fact-driven account of the multiple ways  in which livestock benefit from trees and their environment.  
**0:01:12-0:01:17:**  Well I was expecting some of the benefits such as shelter or fodder but I was amazed  at hearing some of the facts Lindsay shares with us and the extent to which trees can  have a positive impact including on the social interactions within the herd.  
**0:01:26-0:01:27:**  Enjoy the interview.  Welcome Lindsay to the podcast.  Thank you.  
**0:01:31-0:01:37:**  Thanks so much for joining us today and as an introduction could you tell us who you  are and how you got into agroforestry?  Yes, well my name is Lindsay Wistentz.  
**0:01:44-0:01:51:**  I'm a senior researcher at the Organic Research Centre and I got into agroforestry really  because of the benefits that trees bring to livestock.  Of course trees are very important in their own right and on a private and global citizen  
**0:02:01-0:02:09:**  level if you like, trees play a really fundamental role in global health but in professional  terms really my focus is how trees can bring real benefits to the livestock's landscape.  And how about your career and did you always work researching on agroforestry or what's  
**0:02:24-0:02:25:**  your background?  No, well originally I actually left school without any higher education.  All I wanted to do was really was milk cows.  
**0:02:37-0:02:44:**  I wanted to be a farmer initially and I spent a few years working mostly with dairy cattle  but also some sheep work and some pig work and became actually increasingly frustrated  with the focus on production because my real interest then and now is the welfare of the  
**0:03:01-0:03:02:**  animals that we farm.  I'm very happy, I'm okay that we farm them but I really believe that we should give them  a life worth living.  
**0:03:13-0:03:20:**  And so I went back really to education as a mature student and worked through doing  my higher education degree, PhD with the aim to understand livestock better.  Really, my main focus is behaviour and welfare of livestock.  
**0:03:34-0:03:41:**  So I worked for a few years around different research centres around Europe and I've now  been working at the Organic Research Centre for five years and this is really where my  interest and ability to research agroforestry or silvopasture in particular has really kicked  
**0:03:55-0:04:04:**  off because ORC had an established agroforestry programme already going and I could just slot  into it with the livestock interests.  I actually find it extremely fulfilling.  
**0:04:13-0:04:23:**  I believe, I know that livestock have a relationship with the natural world independent of humans  and I think if we are to give them a life worth living then we should be giving them  diverse landscapes in which they can choose what they want and when they want it.  
**0:04:34-0:04:42:**  And trees really more than any other plants, of course other plants are important but really  it's the trees that bring a huge variety of benefits to the livestock in the form of food,  medicine, shade, shelter, even social benefits including improving the relationship between  
**0:05:00-0:05:03:**  humans and animals.  So this is why I'm really fascinated and interested to research this aspect of livestock welfare.  And that was a great overview of a lot of the themes I want to discuss with you today  
**0:05:16-0:05:20:**  but before we delve into them, maybe you can tell us a bit more about your work with the  ORC, how does it function and what kind of organisation it is?  Yes, well the Organic Research Centre is a charity.  
**0:05:30-0:05:36:**  We work predominantly with organic systems but not exclusively.  So as a group we try to and want to work with any farmer or stakeholder within the food  production industry that is interested in.  
**0:05:48-0:05:56:**  We work across systems, so we have crop, we have livestock, we have agroforestry, we look  at economic and social changes and sometimes we work with a combination of these things  because of course when you have regenerative and sustainable systems it often means that  
**0:06:12-0:06:14:**  they're mixed systems.  So understanding each of these aspects in different contexts can be important.  So an example might be an arable farmer who wants to bring in grass lays into his system  
**0:06:29-0:06:36:**  and then brings in sheep to graze that system and understanding how these work together.  From my point of view, of course animals, the researchers can be incredibly diverse,  so I've just finished a project, a four-year project looking at how we can feed pigs and  
**0:06:51-0:06:57:**  poultry with 100% organic and regional feed across Europe.  We found certainly some solutions but that's a very difficult and much bigger topic than  one project but we certainly made some headway with that.  
**0:07:07-0:07:14:**  Another project that I worked on, also a four-year European project, was looking at the sustainability  of sheep and goat industries across Europe and how different aspects of farming sheep  and goats can be made more resilient and more sustainable in a changing climate and in a  
**0:07:29-0:07:33:**  changing economic world.  So these can be really quite different and a further project that ORC is engaged with  is extensive dairy systems, so finding ways that cows can produce milk from grass.  
**0:07:51-0:07:57:**  And yet another interest that we've been looking at is how to keep dairy calves with their  mothers in dairy systems.  So it can be really quite diverse.  
**0:08:04-0:08:12:**  Yeah, well, it's interesting because a lot of these research projects seems to go beyond  agroforestry, so then agroforestry is only one of the toolkit that you have to tackle  this more sustainable approach to food.  
**0:08:20-0:08:28:**  I know it'll be interesting to see exactly where you see the role of trees and what were  the opportunities for trees and all the different solutions you brought forward in your research.  Yeah, sure.  
**0:08:36-0:08:41:**  I think this is one of the exciting things.  As I say, the animal for me is central in what I do but trees play an important role  in offering good welfare, high welfare systems, and that's for all livestock.  
**0:08:57-0:09:07:**  We know that free range poultry will use the landscape more when they have cover.  So we're not just talking about cows and sheep here, we're talking about all livestock and  also pigs.  
**0:09:14-0:09:21:**  In fact, many of our livestock originally are woodland or peripheral woodland creatures.  If you like, they've inherited this relationship with trees and it really behoves us to offer  them that relationship again so that they can interact as they naturally would.  
**0:09:37-0:09:38:**  Sure.  Maybe that's the first thing I wanted us to do together is really for once take the perspective  of the livestock.  
**0:09:48-0:09:53:**  Here on the show, we've talked about silver pasture a few times and we often do so from  a practical farming approach, taking the angle of the farmer and how to manage and all these  practical and economical aspects.  
**0:10:04-0:10:09:**  But I think for once it's really interesting to really try and see things from the livestock's  perspective and understand how trees might affect their behavior.  Maybe starting with some of the obvious things which is protecting them from extreme weather  
**0:10:22-0:10:27:**  events or from heat, maybe we can have a bit of an overview then of these different ways  in which they benefit from trees.  Yeah, sure.  
**0:10:31-0:10:37:**  Yes, I mean the animals as I say are central to me so the way I look at trees is from their  point of view first and foremost.  And if we think about how the trees buffer the landscape, then we get an idea of how  
**0:10:47-0:10:50:**  the trees also buffer the livestock.  So, for example, we're becoming much more at risk of hot summers and I don't know what  it was like for you in the summer of 2018 but here in the UK we had a very hot and very  
**0:11:07-0:11:13:**  dry summer and once the farmers had cut the grass for silage or hay that first time there  was no regrowth.  The fields were brown and really you could see very quickly, very clearly how the trees,  
**0:11:23-0:11:26:**  the canopy enabled the grass to remain green.  So you've got a protection from the solar radiation but also protection from or maintenance  if you like of the water, so the evapotranspiration rates holding that moisture lower to the ground.  
**0:11:43-0:11:48:**  And then we've got the benefit that trees bring, for example, in wet climates, so the  root system holding and managing the water and taking it away from the surface.  And there's an example of an agroforestry system in Ireland where the ground is wet,  
**0:12:00-0:12:06:**  an established agroforestry system ended up extending the grazing system by an average  of 15 weeks every year, most of that in the autumn.  That's a really substantial increase in enabling the animals to stay outdoors and to graze  
**0:12:19-0:12:23:**  for much longer every year.  And then if we think about the winter time, we know that even when trees have lost their  leaves the ground temperature under a tree canopy can be up to six degrees warmer.  
**0:12:36-0:12:44:**  So this is not only providing animals with an easier place to find food for grazing,  but it's also offering them a warmer place to lie down when they're out wintered.  Six degrees is a substantial increase in temperature when you're looking for a comfortable place  
**0:12:54-0:12:55:**  to lie down.  How can we explain such a big difference in temperature even when they've lost the leaves?  I don't know.  
**0:13:05-0:13:07:**  I can't tell you.  It's been measured.  I mean, I would of course say that there must be, this is up to six degrees I should say,  
**0:13:15-0:13:22:**  because if it's a single tree in a very exposed situation, you've got high winds, then you're  not going to be finding those increases in temperature.  So animals are fairly resilient of course, and if they're acclimatised they can tolerate  
**0:13:31-0:13:34:**  better cold weather.  If they have a good winter coat, if they have good body condition, if all of these things  are met, then animals can be relatively tolerant.  
**0:13:43-0:13:49:**  But it's still important for us to understand what these environments are doing for them  in welfare terms.  So if we, for example, take a beef animal that is healthy and has a good winter coat,  
**0:14:00-0:14:08:**  then it will have a lower critical temperature of around zero degrees centigrade.  So below that point, for every one degree below that animal's lower critical temperature,  it will need a two percent increase in feed to maintain its growth or its body maintenance.  
**0:14:26-0:14:33:**  If we then take a scenario where we've got an air temperature of plus two degrees and  we add in a 24 kilometre an hour wind, it's a cold day, the effective temperature becomes  minus seven.  
**0:14:42-0:14:51:**  So for this animal, it's already needing 14 percent extra feed.  Now this is for an animal that's dry.  If we then add rain into the mix, so it's a cold and windy day and it's raining, it's  
**0:15:02-0:15:09:**  lower critical temperature shoots up to 15 degrees centigrade.  So if we add seven and 15, that makes 23 degrees below its lower critical temperature, which  is now 46 percent extra food for that animal in those conditions.  
**0:15:23-0:15:29:**  Now, you know, we could say, okay, we can compensate that animal.  We've got plenty of grass.  We've made plenty of hay or plenty of silage this year.  
**0:15:33-0:15:36:**  So we can give them that extra feed.  But let's remind ourselves that the animal's first choice would be to look for shelter.  It's not to go and food, go and eat more.  
**0:15:45-0:15:47:**  They would naturally go and look for shelter.  And that's indeed what they do.  So we might be able to maintain production, but we've done nothing for animal welfare  
**0:15:55-0:15:58:**  in that scenario.  So that's on the cold side of things.  If we then think about the... what happens in hot weather when it's way too hot, and  
**0:16:10-0:16:17:**  I should actually say, as important as cold stress can be, actually heat stress is of  much more critical importance here.  And really shade from trees is probably the most important thing they can do across the  
**0:16:26-0:16:31:**  globe.  There are lots of things going on when an animal suffers from heat stress.  First of all, they naturally seek shade.  
**0:16:40-0:16:45:**  And if that shade is not available, then they start to suffer heat stress.  And then what happens is that they begin to shut down non-vital systems in order to move  blood out to the skin to increase cooling and help maintain core body temperature.  
**0:17:00-0:17:06:**  So then what happens when you move blood away from these non-vital systems, if we take the  reproductive system as an example, you have negative effects on fertility.  So your animals are not getting pregnant.  
**0:17:16-0:17:22:**  You have negative effects on embryo growth and development.  And these things translate into smaller babies being born.  And there's some research that's been done on dairy calves where the cow has suffered  
**0:17:34-0:17:37:**  from heat stress during late lactation.  And they have found that the cow has poorer quality colostrum.  So there's lower immunoglobulin G levels in the colostrum.  
**0:17:50-0:17:53:**  The calf is smaller.  And if it's a heifer, they've recorded that her milk levels are affected for her first  two lactations.  
**0:18:02-0:18:08:**  So this is really just for a small amount of time when the mother has been heat stressed  in late gestation.  These are really big effects.  
**0:18:14-0:18:19:**  The other non-vital system is the digestive system.  And up to 50% of the blood can be redirected from the digestive system and out to the skin.  What happens here is that the removal of that blood stops the membrane being impermeable.  
**0:18:39-0:18:47:**  So the gut membrane becomes permeable and that allows things in the gut to pass through  into the bloodstream.  And we're talking mycotoxins and endotoxins, things that should not be in the blood.  
**0:18:57-0:19:02:**  Then what happens is that you get an inflammation cascade.  So unsurprisingly, research has measured that dairy cows are more likely to have mastitis  problems when they don't have access to shade.  
**0:19:17-0:19:20:**  And these are incredibly significant.  In America, they've worked out in terms of dollars how much heat stress costs their industry  on an annual basis.  
**0:19:28-0:19:34:**  For dairy cows, it's $900 million every year.  When you think of the cow is losing production, she's diseased and needs treating, she's not  in calf and therefore they lose the cow.  
**0:19:46-0:19:49:**  These are all big things happening.  And in the beef industry, they've calculated it to be $400 million every year.  These are really, really substantial production losses all based on poor welfare, all because  
**0:20:04-0:20:08:**  the animals don't have access to good shade.  Wow.  This is really quality information.  
**0:20:13-0:20:19:**  Thank you so much because as a future cow farmer, I don't know how you say in English,  but already it's so useful to understand so much detail.  But just to clarify, when we're talking about heat stress, from what temperature onwards  
**0:20:32-0:20:36:**  are we talking about severe effects?  Well, again, this is a bit of a moveable feast.  It depends really what...  
**0:20:47-0:20:51:**  It's different for each species.  It can be different within species.  So coat colour, yield status, body shape, size, these can all have an effect.  
**0:21:05-0:21:06:**  Food can have an effect.  So if they're being fed on high energy feeds, that also creates more heat.  For dairy cows at least, there's evidence that they are beginning to suffer from heat  
**0:21:19-0:21:24:**  stress at 18 degrees centigrade.  But I should also qualify this really and say that with mild heat stress, animals can  recover and they typically recover during cooler periods of the day.  
**0:21:37-0:21:46:**  So for example, at nighttime, but models forecasting climate change suggest that we will be losing  that benefit over time.  So as the earth warms up, it's unlikely to lose that type of heat during the nighttime.  
**0:21:58-0:22:05:**  So the cows and other livestock will then not be able to benefit from that.  And I think sheep also, the changes with sheep can be much more dramatic if you like, where  they have a full fleece and can withstand the colder weather, for example, assuming  
**0:22:21-0:22:25:**  that they're clean and that they're healthy.  Then when we shear them, their lower critical temperature shoots up, in fact, 28 degrees  centigrade.  
**0:22:33-0:22:35:**  It's really very high.  Now, luckily for them, the fleece starts to grow back very quickly.  So that vulnerable period for them is quite short.  
**0:22:44-0:22:51:**  But in the UK, we start shearing our sheep in May, where the average temperature is only  around 16 degrees.  So they are 12 degrees below their lower critical temperature for several days.  
**0:23:00-0:23:04:**  And we are increasingly experiencing bad weather in May.  So we'll have storms and cold winds.  So this is certainly something to think about for them.  
**0:23:13-0:23:21:**  Actually, I genuinely think that of course food is important, but if we offer the livestock  places where they can shelter themselves in a meaningful way, so there are enough trees,  there is enough hedgerow or shelter belt available for them to go and utilise it, then we're  
**0:23:37-0:23:39:**  doing the best we can for them.  Yeah.  Well, I think hopefully we'll come back to this idea of how many is enough and get a  
**0:23:46-0:23:48:**  bit more idea of that.  But just continuing our overview, I think it's pretty clear how beneficial trees are  in terms of buffering these extremes.  
**0:23:57-0:23:59:**  How about in terms of nutrition?  I mean, tree fodder is a big topic when it comes to ruminants.  And I'm wondering what you can tell us about that.  
**0:24:09-0:24:10:**  Yes.  Well, it's worth remembering that, as I said earlier, animals have this natural relationship  with trees and not just in terms of accessing them for shade and shelter.  
**0:24:25-0:24:33:**  Actually, trees as browse is part of all of our livestock's natural diet.  If we think for cattle, over a whole year, the percent of browse is around 12% across  that year.  
**0:24:44-0:24:47:**  For sheep, it's around 20%.  And for goats, it's around 60%.  So when they have access to browse, they will naturally do so.  
**0:24:55-0:25:00:**  And of course, this percentage can increase at certain times.  So if we have drought or dry periods, or for example, early spring growth that's highly  palatable, then that intake can increase quite dramatically.  
**0:25:11-0:25:22:**  So cattle can quite easily browse up to 55.5% of their diet without any negative effects.  Although they are very well adapted to getting energy from grass, actually feeding on browse  is not a problem for them.  
**0:25:34-0:25:39:**  They can digest it very well.  In terms of nutritional content, there've been a few bits of research across the world.  And generally the findings are that across the board, nutritional content can be compared  
**0:25:56-0:25:59:**  to grasses in the same environment.  So generally speaking, they are comparable to grasses.  Of course, they don't grow at the same rate.  
**0:26:06-0:26:12:**  So we have to manage intake and we have to manage browse much more carefully from the  trees.  What you certainly don't want to be doing is allowing more than 50% defoliation because  
**0:26:21-0:26:31:**  then you'll be stressing the tree and perhaps affecting its regrowth.  There are certainly some trees that are better, very good in nutritional terms.  And some research was done in the Netherlands in 2016 looking at protein content in different  
**0:26:46-0:26:52:**  leaf species and comparing that to alfalfa and dry grass.  They found that, for example, ash and lime compare very well, but the absolute outstanding  tree was mulberry.  
**0:27:02-0:27:08:**  So if any farmers live in a region where mulberry grows very well, then they have a very, very  good crop indeed in terms of protein.  And one of the other things I wanted to mention about protein content is that largely grass-based  
**0:27:22-0:27:30:**  foods, certainly grasses, don't have any tannins.  And we know that aside from the health benefits, condensed tannins hold onto the protein, it  passes through the rumen and then it gets degraded in the abomasum, effectively delivering  
**0:27:48-0:27:53:**  high quality rumen bypass protein to the small intestine.  So this is something that's really attractive.  And on top of that, we also know that the condensed tannins also help to manage methane  
**0:28:01-0:28:04:**  levels.  So if we compare the amount of methane that's produced off willow with that produced from  lucerne, well, the willow produces less than half than the lucerne does.  
**0:28:18-0:28:24:**  So really having some tannins in the diet can be very beneficial.  And I should say generally the recommended is around 4% of dry matter intake and certainly  not more than 5% of dry matter intake on a daily basis.  
**0:28:37-0:28:45:**  Because of course we have to remind ourselves that tannins are the plant's defense against  predation.  It's supposed to be an anti-nutritional factor.  
**0:28:52-0:28:56:**  But yes, in small quantities, it can have these benefits.  And I think the final thing that's really notable about trees in terms of nutrition  is the trace elements.  
**0:29:06-0:29:11:**  So the mineral content that they can provide.  And we did some work at ORC around four, five years ago where we looked at the mineral content  of a few species of tree.  
**0:29:25-0:29:35:**  So that included older, goat willow, ash, and elm.  Now we're currently having problems with ash and elm, both trees, which is very unfortunate  because these are both very good traditional tree fodder trees, certainly in the UK.  
**0:29:50-0:29:56:**  And what we found was that they are very good sources across the board, very good sources  of minerals, but some trees are particularly good sources of certain minerals.  So for example, we find with the Osea willow, the Salix viminalis, we find that to be very  
**0:30:12-0:30:15:**  good in terms of zinc.  We find the goat willow to be good for calcium and phosphorus and in a quite useful two to  one ratio for these minerals.  
**0:30:30-0:30:37:**  And we also find that within this piece of research, we were really looking at nutritional  content when it was fed as tree hay.  So the leaves were harvested in June in the summer, and then they were fed in March the  
**0:30:52-0:30:56:**  following year and they were analysed at both points.  And what we found was that when they were fed, the mineral content was much higher across  all minerals.  
**0:31:05-0:31:10:**  So both macro and micro minerals, the content had increased.  And this makes us think that tree leaves actually might be a good and sustainable source for  mineral feeding if we can manage it or perhaps make it into some kind of production, meaningful  
**0:31:28-0:31:30:**  production.  So these are really the key points to take from tree fodder is that generally across  the board, they are at least comparable to grasses.  
**0:31:43-0:31:52:**  They offer a good protein supplement and they offer a good mineral supplement generally.  What we've also learned more recently is that if you're interested in the mineral content,  apart from a few trees, which seem to have high levels, for example, of zinc in the Osea  
**0:32:09-0:32:19:**  willow, that soil content can reflect content in the trees.  So I've been learning about this from bioremediation research, where some trees, as you may know,  are being used to help with pollution.  
**0:32:31-0:32:40:**  So they've done a lot of research on some trees and there are three strategies if you  like.  So you have accumulator trees.  
**0:32:43-0:32:49:**  So it doesn't matter how much of a mineral is present in the soil, it will accumulate  this above ground.  So you will always find this mineral to be high in that particular species.  
**0:32:55-0:33:01:**  So this, for example, is what's happening with zinc in the Osea willow.  Then you'll find indicator trees.  So they reflect what's in the soil.  
**0:33:06-0:33:11:**  So it's very hard for us to say across the board, oak has high selenium.  It does on the farm we measured it on in Berkshire, but it didn't in Wales.  So that's an indicator species.  
**0:33:19-0:33:22:**  And then you have excluder strategy as well.  So it will actively prevent a mineral from being represented above ground in the plant,  if you like.  
**0:33:33-0:33:42:**  And so we're learning all the time and really it's unavoidable to, you have to have some  intimate knowledge of your own landscape, if you like, to know what you're offering  your animals if this is of interest to you.  
**0:33:53-0:34:01:**  And I think the other important thing to say is it's, yes, it's useful and important to  know what nutritional content there is, but it's also important to know what the animals  like to eat.  
**0:34:09-0:34:19:**  So understanding palatability and understanding motivation to eat certain trees is key.  Now there's not been that much work done on this, but there was some research done in  Scotland which showed that in a free setting that aspen and willow were very high in palatability  
**0:34:38-0:34:42:**  as were ash and rowan.  So in the middle were hazel, oak, Scots pine, holly, birch and hawthorn, but right at the  bottom beech and alder.  
**0:34:53-0:35:06:**  So alder has very low palatability and I suppose we don't understand why.  Alder is a very interesting tree for other reasons.  It works well on wet ground.  
**0:35:11-0:35:14:**  It's a nitrogen fixer.  So it's of interest certainly in farming systems, but the older tree typically doesn't even  need to be protected against wild deer.  
**0:35:24-0:35:33:**  It really is a very unpalatable tree in general terms and yet its nutritional content is highly  comparable to other trees.  So we don't really know what's going on with this tree.  
**0:35:43-0:35:51:**  That said, we do also know that palatability levels can go up and down depending on the  health status of the animal.  So for example, there's been some research done on sheep that have a heavy worm burden  
**0:36:07-0:36:15:**  and if they are offered plants that have a high condensed tannin content, they will shift  their preference to the high condensed tannin plants and that research has shown that they  can reduce their worm burden by 50% doing this, but they don't continue to eat the high  
**0:36:28-0:36:32:**  condensed tannin plants because these are bitter.  So they're changing their food preferences in order to rebalance their health status  if you like.  
**0:36:41-0:36:43:**  This is actually something that I wanted to ask you about.  So we're on topic about this anti-parasitic effect of tannins.  So the research seems to show that it is effective in controlling some types of parasites.  
**0:36:56-0:37:00:**  Yes, yes it is.  It's shown to be effective on ascaris in pigs.  The general worms, parasites for ruminants, it's basically effective for most.  
**0:37:18-0:37:25:**  Less so for haemonchus, things like that, but actually copper can work very well on  haemonchus.  But yes, in terms of generic gastrointestinal parasites, condensed tannins have a beneficial  
**0:37:34-0:37:37:**  effect.  And they do this by inhibiting the larvae from maturing.  So they prevent the maturing of the larvae and for those that do become mature, they  
**0:37:56-0:38:05:**  tend to be smaller in size than if you like healthy larvae becoming adults.  And size really matters in larvae because size really predicts how many eggs they lay.  So in effect you've got a double whammy here.  
**0:38:18-0:38:25:**  You've got larvae being prevented from becoming adults, so the cycle is broken.  And then you've got smaller adults producing fewer eggs for the next generation.  So it actually really works very well.  
**0:38:33-0:38:43:**  And because it's a mechanical effect, there's absolutely no evidence that the worms, the  parasites have any defense against the tannins.  So it's actually a pretty effective long-term strategy, if you like, to utilize condensed  
**0:38:56-0:38:58:**  tannins in this way.  And of course then animals are naturally seeking them out when they have this option.  And the benefit of that is that the animals can seek it out when they need it, not when  
**0:39:11-0:39:15:**  we have woken up to the fact that they need it.  So they're doing it in their own time, in real time, if you like.  And it also then means that we're not having to give them chemicals.  
**0:39:26-0:39:33:**  We're not having to use chemical remediation when these natural remedies are available  to them.  Yeah, it's really interesting to see all those benefits from the nutritional aspect and the  
**0:39:41-0:39:42:**  tannin aspect.  But the other kind of obvious one is also that in these times where everything is drying  up so early in the season, just having access to green leaves in August, for example, is  
**0:39:54-0:39:55:**  a huge benefit.  Yes, it can be.  And it can be of benefit in several ways, really.  
**0:40:02-0:40:09:**  When you have a dry season, for example, some countries, certainly Mediterranean countries  and some areas in New Zealand and Australia all having dry seasons, then yes, the only  green that is available is tree fodder.  
**0:40:21-0:40:28:**  And in fact, in some places in New Zealand, they've adopted tree fodder really as a crisis  management, if you like, where they planted lots of willow and poplar as a landscape management.  So they were planting the trees to help keep soil in place.  
**0:40:43-0:40:50:**  And then they were finding that these trees were also exceptionally good as fodder in  the dry season.  So they will cut them fresh and just let them drop.  
**0:40:56-0:41:01:**  What they find is that they can maintain animal condition.  So the animals in these scenarios, they might not be growing, but they can at least maintain  condition where animals are losing condition on drought pasture in the same scenario.  
**0:41:13-0:41:19:**  Now, of course, let's remind ourselves that they are only offering two species of tree,  which is willow and poplar.  So that's not necessarily a, let's say a fulfilled diet, but it's certainly helping them in those  
**0:41:32-0:41:35:**  drought conditions.  And there's also been some research done on lambs.  So lambs born in these Mediterranean style conditions where they've got very little green  
**0:41:47-0:41:49:**  grass.  They're also very susceptible to white muscle disease because the vitamin E is in very poor  supply.  
**0:41:55-0:42:01:**  So when they're coming off milk, when they're being weaned, they are increasingly susceptible  to white muscle disease.  But there are lots of shrubs in this environment with green and therefore high vitamin E. And  
**0:42:13-0:42:21:**  some researchers did some trials with lambs where they actually made some of the lambs  deliberately deficient in vitamin E. And they offered them two feeds, one which was low  in vitamin E and one which was unpalatable, but high in vitamin E. And they found that  
**0:42:35-0:42:43:**  the lambs that were deficient switched their preference to the feed that was unpalatable,  but high in vitamin E. And they found that the lambs were doing this before they could  record any differences in health status.  
**0:42:54-0:42:58:**  They knew they'd made them deficient, but nothing was measurable at that point when  the lambs switched their feeding preferences.  And once they'd regained balance in the vitamin E, then they switched back to the more palatable  
**0:43:06-0:43:09:**  feed.  So I suppose it indicates an awareness of nutritional status.  And it also indicates that if animals have access to a variety of feedstuffs, then they  
**0:43:23-0:43:31:**  can learn and look for those feedstuffs that have the nutritional content that they need  when they need it.  I do want to make the point that although we've certainly seen evidence of animals selecting  
**0:43:41-0:43:47:**  the food and the nutrition that they need at given times, I think it's still important  to underline that it can go wrong.  Animals can select foods that are poisonous.  
**0:43:57-0:44:02:**  They might have nutritional status, but they're eating too much, for example.  So I don't want to give the impression that all animals are all knowing because just like  humans, they can get it wrong.  
**0:44:11-0:44:12:**  Of course they can.  And if the landscape is imbalanced in terms of diversity, they may be selecting plants  that are not healthy in the quantities that they may be choosing to eat them.  
**0:44:27-0:44:33:**  I really want to make that point because there are plenty of farmers who have experienced  livestock being poisoned by eating the wrong thing in the wrong amounts.  We have quite a debate here in the UK about ivy, where it has a tradition as a feedstuff.  
**0:44:52-0:44:59:**  And here, certainly anecdotally, farmers will say that if you have a sick sheep, if it doesn't  eat a little bit of ivy, then it doesn't want to live.  So it has that reputation.  
**0:45:05-0:45:10:**  But then we also have other farmers that have had animals die because they've eaten ivy.  So we need to know much more about that as a plant and its nutritional content and what  else it's containing.  
**0:45:20-0:45:28:**  So that's really just a caveat that animals, they know a lot if they have the ability to  learn, but they don't know everything like humans.  Thanks for this precision.  
**0:45:34-0:45:37:**  It's good to always nuance these things.  And it's nice to think that animals are this perfect nutritional intelligence, but I think  it's a useful reminder that you gave us.  
**0:45:45-0:45:50:**  Another fascinating point that you mentioned a bit earlier on in the introduction was how  trees can actually influence the social behavior of animals.  Could you tell us a bit more about that?  
**0:45:58-0:46:00:**  Yes.  I was really interested when I first learned about this because it didn't seem immediately  obvious that it would have this benefit.  
**0:46:11-0:46:20:**  But some research has in fact shown that animals that are kept in an agroforestry, in a silvipasture  setting, have better social relationships within the herd.  And some work that was done with cattle, for example, has shown that if they're out on  
**0:46:33-0:46:43:**  open pasture, then the positive social licking part of their social interactions is around  42% of all of their behavior towards each other.  But within a silvipasture setting, this shoots up to nearly 80%.  
**0:46:57-0:46:59:**  And this is a really positive behavior.  It helps with social cohesion.  It helps maintain hierarchy and dominance levels without the animals resorting to aggression.  
**0:47:12-0:47:20:**  What research has also shown is that this better relationship transfers to humans as  well.  So the relationship between humans and livestock is also improved in this scenario.  
**0:47:28-0:47:34:**  And it's not really clear why this should be, but they think that at least having something  physical for the animals to hide behind enables them to show less fear or feel less fear towards  their human handlers.  
**0:47:47-0:47:54:**  And this then helps the human animal relationship when they are being handled.  And I was listening to an Irish farmer saying, in fact, just this thing, when he started  silvipasture with his cattle, he now has an established silvipasture system.  
**0:48:08-0:48:13:**  And he used to be able to walk among his beef cattle.  They certainly weren't scared of him, but he would have to be very careful walking up  to them and may not be able to touch them.  
**0:48:22-0:48:28:**  Now he can walk right up to them and just scratch them in a silvipasture setting.  He said it's absolutely the trees that have improved his relationship with the animals.  And we do know with social licking, and to return to that point, it has a very beneficial  
**0:48:46-0:48:52:**  effect, not just in terms of dominance hierarchy, but there's research evidence that shows  that the heart rate of the animal that is being licked goes down.  So it's a real pacifying effect it has on the animals.  
**0:49:05-0:49:12:**  And in fact, the other component, the other benefit that trees bring to livestock is their  ability to scratch and rub, so body maintenance behavior.  And research has also shown that when an animal is rubbing, their heart rate goes down.  
**0:49:26-0:49:34:**  So socially and in stress terms, these are really beneficial effects of having trees  in the landscape.  Aside from, of course, from the physiological benefits of being able to rub.  
**0:49:42-0:49:49:**  So if we think of skin as a frontline defense against disease, then it's hardly surprising  that these animals are spending part of every single day managing the health of their skin  and their coat.  
**0:49:55-0:49:58:**  And of course they do this through rubbing.  So by being able to rub different body parts, they can get rid of dead hair, dead skin,  external parasites, seeds that can penetrate the skin.  
**0:50:12-0:50:14:**  All of these things can be knocked away.  And also by knocking the dust out of the coat, this can all help with temperature regulation.  So that then has further benefits on the general wellbeing of the animal.  
**0:50:26-0:50:32:**  And if we think about incorporating trees at different angles, then they can access  most body parts in this way.  So overall, trees contribute to making a more interesting environment for livestock in every  
**0:50:43-0:50:44:**  way.  Having more diverse sources of food, having different textures and different temperatures  and microclimates to explore.  
**0:50:53-0:51:00:**  A lot like us, the feeling of walking in an interesting kind of semi-woodland with a bit  of light.  I mean, at least that's my experience.  
**0:51:04-0:51:09:**  Sometimes more enjoyable and more interesting than walking in an empty open space.  But it's so interesting that you're able to actually demonstrate this to us and illustrate  it with so many different examples and so much scientific research.  
**0:51:18-0:51:19:**  Yeah.  Well, I mean, it's genuinely a fascinating subject.  And I think if we understand the animal, then we understand the environment that they can  
**0:51:30-0:51:33:**  and should be living in.  And there's also evidence, of course, that if you put animals in a silvopasture setting,  they use that environment more evenly.  
**0:51:41-0:51:45:**  Now, of course, we're talking sufficient access.  We're not talking about a single tree in a field where all of the animals are overcrowded  to try to gain access to shade, for example.  
**0:51:54-0:52:01:**  So in that scenario, you're risking animals staying in one area for too long, death of  vegetation, soil compaction, maybe weed growth during recovery of that land, and also risking  disease of livestock because they're standing too close together and maybe even perversely  
**0:52:16-0:52:22:**  overheating because they're not able to lose body heat when they're standing all very close  together.  What we find in a silvopasture setting is that they generally maintain behaviour patterns.  
**0:52:31-0:52:39:**  So they continue to feed and continue to produce what we're asking them to, but they also utilise  that landscape more evenly.  And the knock-on benefit of that is that they're depositing recycling nutrients more evenly  
**0:52:47-0:52:49:**  across that landscape.  So yeah, I mean, I would say largely if people are happy managing trees, then it's certainly  a win-win for the animals living within this environment.  
**0:53:03-0:53:08:**  And also bearing in mind, of course, that if we want the animals to browse, then we  have to think about their browse heights.  So it has to be growing at a meaningful height for them to access these feeds.  
**0:53:17-0:53:21:**  So for sheep, for example, it will be around 1.2 metres.  For cows, it's around 2 metres, maximum heights this is.  And if anyone has goats, well then there is no limit.  
**0:53:32-0:53:35:**  There's no meaningful height for goats because they're so agile.  They can pretty much climb trees if they want to.  And then if we don't want to, or if we on top of that want to offer tree fodder as tree  
**0:53:49-0:53:55:**  hay, well then we can harvest that and dry it and feed it to them in the wintertime.  I think by now we have a pretty good understanding of the numerous benefits that livestock retrieve  from being surrounded by trees.  
**0:54:05-0:54:12:**  But I'm wondering, and I'm sure our listeners are as well, what those silvopastral systems  might look like in practice, or beyond silvopastral even thinking in relation to pigs or poultry  as well.  
**0:54:23-0:54:26:**  To start things off, you were talking before of tree cover.  Do you have a number in terms of percentage of what's a meaningful tree cover?  What are we talking about to really get those benefits you were just mentioning?  
**0:54:38-0:54:46:**  Well, if we consider tree cover from a livestock point of view, then it's really having sufficient  access for the animals to all use the cover in a meaningful way without overcrowding or  without damaging that landscape.  
**0:54:58-0:55:06:**  So ideally you would have sufficient room for them to be moving around in that landscape  without, as I say, damaging it, but also being able to choose between different environments.  So there might be some more dense, less dense areas and open areas in between.  
**0:55:27-0:55:34:**  If we think of it in landscape terms, then we have to consider what we're trying to achieve  with that landscape.  So if we have grasses, we have to know what grasses are there and how much shade they  
**0:55:41-0:55:44:**  tolerate and still be productive.  We tend to underestimate their ability to tolerate shade.  Most of our grasses can at least tolerate 50% shade without loss of production.  
**0:55:59-0:56:07:**  And I came across a piece of research that showed that protein levels were higher when  shade was higher.  I've only come across it once, so I don't know how robust that piece of research was,  
**0:56:17-0:56:24:**  but it's certainly interesting if we're trying to produce grain, for example, for human consumption,  let's say, and the protein content is higher, then that makes it a more valuable resource,  even perhaps if the yield is slightly lower.  
**0:56:36-0:56:40:**  So that might be a reasonable trade-off.  And we also have to consider, if we're thinking about pasture, we have to consider canopy  density.  
**0:56:47-0:56:49:**  So maybe selecting trees.  In fact, it goes across the board for agroforestry altogether.  We have to think about what we're trying to produce on the ground and how those trees  
**0:56:58-0:57:00:**  interact.  So trees with a later canopy growth and a less dense growth will enable us to farm vertically  and maintain production levels better at the ground level.  
**0:57:17-0:57:21:**  That said, we can manage canopy height.  So we can clean up the canopy and have it higher, so there's more light coming down  to the ground.  
**0:57:29-0:57:33:**  And we're still getting the benefit, if there are sufficient trees in that landscape, we're  still getting the benefits of, perversely in summer, an increased airflow and higher  evapotranspiration rates.  
**0:57:43-0:57:50:**  So they're also helping to manage both grass growth and more comfortable conditions for  the livestock.  When we think of design, for the livestock, we can have several different designs, if  
**0:58:01-0:58:07:**  you like, we can think about the traditional wood pasture, which is permanent pasture and  you have trees spread out in that landscape in a random way.  There can be natural regeneration in this process.  
**0:58:21-0:58:25:**  So the trees are interacting with the birds.  The birds are hiding acorns, for example, from the oak tree and some shrubbery.  And this is all just a natural process.  
**0:58:32-0:58:37:**  So there's very little control over where trees are planted in this scenario.  But here in the UK, it was a very traditional system.  And some of these systems now being regenerated, actively managed again.  
**0:58:49-0:58:56:**  In modern systems, we might want to think about clusters of trees.  And in fact, we have a piece of research that we're currently engaging with.  We have eight farmers in the south of England and we have three different silver pasture  
**0:59:07-0:59:11:**  designs that these farmers are trialling and we're monitoring.  So they've just planted them.  And in this piece of research, some of the farmers are trialling clusters of trees.  
**0:59:22-0:59:29:**  So mimicking the old wood pasture system closely.  And then we have two linear designs.  So more like a hedgerow type.  
**0:59:38-0:59:43:**  And the third one is more like a shelterbelt type.  So longer lines, more regimented, easier access for machinery, perhaps more suited for changing  use of lands.  
**0:59:56-1:00:06:**  So if you're putting in lay grasses and reseeding regularly, then the more uncontrolled design,  if you like, is less suitable in this scenario.  So these farmers, all livestock farmers are trialling these different systems and we'll  
**1:00:15-1:00:21:**  be monitoring and measuring them as we go through the next 12 years.  But what we expect to find with the linear systems, you do tend to limit access to shade  and shelter because of course the sun is changing as it moves round.  
**1:00:35-1:00:41:**  So what you need to consider with these systems, although they might be easier to manage for  the farmer, they will have their drawbacks for the livestock.  And then you really need to think about how they're positioned in terms of the prevailing  
**1:00:57-1:00:58:**  wind, for example.  So you want them to be perpendicular to the prevailing wind, otherwise you risk creating  wind tunnels.  
**1:01:07-1:01:12:**  And you really want them to be either side of the landscape that you're offering the  livestock so they can at least offer optimum shelter and optimum shade for more of the  day than they otherwise would have with a single line.  
**1:01:26-1:01:32:**  The benefits of having these shelter belts, of course, is that it's easier to browse from  because they tend to go down to ground level where if you've got trees, they can access  what they can up to the browse line and then they have to wait for regrowth.  
**1:01:47-1:01:53:**  So these are all real considerations that you manage with your livestock, but you also  manage with the type of farming that you wish to carry out.  Yeah, it's really good points that you're making actually in terms of designing it.  
**1:02:06-1:02:13:**  And I'm wondering in terms of, we talked about fodder beforehand, in terms of harvesting  fodder for me, that's one of the main difficulties when we come to tree fodder is how you give  access to the animals, because sometimes the labor involved in pruning trees and then feeding  
**1:02:25-1:02:28:**  it to the animals and then disposing of the branches is huge.  But on the other hand, it's not always easy to synchronize the needs of the pasture and  giving access to trees and managing the whole herd.  
**1:02:40-1:02:44:**  And of course, you don't have all the answers to this, but I'm wondering if you've seen  some things through your research working with farmers of systems that worked well for  the farmers in question.  
**1:02:50-1:02:53:**  Well, yes, tree fodder does.  It can be a complicated process.  It can certainly bring benefits, but it does require forethought when you start practicing  
**1:03:03-1:03:06:**  collecting tree hay.  We have some farmers here that are beginning to do so.  It does require a lot of space.  
**1:03:14-1:03:17:**  It does require planning.  You have to consider harvesting it at the right time.  If you harvest it too late in the season, then you risk a lot of leaf drop.  
**1:03:25-1:03:29:**  And of course, the leaves are the things that you really want.  Although the animals will feed on the smaller twigs, it's the leaves that hold the most  nutrition.  
**1:03:38-1:03:40:**  Which brings me to another point.  The species of the tree that you're harvesting also matters.  Ash, for example, is a very good tree fodder tree, but the leaves become quite brittle.  
**1:03:53-1:04:02:**  So some recording in either Sweden or Norway, I can't remember, but the way they used to  practice it was that they would cut it and they would dry it as close as possible to  where they were going to feed the animals so that that leaf drop was minimized.  
**1:04:17-1:04:25:**  The other thing is that when you harvest it, if you're harvesting wood that's bigger than  the animals are prepared to eat, then you also then have a lot of waste that you have  to go back and clear up.  
**1:04:33-1:04:38:**  So thinking about that is also important.  Both sheep and cattle, once they're accustomed to eating browse, will eat the twigs, the  branches, up to roughly one centimeter diameter.  
**1:04:51-1:04:56:**  So if you're harvesting bigger than that, then you're going to be doing a lot of clearing  up as well after feeding.  Because for me, when I think about harvesting, it seems more obvious to be cutting branches.  
**1:05:07-1:05:08:**  That's what you often see.  So what ways are farmers finding to harvest the tips of the branches with very small twigs  as you just recommended?  
**1:05:17-1:05:19:**  I don't actually know.  I know of two farmers who are currently feeding tree hay.  One is a Belgian goat farmer, and I think the goats will actively strip the bark off  
**1:05:35-1:05:36:**  the bigger branches.  So I don't think he's overly bothered about this.  The second farmer is a dairy farmer in the UK, and he's just started feeding tree hay  
**1:05:47-1:05:52:**  this year, this winter we've just had.  And he was feeding willow to his dry cows, and he was most interested in offering them  willow for medicinal purposes, if you like, to help them through that late gestation period  
**1:06:06-1:06:09:**  for carving.  And he certainly cut them too big, but rather than make life hard for himself, he dried  it on trailers, and when it was completely dry, he hired a wood chipper, and he just  
**1:06:23-1:06:32:**  chipped the lot, and then spread it on top of the cows' food, and they ate everything.  Now, for dry cows, that is not necessarily a problem, but in terms of nutritional content,  you wouldn't recommend necessarily that they're feeding on wood of poor nutrition.  
**1:06:52-1:06:59:**  So it works for him in his situation, but that's probably not something that one would  recommend generally.  Of course, there is another option, you can ensile tree fodder, you can make silage out  
**1:07:12-1:07:15:**  of tree fodder.  This brings its own problems, because of course you have to get all of the air out for the  process to work properly.  
**1:07:26-1:07:33:**  Fasting works well in this scenario as well, but you also have to consider time of year  and water content, and being careful not to harvest it too dry is key.  Species such as willow can become too dry, and then they won't ensile, you won't get  
**1:07:49-1:07:54:**  that fermenting process, in fact it will just go mouldy.  So that's something to consider, but if people are comfortable with making grass silage,  then moisture content is a known and important part of that process, so it's not that difficult.  
**1:08:11-1:08:21:**  In terms of how it's done, it's not really done on large scale, but a few zoos are actually  using this practice to feed and enrich their zoo animals, so they're creating tree silage  in tubs, recycled, reused tubs every year.  
**1:08:36-1:08:44:**  It's possible, it's absolutely possible.  We've talked a lot about how desirable integrating trees is, and how we can do it, and what it  might look like, but I'm sure you've encountered some hesitations or some questions from farmers  
**1:08:59-1:09:09:**  or from farming advisors or experts, and today what do you see as the main obstacles to being  able to scale silver pasture and really include trees in the way we farm?  I see really three main obstacles.  
**1:09:23-1:09:28:**  The first one is lack of knowledge.  We've been quite systematic in our removal of trees from the farmed landscape over the  last 80 years or so.  
**1:09:40-1:09:46:**  Although trees used to be a fundamental part of the farmed landscape, we've very quickly  forgotten how to farm with trees, which really leaves farmers in a difficult position.  They can see the benefits, but they're not comfortable with getting it wrong, if you  
**1:10:05-1:10:06:**  like.  So there's real knowledge needed, and we don't have enough yet.  We're all having to relearn these systems, but if you plant trees in the wrong place,  
**1:10:18-1:10:21:**  it's a lot to get wrong.  That said, those farmers who have been practicing silvery pasture for several decades in this  country really say, just get on and do it.  
**1:10:35-1:10:40:**  That is their advice to farmers, and they typically say that the best time to plant  trees was 20 years ago.  The second best time is today.  
**1:10:47-1:10:53:**  Using for, for example, financial support from the government, they say, well, the government  in the UK changes every four years, and they change their mind, so just do it.  I do think whilst I understand farmers' hesitancy about planting trees, I think they can take  
**1:11:11-1:11:20:**  some reassurance from those farmers who are already doing it that they haven't, they don't  regret planting those trees, and they're very keen that other farmers should plant trees  and follow their practice.  
**1:11:30-1:11:39:**  I think leading on from that, the second issue is really the health issue, the safety issue  of bringing trees on farm, because it's important to note that trees require management as much  as the grass does, as much as the soil does.  
**1:11:54-1:12:00:**  Just by bringing trees in, I mean, yes, you can have some standard trees, but they will  require some kind of management, and particularly if you want to go down the tree fodder route.  For many of our farmers, they are now in a situation where they are loan workers, all  
**1:12:13-1:12:21:**  day, every day working on their own, and thinking about having a chainsaw, and maybe working  at height are factors that they have to consider, and rightly so.  So that's the second point.  
**1:12:32-1:12:39:**  And the third point in the UK is we have a lot of rented land, and you have to have the  landlord agreeing before the tenant can plant trees, and this can be a real problem for  farmers.  
**1:12:48-1:12:52:**  So overall, there are these three issues that we need to consider.  I think the first two can be managed, learning courses, and becoming more comfortable with  having trees back into the farm landscape, where we can start to think of that as normal  
**1:13:09-1:13:18:**  rather than new and innovative, actually returning the landscape to the way it once was.  And I should actually say that online there's a fantastic video of a French farmer who grows  mulberry trees for tree fodder, and he pollards them, and his harvest every year, he clearly  
**1:13:38-1:13:47:**  lives in a place where mulberry trees go very well, and he harvests multiple tons of mulberry  leaves every year for his beef cattle.  They're quite an extraordinary sight.  
**1:13:55-1:14:03:**  One last question I wanted to ask is things to be aware of in the design of, I'm thinking  putting trees in the wrong place or not enough of them could have detrimental impacts, thinking  of maybe not enough trees where all the livestock concentrates on creating problems of compaction  
**1:14:22-1:14:25:**  and concentrating fertility in one area.  So what would your advice be in terms of preventing that?  Oh, more trees.  
**1:14:32-1:14:35:**  It's as simple as that.  This is a valued resource that the animals are using because they need to use it.  So getting more trees will take the pressure off that part of the landscape.  
**1:14:50-1:14:52:**  There is one other thing to think about.  We talked at the beginning of the conversation about water management.  And one thing to consider is if you have land that has drainage, so the land has been drained,  
**1:15:09-1:15:13:**  then you do have to think about the trees seeking out those drains for the water supply  and blocking them up.  Now there is an ongoing discussion here about if the trees are going for the water and they  
**1:15:22-1:15:28:**  can manage the water, then the drains are less important and of less value.  But there are certain species of trees, which includes willow, and they actively seek out  water.  
**1:15:35-1:15:43:**  So if you have drainage on your land, then thinking about where they are and the types  of trees that you're planting can be a useful exercise to avoid your drains not working  anymore or being blocked by willow roots.  
**1:15:55-1:16:02:**  I think maybe I'll just finish on one thing.  It's not so much about the livestock, but it is about the number of trees.  I want to consider this in terms of flies.  
**1:16:13-1:16:23:**  So we know that a few trees brings in more flies, which is a problem for the livestock.  But if you bring in more trees, you do bring in the flies, but you also bring in the predators  of those flies.  
**1:16:30-1:16:35:**  So you're creating a better biodiverse system.  And a piece of research has shown that although there are more flies in the silvopasture system,  because of the predators, when you take head counts of head flies, there are 40% fewer  
**1:16:55-1:17:00:**  in the silvopasture system than on open pasture.  And this is really a key point to make because you're rebuilding biodiversity.  You're rebuilding these systems.  
**1:17:10-1:17:17:**  So yes, those pests are there, but the predators are there to manage those populations.  And alongside this, we know that silvopasture systems have more dung beetles, more species  of dung beetles, and each of these beetles is more active.  
**1:17:33-1:17:40:**  So the muck that's being deposited is getting into the ground much quicker.  So those nutrients are being captured.  So really, yes, my main interest is the livestock, but in general, trees bring a great deal more  
**1:17:54-1:17:58:**  benefits than that.  What a beautiful conclusion.  Thank you so much.  
**1:18:01-1:18:08:**  And thanks again for taking the time to share all this amazing knowledge with us.  And I hope we will get you back on the podcast one day for round two, because there's so  many more things to discuss with you.  
**1:18:16-1:18:18:**  So much more to learn in the meantime.  Thank you.  It's been a pleasure.  
**1:18:20-1:18:23:**  Thanks for listening and making it to the end.  I'll post all the relevant links just below the episode.  Don't forget to reach out to us for any suggestions on future guests or on some questions that  
**1:18:32-1:19:01:**  you'd like us to explore through the podcast.  