---
title: 3 Introducing Agroforestry To A 1000ha Grain Farm With Benedikt Bösel
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2020-08-14)  

**0:00:00-0:00:19:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:26-0:00:30:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  these challenges.  
**0:00:36-0:00:41:**  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Hello everybody and welcome to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:00:49-0:00:56:**  Today we're super excited to be interviewing Benedikt Bössel from Gothenbössel in Germany.  Hi Benedikt and welcome to the podcast.  Thanks for joining us.  
**0:01:00-0:01:01:**  Yeah, my pleasure.  Hi guys.  Great to be here.  
**0:01:05-0:01:10:**  So we were thinking that maybe we could start with kind of overview of the project and you  could, you know, introduce the project and tell us what it's about and how it kind of  came about.  
**0:01:17-0:01:18:**  Sure.  So I had a prior life, let's say, because I started working in investment banking when,  you know, I basically went through or came out of university.  
**0:01:41-0:01:48:**  And having lived in and around farms and having always had, let's say, the natural world,  so to say, as something that is basically my passion, I soon came to realize that investment  banking as such is not something that I really want to, you know, spend my time in.  
**0:02:04-0:02:10:**  Then the financial crisis hit and suddenly I saw how this whole system just really fell  together and being 22 years old and experiencing that firsthand was something that had a deep  influence on the way I saw the world or on the way I thought about myself in that context.  
**0:02:25-0:02:31:**  So then I basically said, let's go back to, you know, the kind of passion that you have,  which has always been natural nature and I guess resources.  So I started looking at, you know, the idea or the context of how can you bring in the  
**0:02:41-0:02:49:**  sort of financial background that you have with topics around land use.  And this is when, you know, you had the first couple of funds in the US, I think it was  Avrio, Contibian and in the Netherlands you had Antara that had been formed around the  
**0:03:02-0:03:04:**  topic of ag tech.  So I thought, okay, this is, you know, this is an area that I'd love to go into because  obviously the problems that we are facing are quite obvious and the solutions that innovation  
**0:03:18-0:03:27:**  can bring, be it technological, digital or somehow other are going to be part of the  or a large part of the solution.  So then I took one or two side steps.  
**0:03:33-0:03:34:**  I wasn't restructuring for a while.  I did a master's in agriculture economics and then started working in venture capital  with a strong focus on, let's say ecological technologies specifically agricultural technologies.  
**0:03:51-0:03:59:**  And what I learned through those times, specifically talking to startups in the space, that I was  always confronted with their sort of vision of a future when it comes to land use and  agriculture and food.  
**0:04:07-0:04:19:**  And I think through that, I basically regained the interest of agriculture in the broad sense.  And here also a little side step to my personal history.  See my family's history in a sense that the family of my step-grandfather used to live  
**0:04:34-0:04:41:**  in an estate in our east of Berlin for 250 years.  And he flew in 1945 and then married my father's mother in Western Germany when my father was  five years old.  
**0:04:51-0:04:54:**  So basically my father grew up with my step-grandfather.  And for me, it was always my grandfather, although we're not actually related.  And when the war came down, my step-grandfather came back to the estate that his family has  
**0:05:09-0:05:17:**  been living on all those years and was basically approached by the people living here and was  asked to come back.  Because of course, after the war went down, it was all very, an unsure time.  
**0:05:24-0:05:26:**  It wasn't quite easy.  It wasn't quite, yeah, I wasn't sure how it will all basically turn out to be.  So then my step-grandfather approached my parents and said, look, I am thinking of going  
**0:05:39-0:05:42:**  back home and rebuilding the estate.  Are you guys up for it?  And my parents obviously were saying, this is a great opportunity and the tasks are daunting,  
**0:05:55-0:05:58:**  but yet could be quite fulfilling.  So they then started or initiated the whole process of starting to buy back the land.  First of all, the agricultural land, then the forestry land, and then years afterwards,  
**0:06:09-0:06:12:**  the park and the manor house.  And this is basically how my family kind of returned to the land.  And when I was, I guess, around 30 plus minus, and having worked with the startups in the  
**0:06:31-0:06:40:**  agricultural space and getting more and more known, myself more and more, let's say, involved  in thinking about the future when it comes to land use, when it comes to food and agriculture,  I realized that for me personally, the biggest impact that I can have is not being a cool  
**0:06:53-0:07:01:**  investor and talking to startups about technologies that I don't understand as much as they do,  but to actually go back to the land and utilize the land or make it also available for others  to actually test solutions, develop solutions and seek and look out for new solutions when  
**0:07:15-0:07:17:**  it comes to land use.  So I returned to the farm and took over responsibility of our reparations here in December, 2016.  And in the beginning, I thought, coming from the space, technology and digital solutions,  
**0:07:33-0:07:40:**  I guess, are going to be the way forward when it comes to land use and food.  And what I realized pretty fast is that the problem is that today, 90% of the time, undefined  percentage, but I think it's a high percentage, we have innovation in the ag space or also  
**0:07:59-0:08:05:**  in connection to land use that is always being developed out of an exploitative understanding  of complex ecosystems.  And that means that by definition, the innovation that can come from that will always only be  
**0:08:14-0:08:20:**  able to, let's say, limit the negative outcomes or the negative effects of our predominant  production model.  But I think, and this is what I observed here, this is what I observed day to day, is that  
**0:08:28-0:08:34:**  in order to solve the big problems of our time when it comes to climate, to health,  to rural development, education, culture, obviously there's many things, equality, to  name another one, we need to take an imaginary step back and look at the root causes of the  
**0:08:49-0:08:56:**  problems and then decide how do we have to change our system in order to not be faced  with the negative outcomes in the first place.  And this is really what I learned in those first, let's say, in the first year when I  
**0:09:05-0:09:12:**  took over the responsibility here, because we are now east of Berlin, we have very sandy  soil and at the same time, we have quite incredible drought problems, especially in the spring,  early summer, we have weeks and weeks without rain.  
**0:09:24-0:09:32:**  So this combination makes it incredibly challenging to grow food, to grow even a forest.  So what I realized is that my focus has to be on soil and soil health and soil fertility  and more or less the question, how can we build soil organic matter?  
**0:09:45-0:09:52:**  How can we use that little water that does come most effectively?  So how can it be taken up?  How can it be stored?  
**0:09:55-0:10:02:**  And through that, I then understood that it's not only technological, it's not only digital  innovation that we have to look for.  I mean, they are and they will be incredible tools or instruments later on, but beforehand,  
**0:10:10-0:10:14:**  we have to think systemically, we have to think ecologically, socially, what kind of  innovation can come from that angle.  And then I started writing thousands and thousands of emails to really anybody that was somehow  
**0:10:23-0:10:29:**  involved in new systems or new is a wrong word for this, I guess, but different systems  of land use, different ideas of how we can cultivate land.  I looked at farmers and NGOs and people all over the world that either had similar problems  
**0:10:44-0:10:49:**  than we have and have already solved them or that have just other approaches.  And through all that, I basically discovered the whole ideas of regenerative agriculture  with all its different variables, let's say, or different lines of thought, I guess.  
**0:11:01-0:11:08:**  So agroforestry in a more classical way, centropic agriculture, which is basically like a dynamic  agroforestry with an extremely high diversity in species, holistic grazing, of course, marked  gardening.  
**0:11:18-0:11:23:**  I mean, there's so many different kinds of regenerative agriculture.  I'm always not such a big fan on the whole definition side of things, but I think the  ideas were compelling.  
**0:11:30-0:11:36:**  And what I found really interesting is that although they have been developed and have  been proven to be extremely successful in very different regions and contexts and climate  situations, they more or less all have the same underlying understanding of soil and  
**0:11:48-0:11:55:**  how you have to treat the soil and what you can do to actually start growing soil and  building soil biodiversity and so forth.  And so when I saw that, I realized, okay, this is going to be our future.  
**0:12:02-0:12:04:**  I want this to be our future.  So then the next question was, how can we bring those ideas here?  How can we bring the knowledge here?  
**0:12:11-0:12:16:**  How can we bring people that are fascinated by it that already know some of it or at least  are willing to learn?  And then I started writing a lot of different programs on innovation and subsidy programs  
**0:12:27-0:12:28:**  and whatever.  And I think it was over 10 different tries on the regional level.  The country level, EU level, and all of them collectively said, nah, we're not going to  
**0:12:48-0:12:49:**  find this.  This is no innovation.  Where's the drone?  
**0:12:53-0:12:54:**  There's no blockchain here.  This can't be innovation.  And yeah, I was like, well, this is systemic systems innovation.  
**0:13:02-0:13:03:**  This is ecological.  This is social innovation.  But they didn't really feel that, I guess.  
**0:13:10-0:13:12:**  So then I understood I have to just do it by myself.  So I still had a car, a nice German Audi from my venture capitalist times, which I sold.  And I had some really bad shares, which I had when I started investment banking.  
**0:13:25-0:13:27:**  They were really bad also.  So I was kind of relieved to get them away anyway.  So I sold both of them and got a loan from Ecosia.  
**0:13:36-0:13:44:**  Ecosia is a German search engine that actually is a purpose company that plants trees by  the money that they do earn through advertisements.  They gave me a loan.  
**0:13:48-0:13:56:**  So I always say I swapped 200 horsepower against 20 carpowers because with that capital then  I founded a single agriculture company that today is basically leasing the land from the  large ecological agriculture company.  
**0:14:09-0:14:18:**  And within that small company, we then basically now initiated those different forms of regenerative  agriculture on the estate.  So we today have two different, let's say more or less classical agroforestry systems.  
**0:14:29-0:14:37:**  We have a centropic agriculture test field on roughly 3.5 hectares.  We have, by the end of the year, we'll have more or less hundred cows.  We have the chickens.  
**0:14:46-0:14:50:**  So we do the whole holistic grazing on that front.  We have partners that we're leasing land to that are doing a market garden.  So there's different sort of things that we're trying, composting methodologies as well.  
**0:15:03-0:15:09:**  And trying to, first of all, see how they work in our context, obviously trying to adapt  them and develop them.  And also what we can see and what we can learn, bring that more and more into the large ecological  
**0:15:18-0:15:26:**  estate to transform that basically as we speak.  And yeah, maybe I'll add some more words to the whole setting here in total.  So we are basically in charge of roughly 3000 hectares, a third of which is agricultural  
**0:15:41-0:15:44:**  land, two thirds is forestry.  We manage that with roughly 20 employees.  We always have around five interns as well as volunteers that come help us in, let's  
**0:15:55-0:16:03:**  say the planting seasons in early spring or during the winter.  And yeah, I mean, my family lives here.  I live here.  
**0:16:08-0:16:17:**  And yeah, we've had the luck to find more and more people that are willing to come and  join this journey with us and help us out and share the dream, I guess, of finding new,  I guess, multifunctional land use models that have the potential to be economically, ecologically  
**0:16:34-0:16:41:**  and socially somehow more beneficial than the current other systems that we usually  see.  And although we are only at the beginning and although we know there's just so much  
**0:16:46-0:16:54:**  more to learn and to see and to do, we are incredibly hopeful and we are incredibly,  I guess, motivated by what we see every day and how many people come in from all different  areas and kind of give us the impression that they value what we do.  
**0:17:08-0:17:12:**  And yeah, so it has been an incredible journey.  And to be totally honest with you, I'm so glad that we didn't get funding for any of  the projects that we proposed earlier, like a couple of years ago, because sometimes the  
**0:17:28-0:17:33:**  things that go wrong are the things that you need to go wrong in order to get where you  want to be.  And where we are right now is exactly where we want to be.  
**0:17:37-0:17:44:**  So we are quite happy about that, I guess.  That's such an interesting story and introduction, Benedict.  Thank you so much.  
**0:17:49-0:17:54:**  Yeah, sorry for the long monologue.  It was amazing.  A very, very detailed description.  
**0:17:58-0:17:59:**  It was very interesting.  So we wanted to understand a bit more about how much of these 1000 hectares you're farming  are you currently testing regenerative techniques or testing ecological techniques?  
**0:18:12-0:18:19:**  And when you talk about ecological farming, what does that mean for you on the farm?  Well, so let's start with the last question.  Ecological farming in Germany specifically, you have a whole, let's say, set of rules  
**0:18:33-0:18:36:**  and regulations that you have to basically adhere to.  So it has to do with the crop rotation.  It has to do where you buy your seeds.  
**0:18:41-0:18:47:**  And if it's all certified, where you get the manure from.  And it's a whole process that follows certain rules that make sure that the whole ecological  production follows, let's say, the ecological mind, let's say, right?  
**0:18:57-0:19:00:**  So there's no synthetic fertilizers allowed, of course.  There's no herbicides, fungicides.  It's pretty, I guess, it's pretty natural, I guess.  
**0:19:09-0:19:14:**  So our farm has been ecological since 2004.  So as such, we haven't had any kind of conventional approaches here for a long, long time.  Asking how much of, let's say, the regenerative approaches we are already establishing on  
**0:19:30-0:19:32:**  the whole farm.  I mean, this is, I guess, more or less difficult to say because where does it start and where  does it end?  
**0:19:40-0:19:49:**  I mean, as of today, we are growing roughly 400 to 600 hectares of cover crop each year.  In addition, we have 200 to 300 hectares with nurse crops underneath.  So a combination of different grasses and clover, for example.  
**0:20:01-0:20:08:**  So this would be something that is part of the definition of regenerative agriculture.  Yet this is something that we conventional farmers, ecological farmers have been doing  and are doing in Germany and probably in many other countries also.  
**0:20:19-0:20:23:**  So that depends, I guess.  I mean, when it comes to no till convention or no till organic farming, I guess this is  also something where we have to take small steps.  
**0:20:36-0:20:44:**  I mean, I wish I could just say, okay, we will stop plowing completely as of today.  But life is not that simple.  And I think we are, as many others are, also caught in our system, right?  
**0:20:52-0:20:59:**  So I mean, because of the sandy soil and the low precipitation, our profitability is really,  really weak.  And being faced with those risks that we certainly are and having operating costs that are quite  
**0:21:08-0:21:17:**  large, I can only take little steps, I guess, because if I was to basically say no plowing  as of today, we would probably go through a year of, or let's say a time of, I guess,  something between six and 10 years where I will have a revenue dip of something between  
**0:21:30-0:21:32:**  20 and 40%.  And there is no way that I could basically somehow economically do that.  I would have to lay off people, which I don't want to do, and I would have to do other things  
**0:21:45-0:21:46:**  that I don't want to do.  So we have to really take it slow and we have to learn, we have to be very, very sure on  what we do because we can be, and we want to be as ecologically sound as we possibly  
**0:21:57-0:21:59:**  can and we want to build soil.  But if that means I have to sell my parents' house or I have to lay off workers, then that  can't be sound.  
**0:22:10-0:22:16:**  So this is also one of the reasons why our experience is we need to start small, learn  as much as we can to then slowly leapfrog some of that knowledge into the larger state  because the risks are just so predominant.  
**0:22:26-0:22:33:**  If we go really saying, okay, but if you go hard on yourself on how many hectares are  you doing regenerative organic agriculture, it would be 100 hectare as of today.  But as I said, then we have another 100 hectare today where we don't know plowing, but we  
**0:22:46-0:22:52:**  haven't started any holistic grazing on it yet, that we haven't done any agroforest.  So it's a moving target, let's say.  But obviously we're trying to grow in a sense with land and with capital and with experience  
**0:23:03-0:23:11:**  so that we'll be looking at a thousand hectare regenerative organic in a few years, of course.  But if I have learned one thing doing what we are doing and living here, it's to be humble  and to make sure that you always know that the outside decides not I and not we, our  
**0:23:32-0:23:34:**  heads or our aims.  If it rains, we can reach certain targets.  If it doesn't, we can't.  
**0:23:39-0:23:45:**  And we have to make sure that we'll be able to cope either way.  So yeah, it's an ongoing process.  It's great to hear that, Benedikt.  
**0:23:52-0:23:58:**  In so many successful farms, that's what I've observed over the past few years is this transition  method and not being too hurried to go too far in the idealism because it remains something  quite experimental.  
**0:24:04-0:24:08:**  So it's really cool to see that that's the approach you're taking as well.  And congrats for that.  I think we wanted to focus now on a bit more in detail on the agroforestry systems.  
**0:24:16-0:24:20:**  So maybe you can just give us an idea of what we're talking about.  What did you plant out and a kind of detailed description of the main trees.  I know it's difficult to encapsulate everything, but just so that we have an idea of what we're  
**0:24:31-0:24:32:**  talking about.  Sure.  Well, the first system that we started was basically one step back.  
**0:24:43-0:24:51:**  In the beginning, the first system we planted was April 2019.  So not that long ago.  And a couple of months before that, let's say, I guess towards the end of 2018, I had  
**0:25:05-0:25:13:**  in mind to basically initiate maybe an agroforestry system or maybe think about cows.  Nah, probably not.  I can't start with cows.  
**0:25:16-0:25:18:**  Well, cows are going to be so much work.  I've got so much work enough already.  And I had that kind of idea and thinking and potential projects in my mind still at the  
**0:25:28-0:25:35:**  time where I was like, okay, if I managed to somehow get one of those projects here,  this would just be incredible.  And now looking back, we have quite a few of those.  
**0:25:42-0:25:48:**  So there has been some sort of exponential development when it comes to the different  projects.  But looking back, I sometimes don't really, I can't really realize, it's difficult for  
**0:25:53-0:25:59:**  me to understand how I must have been thinking back in the day.  But anyway, so the first system that we started was really just getting started.  I mean, it was really just about putting some trees on the agricultural fields just to basically  
**0:26:14-0:26:17:**  get our hands dirty.  So the first system was very simple or is still very simple where we have basically  just populace, Alder, and what's it called?  
**0:26:33-0:26:36:**  Well, I think it's called, wait one second.  Give us the German name and then everyone else will have to go and Google translate  and practice writing German.  
**0:26:42-0:26:43:**  Weider.  So Willow.  Yes, Willow.  
**0:26:45-0:26:46:**  Thank you so much.  So it's basically just a system of that.  We have eight different populace species and two willow and two alders.  
**0:26:58-0:27:04:**  And we always plant them in, let's say 30 meter parts following each other because we  really wanted to see which species and what kind of kind will be able to cope with our,  let's say surroundings here, which as I said again, but it's really something that is  
**0:27:16-0:27:20:**  quite predominant, incredibly tough.  And we planted them on a field that has roughly 35 hectares and decided to have two double  rows from east to west as well as six double rows north to south.  
**0:27:37-0:27:43:**  And we did that because with all the systems that we did initiate or that we're doing,  we always try to go as high as we can in diversity and basically trying out things because we  think there is more or less nothing more valuable than doing it and observing it and trying  
**0:28:00-0:28:08:**  to learn from it the best that you can to then have by definition made many mistakes,  which you then hope to not repeat.  To be honest with you now, looking back, planting our first agroforestry system, we did, I don't  
**0:28:19-0:28:22:**  know, 10 mistakes, 10 big mistakes.  Then this year in spring, we thought, okay, we know it a lot better now.  We did it again.  
**0:28:29-0:28:32:**  We did 10 mistakes, which were just as big.  They were just very different.  So unfortunately, it's a bit of a spoiler, but doing those mistakes or doing things not  
**0:28:43-0:28:48:**  as good as you could do them looking back, that's not going to end, unfortunately.  But that's a different discussion.  So basically we did that and it was quite interesting.  
**0:28:54-0:28:56:**  As I said, we planted them badly.  We had the wrong choosing of crop in between.  We didn't have any sort of high gear GPS thing that basically helps us make it a straight  
**0:29:08-0:29:09:**  line.  So I'm kind of sweating when I think about Google Maps, because as soon as they have  an update of the satellite pictures, everyone else will see our agroforestry lines, which  
**0:29:21-0:29:28:**  will look more like, I don't know, but not really straight, I guess.  So there's a lot of things that you can do better.  But yeah, I guess it was our first trial and we'll see what it'll be like.  
**0:29:43-0:29:47:**  In the first year, we had rye next to it, which is not a good thing because it grows  so high that you can't see the rows anymore.  We didn't go in there and clean within the tree rows, which is really bad mistakes.  
**0:29:56-0:30:04:**  The animals loved it, so any kind of animal from any kind of deer, wild boar, wolf, they  all loved those tree lines and they ate them and did anything to them, which we didn't  want them to, but they were loving it.  
**0:30:14-0:30:19:**  So yeah, you can tell when you come there today how they look.  They've had a rough upbringing, but maybe that makes them even stronger now looking  to the future.  
**0:30:27-0:30:35:**  And we are already starting to basically fill them with other trees and more quality trees  in between to basically get the diversity up and get more species into them.  So this was basically the first one.  
**0:30:45-0:30:56:**  The second one we did this year was with a variety with different beech trees, also popular  also elder, but then we also had slow black thorn.  What else?  
**0:31:05-0:31:06:**  One second.  Mulberry.  So a very high sort of different bushes as well as fast growing trees as well as more  
**0:31:17-0:31:20:**  sort of slow growing trees.  Specifically interesting is the sort of limes also, lime trees.  So there we already have a different structure that we are looking at different layers within  
**0:31:30-0:31:39:**  the system combined with wild berry.  It's interesting for either the chicken tractors that we could walk through those agroforestry  systems or just basically the general wildlife.  
**0:31:50-0:31:54:**  Because of course in the first system where we only have fast growing trees, once they  grow let's say out of the first three, four meters, then we'll have the same effect that  we had before, which we don't want that the wind can go underneath.  
**0:32:02-0:32:08:**  And what we really want is basically to have a windbreak.  So in those kinds of agroforestry systems, what we're looking to do is change the microclimate  within the tree lines.  
**0:32:15-0:32:18:**  This is I think for me the most compelling thing.  If you imagine a time like now where we hardly have any rain, but we sometimes have some  humidity in the morning especially.  
**0:32:31-0:32:34:**  If the sun goes up, it gets very hot very fast.  The wind is most of the time quite strong.  It goes over the field and basically takes all the humidity and evaporates it.  
**0:32:41-0:32:49:**  Basically it's the same that if it does actually rain, the soil is so hot and hard that it's  like basically if you take a jar of flour and you put in some drops of milk, you'll  have this milk bubble forming on the flour.  
**0:33:00-0:33:02:**  Then this is what happens here.  Then the wind comes and it evaporates it.  So for us, it's really about decentralized water retention when it comes to those, let's  
**0:33:08-0:33:16:**  say more easy agroforestry systems, which we are really interested to see what kind  of effect they have on the agricultural land in between.  Sort of comparable scientific literature has shown that if you reduce the agricultural  
**0:33:28-0:33:37:**  land by 5 to 10%, that your potential yield on the remaining field will be either the  same if not more, especially in let's say difficult situations.  So this is a bit what we're looking at, where we're going for.  
**0:33:48-0:33:54:**  And then of course, if you think about wind erosions, water erosion, extreme water conditions  that we tend to have here as well, you'll have the tree lines that can actually hold  up the water.  
**0:34:00-0:34:03:**  They can help with the water infiltration.  Also a question of building soil organic matter.  So there's all these kinds of effects that we're looking for in those two systems.  
**0:34:09-0:34:18:**  We have a university from Berlin that is basically taking soil samples over a 20-year time period  to see how the different soil components develop over that time period.  Just a quick question about these systems, Benedict.  
**0:34:27-0:34:33:**  Firstly, what you said about the mistakes, these are some of probably, I mean, for most  people listening, these are probably some of the most interesting things to know more  about, but it would take a whole other podcast, I imagine, to go into these mistakes, but  
**0:34:42-0:34:48:**  definitely things to keep track of and hopefully one day something that we can all share with  our agroforest systems and all the mistakes we did.  But going back into the systems that you've just described now, you described the ecological  
**0:34:59-0:35:05:**  or let's say the ecosystem services that they can provide for the crops.  What are the economic benefits that you're hoping to take out from the tree lines?  Are you hoping to produce something from them as well?  
**0:35:13-0:35:21:**  Well, I mean, we are hoping to produce something from them for sure.  But as of today, the focus really is on the agricultural fields in between.  So if we can prove that the average, let's say revenue, depending on obviously market  
**0:35:36-0:35:41:**  price, or you could just use some standardized market price, but if we go for yield, if you  say tons per hectare, for example, from that field over the last 10 years will be compared  from now into the future.  
**0:35:49-0:35:56:**  And if we manage to have the same amount or even a bit more, although we're reduced by  the tree lines, then this is what I'm looking for.  Because as of now, I don't want to mix the two thoughts.  
**0:36:03-0:36:11:**  Of course you can, but my approach or my hope is, and I think I am pretty sure that it will  be, that we manage to have the ecosystem functions of the trees that bring more value to the  whole field or the whole area.  
**0:36:24-0:36:32:**  And then on top of that comes a potential value add through the tree lines themselves.  But on this field specifically, I am actually not so keen about the potential coming from  the tree lines itself.  
**0:36:39-0:36:43:**  It's really about the surrounding field.  And this is quite the opposite to our syntropic test field, for example.  In the syntropic test field, this is one where we work with Ernst Gertsch very closely together,  
**0:36:53-0:36:56:**  who's been here two times on the farm.  We are really concerned with the potential value add of the tree lines themselves.  So there we have a huge variety of different nut trees, fruit trees, high value sort of  
**0:37:10-0:37:14:**  wooden trees and so forth.  We only have, let's say 10 meters from tree line to tree line on that other field that  I was referring to in the beginning, there we have 36 meters between the tree lines basically.  
**0:37:26-0:37:31:**  But sure, we do think about that.  It's a matter of choosing the right species, I guess.  But here again, I think something that I am lacking definitely is sort of the time to  
**0:37:47-0:37:55:**  go to other places and visit them and share on their experiences and their mistakes and  the things that they have done.  Because I think it's a bit of a philosophical question, but in my first job as an investment  
**0:38:11-0:38:19:**  banker, you took everything and changed it towards an outcome that you want.  And the underlying assumption was always, well, no one will be able to prove what you  rigged in the numbers, so to say, when the time has come.  
**0:38:32-0:38:35:**  So basically, here it's the same thing.  I can plan anything I want on Excel.  I can calculate myself poor.  
**0:38:39-0:38:44:**  I can calculate the project being very profitable or whatever.  But until I harvest it in 25, in 30, in 35 years, it doesn't matter what's on the Excel  sheet.  
**0:38:54-0:39:00:**  That is when the time comes if it has worked in that sense or if it hasn't.  And to calculate in that sense, to think in that sense too strongly in a time where you  just don't know enough yet, I think it's just not something that is very good to do because  
**0:39:13-0:39:18:**  you're relying on something that you only have minor influence on.  So yeah, it's not a good answer for that simple question, but it is really, we think about  it, but I have my eyes somehow on a different target as of now.  
**0:39:34-0:39:36:**  Let's put it that way.  Yeah, Benedict, I mean, you said that you can't travel everywhere, but that's why we're  doing the podcast.  
**0:39:40-0:39:46:**  So hopefully you'll be able to travel with us as we go and investigate everyone's mistakes  and successes.  And that's good to hear.  
**0:39:52-0:40:00:**  So maybe since you mentioned the objective and the focus is really on the field production,  how is that working so far then?  How is it working to integrate the trees?  
**0:40:06-0:40:12:**  And by that, I mean both on the crop, but also in terms of workflow and moving machinery  around and how has that changed your previous operations?  I mean, with regard to the 1000 hectare grain rotation or the grain operation, that field  
**0:40:28-0:40:40:**  of agroforestry on roughly 35 hectares is not yet of, let's say of a size that it will  have a big influence on the whole sort of other operation, I guess.  I mean, it has been fun with our guys that have been in the agriculture for 30, 40 years.  
**0:40:54-0:41:00:**  Suddenly, they have to look out on things while they operate the machines that they've  never done before.  And they're like, what's going on here?  
**0:41:03-0:41:08:**  I mean, they're like, what the...  So that's a very interesting thought process, I think.  And they were obviously complaining that the lines are not straight.  
**0:41:18-0:41:27:**  And they asked me what I had the night before when I basically started planting.  So they are having a bit of fun.  And to be honest with you, I think that is also some...  
**0:41:35-0:41:37:**  That's a hugely important thing.  And it's a big learning with all honesty, because if I...  I'm not a farmer.  
**0:41:44-0:41:49:**  I haven't like, well, how do you define being a farmer?  I mean, I would see myself as a farmer today, but if someone has done 40 years of farming  and then sees my background, the last thing is that I'm a farmer.  
**0:41:59-0:42:05:**  But anyway, so if I go there and say, look, guys, we're going to start planting trees  on the agricultural fields, and we're going to do this, I'm going to do that, and we're  going to stop plowing and all that.  
**0:42:10-0:42:18:**  And this is all knowledge and views and values and ideas and systems that they haven't heard  of before and they haven't done in 40, 50 years.  And they don't understand.  
**0:42:27-0:42:31:**  It's also defined understand, but they don't agree with, let's put it that way, they don't  agree with.  Then if I force them to do it, I might as well just chuck the money out of the window,  
**0:42:39-0:42:48:**  because what we need, what I need, and I think all of us who begin this journey is to get  the people that are working with us on the same page.  You have to kind of listen to them, bring them along, draw them in, communicate, show  
**0:43:03-0:43:09:**  them why and how, maybe if you can prove to them on the outside so that they can actually  experience it themselves.  But it has to be a process, it has to be very carefully communicated in order for them to  
**0:43:24-0:43:29:**  see this as their project as well, because if they don't, they'll never support it.  And if they don't support it, it will never have a chance.  So this is something that I think is incredibly important.  
**0:43:37-0:43:48:**  So we're starting to basically then observing all these new things that are happening and  seeing how they develop.  And then suddenly you drill the next crop and obviously they start looking out of the  
**0:43:58-0:44:02:**  window and they're starting to think about it and asking questions about it.  And I get more and more interested.  And that's a way of basically drawing them in step by step.  
**0:44:10-0:44:14:**  So yeah, has it had a huge influence on the farming business as such?  As of now, not in that sense.  Has it had a huge influence on us as a group of people trying to change something?  
**0:44:23-0:44:24:**  Yes, for sure.  I mean, during Corona time, we had started with four volunteers.  In the end, we were like a group of 20, 30 volunteers who planted 10,000 trees together,  
**0:44:36-0:44:44:**  10,000 potatoes with their hands, 100,000 tree seeds, 300 blackberries.  So this has had an incredible influence on us and it was an incredible energy and it  was an incredible feeling for all of us, planting all these things and doing all of this together.  
**0:44:58-0:45:05:**  But on, let's say, numbers-based analysis, looking at the farm as a whole with the 1,000  hectares, it's still minor.  So it's really, as in agriculture, I guess always, it's not just one level, it's not  
**0:45:17-0:45:19:**  just one answer.  It is multifaceted, so to say.  I love your approach.  
**0:45:24-0:45:30:**  I mean, I think it's just great how you were able to stay humble and really take this approach  on the long run of including people rather than excluding them.  You get credit for that and it's really great.  
**0:45:38-0:45:40:**  Do you expect that things will shift?  I expect that they already have to a certain extent, but do you think that things will  shift once maybe the system is mature and the farmers you work with can actually observe  
**0:45:53-0:45:56:**  tangibly results?  Is that, do you think, will be the tipping point in acceptability and in shifting the  whole business?  
**0:46:00-0:46:03:**  Yes, for sure.  I think when it comes to the farmers that we work with here or when it comes to visitors  from any sort of space, what for me is something that I see every day is that we have to make,  
**0:46:17-0:46:21:**  and I think this is our task that goes far beyond what we are doing and what you guys  are doing, what we all have to do is make these kinds of new ways experienceable.  Because you can tell people like, don't do this or you cannot do this or do this, but  
**0:46:31-0:46:40:**  if you haven't really experienced it, you will never take it as a whole, like in a spiritual  sense part of you.  And this is, I think, is really, really important.  
**0:46:46-0:46:55:**  And now, going back to our farm, if basically I'm looking now at our old agriculture employees  or farmers, they all have their own potatoes in their backyard.  And on the centropic field, which we haven't yet talked so much about, we planted 21 different  
**0:47:06-0:47:14:**  potatoes, basically just to cover weeds that usually would come up in that space.  So we used them in a sort of natural way.  Now we have been joking about the potatoes for quite a while with the farmers because  
**0:47:22-0:47:29:**  those potatoes are just lying on top of the soil with the mulch on top of it.  And our farmers, they usually do it the old way where you would use any kind of things  to make them grow fast and strong and then they look at it and they don't say anything.  
**0:47:48-0:47:50:**  They're like, yeah, whatever.  And then the next time you say, hey guys, let's have a look at the potatoes or we do  the hay in between.  
**0:47:58-0:48:03:**  Let's say we had alfalfa between the centropic fields and we did some silage there.  So the guys were driving away the silage and they were standing over the rows and looking  at it and they're like, okay, well, it's interesting.  
**0:48:12-0:48:15:**  They look quite good.  So that process starts.  And now we've already started to say, well, in mid August or late August, we will have  
**0:48:24-0:48:30:**  a day where we'll go to each one at home and look at their potatoes and we'll make a little  test and say, okay, we have like a square meter and we'll get all the potatoes of this  guy and then we'll get all the potatoes of him.  
**0:48:37-0:48:40:**  And then we'll go on the centropic field and get all the potatoes there.  And so basically it's like, you're trying to build a common language, I guess it is.  You have to build a connection somehow through language or through something that everyone  
**0:48:59-0:49:01:**  kind of knows.  And that is then something again, from there it can grow and it can accelerate in all different  aspects or different directions because once they accept that, hey, this new way of having  
**0:49:12-0:49:18:**  potatoes just lying on the soil and you have murch on top and they are beautifully clean  and they have hardly any problems with pests and there's no worms or whatever, I might  try this.  
**0:49:26-0:49:30:**  Then suddenly they'll respect this new way of thinking and they'll be like, oh, I also  saw that you plant a blackberry together with a birch tree.  Why do you do that?  
**0:49:36-0:49:41:**  And then suddenly you're talking about a centropic agriculture system where if you would have  started without having that introduction through the potatoes, they'll be like, what?  No way.  
**0:49:47-0:49:51:**  You cannot plant together a blackberry with a birch tree.  That doesn't work.  So I think it's really important to find those areas where you can start building that relation  
**0:50:03-0:50:09:**  and that connection within the people and through the systems, I guess.  What we wanted to ask you about is how integrating agroforestry at the moment only represents  a small amount of the land that you have, but how do you see agroforestry having an  
**0:50:26-0:50:31:**  impact on the business strategy of the farm in the medium term or long term, or maybe  even now?  How is it at the moment impacting that aspect?  
**0:50:40-0:50:47:**  I think there's also a couple of considerations.  So first of all, we are in a time where, at least in my bubble or in my understanding,  we have a weird situation where we have people and especially eating people, not eating people,  
**0:51:08-0:51:10:**  but consumers, let's say.  I don't like that word, but consumers.  They are not happy with the way products are being produced.  
**0:51:19-0:51:24:**  They are looking for other products that have a different ethos when it comes to animal  welfare, when it comes to ecological side effects, when it comes to health attitudes.  At the same time, we have the farmers who don't feel hurt.  
**0:51:36-0:51:37:**  They are unhappy.  If they are ecological or if they're conventional, it doesn't matter.  Both of them go on the street and say, hey, guys, what's going on?  
**0:51:45-0:51:53:**  We have a system that is strategically making farmers less and less independent, but forcing  them into corners of having huge depth and corners of being more and more specialized  for markets that become more and more anonymous, which I think is exactly the wrong direction.  
**0:52:06-0:52:10:**  I think we have to look at it in a completely different direction.  I think agroforestry in that sense has a very dominant and very direct way of establishing  a connection, of establishing a communication approach with farmers, with consumers, with  
**0:52:25-0:52:32:**  politicians, with all of us who want a world worth living with regards to climate change,  with regards to food, tasty food, with regards to all those things that we can change through  the question of land use because it's a new aspect.  
**0:52:41-0:52:43:**  There is no heaviness to it.  It's not about nitrate leaching or whatever.  It's not always negative, but it's a positive.  
**0:52:49-0:52:52:**  It's a positive narrative.  Although there are some unknowns and although not everything will work in the sense that  we hope it or we believe it to work, it is a new way and it is a new possibility of approaching  
**0:53:03-0:53:06:**  what we have neglected for such a long time.  This is something that I think is incredibly valuable.  I guess business-wise you would call it marketing.  
**0:53:17-0:53:24:**  It's a marketing approach, not limiting it to that, definitely not, but it is a way of  starting a new communication with potential customers.  That is something that I see very predominant as of immediately.  
**0:53:32-0:53:41:**  Then in the mid-term or in a sooner time period, I think there's just incredible value through  the tree lines themselves.  Depending on your machine of equipment, on your set of values, on your entry or your  
**0:53:50-0:53:58:**  let's say the distance to markets, depending on your age group, depending on your risk  profile and depending on all these different aspects that make us as farmers so incredibly  heterogeneous, you can decide on a couple of products or things that you enjoy, that  
**0:54:12-0:54:19:**  you like to eat, that you like to see, that you think fit well into your context that  you can start investing in.  I mean, if you agree on let's say the assumption that we have to look at more perennial species  
**0:54:34-0:54:44:**  in order to combat or better equipped for climate exchanges, then for me it's a matter  of not investing into equipment, machinery, the latest tractor, the latest camera, whatever  drone, but invest your money into the soil, into trees, into animals and into people.  
**0:54:59-0:55:07:**  I think that's really also my economic rationale behind it.  From a sort of an economic side, yeah, I mean, it just very much depends on your system.  We will have potatoes to be sold starting in a couple of weeks.  
**0:55:20-0:55:22:**  We've planted them beginning of the year.  That's a nigroforestry system that has done us really good because it prevented the weeds  from growing.  
**0:55:28-0:55:37:**  But now we have 21 colorful, amazing tasting potato species that have high nutritional  value that we will sell.  We'll have a story to tell.  
**0:55:40-0:55:42:**  We'll have people to draw in.  Maybe we'll even have a weekend where they come and they harvest it themselves.  So that's an immediate economic benefit.  
**0:55:52-0:55:55:**  Then we have other trees and other bushes that will grow into it.  So next year we'll have a lot of blackcurrant already.  The year after we will have this and so forth.  
**0:56:00-0:56:02:**  So it's a moving target.  It's growing.  And I today say that in four or five years' time, our estate will be dominated by, let's  
**0:56:13-0:56:18:**  say, plums and sea buckthorn.  No, I can't guarantee that.  This is why we have planted 1,900 different species of trees and of bushes to find out  
**0:56:28-0:56:30:**  what can actually cope in our surrounding.  But I think what I'm sure there will come a time where we'll be like, right, we're going  to say these three, four, five, maybe a bit more species are the ones that we're going  
**0:56:43-0:56:47:**  to have a strong focus on.  So yeah, again, I'm sorry that this repeats over and over.  But it's just not something that I...  
**0:56:55-0:57:02:**  It's too complex or too versatile to limit to one simple answer, I guess.  Yeah, but it's good that you're talking about this diversity because that's also something  we wanted to understand is how does diversity fit in your sales strategy?  
**0:57:13-0:57:19:**  Because something we had in our experience in Maazee is that ecology drives you towards  diversifying and putting so much diversity of crops.  But then that still requires you selling those crops and it's not always easy to market diversity.  
**0:57:29-0:57:34:**  So I was wondering in your context and your market, for example, you have a grain operation  on the side, which I assume is sold wholesale.  And then on the side now you have some potatoes to sell or you might have some berries next  
**0:57:42-0:57:43:**  year.  Is that going to fit easily?  Is that a challenge as well to find these new customers?  
**0:57:47-0:57:49:**  How does that interact with the existing business?  Yeah, I mean, ask me that again in a couple of months.  This is something that we all are quite wary of, I guess.  
**0:58:00-0:58:04:**  I don't have the answer as of now.  Maybe I'm naive or stupid, but I strongly believe that there is a market for those products,  even if it's a small number compared to wholesale grain, a couple of hundreds of tons.  
**0:58:18-0:58:27:**  But yeah, it is probably naive, but I think that, I mean, we have Berlin just in front  of our door.  I think if you do a nice packaging, if you can in easy, short words, explain some of  
**0:58:36-0:58:47:**  the story behind the product, I think it's going to be a possibility of selling those.  I mean, for sure, if you think about our centropic agroforestry systems where the number of trees  and bushes and plants and everything that is combined there is just incredibly high,  
**0:59:02-0:59:05:**  I don't think that our future will look exactly like this.  I think from what we learn, we will skip a couple of components of the plant systems  to basically make it mechanically harvestable and cared for, and then also be able to actually  
**0:59:26-0:59:29:**  scale those operations.  So, what you're saying to understand is use diversity to test out and let maybe the ecosystem  express the possibilities and then you select and then you upscale and you go through this  
**0:59:43-0:59:48:**  kind of curve of diversity and then maybe lower it again.  That's interesting.  I'm just saying that because I hadn't thought about it that way and I think it's a really  
**0:59:52-0:59:54:**  interesting way of looking at it.  Yeah, absolutely.  I mean, the thing is the environment here has such a huge influence that it's never  
**1:00:05-1:00:08:**  going to be the market that decides what is growing here.  It's always going to be the ecosystem itself that will decide what can or can't grow here.  And then it is up to us to understand what it is and how we can combine that into a beautiful  
**1:00:23-1:00:26:**  system and a beautiful product.  And then it's our task to sell the product.  But I don't think that it's useful to start at a product then look how can I fit that  
**1:00:36-1:00:37:**  into the ecosystem.  I think that's exactly what we have been doing for years and years trying to control because  of whatever reason we have.  
**1:00:45-1:00:55:**  But I want to understand how can I best let nature do her job here and what products can  come out of it.  And then I'll try to make the best out of the products.  
**1:01:00-1:01:05:**  If I find out that this is not the approach and that no one wants to buy the stuff that  will come out of a beautiful agroforestry system here on our farm, well then I'll just  have to eat it all myself.  
**1:01:12-1:01:16:**  But I don't believe it will.  I think people if they have trust to our brand, if they have trust in what we do and if they  like what we do, I think they will buy the product as far as well as long as it tastes  
**1:01:31-1:01:32:**  nice.  That's for sure.  But yes, I just naively strongly believe that it is the ecosystem that needs to show us  
**1:01:45-1:01:50:**  first what we can and then we'll have to take it from there.  So I think talking agroforestry, talking regenerative agriculture, I think this will be something  that at some point in time will be economically more viable than let's say a classical agricultural  
**1:02:07-1:02:15:**  grain dominant business because it shows and it manifests that there's people who take  a risk and that they do that for the nature.  And the people who try a new way because they believe that it will help them to work more  
**1:02:31-1:02:36:**  with nature or basically get ready for different climate.  I think it is going to be at some point in time something that shows that you're thinking  beyond just yield per hectare or you're thinking beyond just profitability per hectare.  
**1:02:54-1:02:56:**  It's also about the ecosystem.  It's also about the people who live in the countryside.  It's also about trying to involve more than just or thinking more than just primary production.  
**1:03:08-1:03:13:**  And I think that will have an effect on your profitability as a whole.  I believe so, yes.  And part of that could be because you have more and more people coming that want to experience  
**1:03:19-1:03:20:**  it and they want to look at it.  And while they're there, you just give them a jar of honey that you can market for 10  euros a piece and not five euros a piece.  
**1:03:30-1:03:35:**  So yes, I think it will have an influence for sure.  That touches upon this big topic in regenerative agriculture of the value that's produced in  these regenerative farms goes much beyond the economic one.  
**1:03:47-1:03:51:**  And so being able to capture that is the challenge, isn't it?  So being able to, for example, as you're saying, communicate it to your customers and through  that possibly having more customers or an easier way to value your product, maybe even  
**1:04:03-1:04:05:**  a bit higher prices.  People would be willing to pay a bit more for a product that they know is doing good  for the soil, doing good for the planet.  
**1:04:14-1:04:20:**  And so this is a big topic in regenerative agriculture and in agroforestry, in the agroforestry  space as well.  But I want to go back to one thing you said just now, because I think this is something  
**1:04:28-1:04:29:**  completely neglected.  And I think this is growing on me more and more each day.  And this is about the concept or the understanding or basically the observation of myself that  
**1:04:43-1:04:52:**  agriculture for all of us has or is just many times incredibly challenging because of a  very variety of things.  And the tendency of seeing the bad things and the negative and the risks and all of  
**1:05:00-1:05:06:**  those kind of developments is always quite high because they're so predominant.  And that, depending on how you are as an individual, that could lead to you being unhappy or you  could be getting slightly depressed or you could be worried about the future.  
**1:05:21-1:05:28:**  And all of these feelings are not a feeling of joy and the feeling of happiness and the  feeling of freedom and a feeling of life.  And I think this is what we have to come back to though, because being in agriculture, being  
**1:05:38-1:05:42:**  a farmer, this is the, I think, in my view, I'm speaking for myself now, it's the best  thing that I could possibly do in my life.  And it's the most beautiful task.  
**1:05:47-1:05:57:**  And if we don't, or we haven't learned to think about ourselves in that context anymore.  So it's always about just producing and production and this and that.  But it's also about the life that you have and the life that you form around yourself  
**1:06:07-1:06:11:**  with your family, with the people that work with you and for you and their families and  so forth.  And in that kind of difficult time or in those kinds of difficult times, having your eyes  
**1:06:19-1:06:29:**  on topics such as transforming the operation towards more regenerative methods, starting  a small market garden, even if it's just for the employees and yourself, starting your  first agroforestry system, getting a couple of cows, suddenly you can turn your energy  
**1:06:40-1:06:46:**  and your focus onto something that you can actually do and that will from day one bring  joy to your life, from day one will bring color and ideas and new ways and new thinking  and things to talk about and to think about into your life.  
**1:06:57-1:07:03:**  And this is something that I've found so incredibly valuable because all the other problems and  risks and all that's, I mean, we all know that, but it bores me to think about it and  it doesn't make my life more happy.  
**1:07:10-1:07:16:**  But focusing on new ways and new approaches and just getting started from a quality perspective  or the quality of life perspective, it's unmeasurable as a value component.  Yeah, sorry.  
**1:07:27-1:07:35:**  I just need to get that off my heart because I think it's such a huge part of it.  I wanted to add to that.  This is also what's going to help people get back into farming from the cities.  
**1:07:44-1:07:51:**  But also it's known that farmers, for example, have one of the highest suicide rates in terms  of profession.  This is clearly a vital aspect to make farming work for everybody.  
**1:07:58-1:08:02:**  It's not just about the economics, which is, you know what, we've been questioning quite  a lot here on this aspect, but it's about so much more that we need to do in order for  farms to be successful.  
**1:08:11-1:08:13:**  Yeah, totally.  I mean, this is exactly what I'm trying to say.  It's just so much more than all of the economics that are obviously driving all the decisions  
**1:08:24-1:08:28:**  and that are a huge part and you have to take care of it.  But in the end of the day, it's about humans and it's about life and it's about designing  and living a life that your kids at some point want to take over and like to get into and  
**1:08:40-1:08:45:**  young people from interdisciplinary fields around you just as much.  Yeah.  And agroforestry feels, sorry about that, but agroforestry feels right as well on that  
**1:08:53-1:08:54:**  aspect.  It's about regenerating.  It's about reforesting.  
**1:08:56-1:09:00:**  It's about complexifying and integrating.  And so this is something where agroforestry, in my opinion, has a lot of power and a lot  of potential.  
**1:09:07-1:09:08:**  Absolutely.  And I mean, one thing that also drives me is just the imagination of what it will look  like in X, Y, Z years.  
**1:09:19-1:09:23:**  Having stand on our, like if you come to our, and obviously I'll invite you all to come  and meet us and see us, but if you stand here on the field during this time of the year  after the harvest, maybe the sun is burning down with 30, 35 degrees Celsius and it is  
**1:09:41-1:09:46:**  just incredibly lifeless, I guess, in that kind of moment.  But now if you mentioned to have tree lines that go through those kinds of fields and  they're still green and lush and you have like you come in the morning, you have all  
**1:09:55-1:09:58:**  the birds going up and it's like a huge diversity.  It's just, you know, it has so many compelling aspects of creating life rather than deciding  on what you have to destroy or what you have to fight when you get up in the morning.  
**1:10:10-1:10:15:**  So I'm completely with you on that one.  We wanted to understand as well how, for example, implementing these agroforestry systems, did  it require some serious investments in terms of machines or other types of infrastructure?  
**1:10:26-1:10:34:**  This is often a big, let's say, limit for farmers, something that they don't often have  so much cash and new investments can be a bit scary.  So could you talk to us a bit about what that was like on your farm?  
**1:10:45-1:10:54:**  So I mean, we have, as far as the planting itself is concerned, we actually have a cooperation  with a company from Switzerland, which is called Renostech, that they have developed  a planting, I guess, a machine that is preparing the tree lines in the sense that you have  
**1:11:11-1:11:21:**  a subsoiler underneath in combination with a milling machine, so to say.  It's in one machine, basically from the subsoiler, it brings up the earth and then it will pick  up from the milling and it will be made very nice and soft on a depth of, let's say, 40,  
**1:11:34-1:11:35:**  45 centimeters.  So it's below a potential, let's say, compaction area through the plow or through whatever  you have in order to basically establish the trees or establish a bedding for the trees  
**1:11:50-1:11:55:**  to go in deep from the early time or from the beginning.  And also the whole planting of the trees themselves is incredibly good to do because obviously  the whole soil is very soft and you can basically do it with your hands.  
**1:12:06-1:12:16:**  So this is a machine that we've invested in and it costs you around 6,000, 7,000 euros,  which when it comes to planting trees is an investment that makes a lot of sense, right?  I sometimes compare it with people buying furniture for their house.  
**1:12:33-1:12:38:**  They spend a lot of money for things that you see, but on a mattress, which you spend  half of your life, you don't spend as much money.  This is the same with the tree planting.  
**1:12:45-1:12:51:**  So invest when it comes to establishing the trees.  This is what I think is important.  And this machine is something that's just incredibly helpful because it gets the best  
**1:12:59-1:13:03:**  sort of start for the trees that you possibly can.  Apart from that, let's say protection obviously is a very big one depending on what kind of  species and trees you're going for.  
**1:13:13-1:13:20:**  But we have built fences around the ones that are carrying all the sort of fruit and nut  trees because without you, you would have huge problems with all sorts of animals that  love those trees as well.  
**1:13:33-1:13:39:**  When it comes to the trees themselves, depending on what kind of trees, I mean, we have to  buy ecological varieties.  So if you think about a walnut, it's somewhere between 35 and 55 euros.  
**1:13:47-1:13:51:**  Same with, let's say, plum trees and so forth.  When it comes to basically trees from out of the forest, classical leaf trees, so to  say, that are there for other purposes, then we're talking a couple of cents or maybe a  
**1:14:09-1:14:11:**  euro or whatever.  So the investment of the trees in my view is always not the big one.  It's more sort of the protection.  
**1:14:19-1:14:21:**  It's the whole planting process.  And specifically, it's the weeding process in between.  So I think when it comes to planting a system, what you have to take care or you have to  
**1:14:35-1:14:44:**  take account of is basically weeding it four, five, six times a year, at least for the first  four to five years.  Depending on the system, obviously, that you choose.  
**1:14:49-1:14:51:**  If it's a classical agroforestry system, then for sure.  If it's a syntropic system, which is comprised of actually not having any space in between  the rows because it's all being planted, then you don't have to do that that much.  
**1:15:01-1:15:03:**  But you have other things to do.  So I think when it comes to the whole investment as such, one aspect that is incredibly important  and I think that makes it most difficult, especially in the beginning, is the sort of  
**1:15:18-1:15:20:**  the timing of things.  Because the chances are you've planted the trees.  Well, okay, now you're done.  
**1:15:25-1:15:32:**  But then comes basically May, June, July, those months you're having to do hay, you're  having to do harvest, that starts.  And this is the time where you at the same time have to basically go into the tree lines  
**1:15:40-1:15:48:**  and weed them, make sure that they always have enough space to breathe and to have not  too high competition when it comes to water.  And if you don't have someone that is specifically looking after the tree lines, the chances  
**1:15:57-1:16:00:**  is you will completely neglect it during those months.  And then for that year, they will have already been quite, let's say, suppressed, I guess.  I was just going to ask you to finalize this ecological understanding of the system.  
**1:16:26-1:16:36:**  You've mentioned chickens, you've mentioned also beef, well, cows, and I was wondering  maybe even if you're not integrating them yet, how you see that integration happening.  Is that something that you're actively thinking about?  
**1:16:43-1:16:44:**  And yeah.  Yeah, for sure.  I mean, we are currently planning a system, a centropic system that we will plant beginning,  
**1:16:58-1:17:04:**  let's say October, November of this year on six hectares where we're going to plant or  we're going to have a focus on, one second.  So like basic like leaf bushes.  
**1:17:17-1:17:22:**  Don't know the perfect.  Is it like tree hay, for example?  Say that again.  
**1:17:26-1:17:30:**  Are you talking more about tree hay, for example?  Hay that or feed that is produced on bushes or trees?  Yeah, pretty much.  
**1:17:36-1:17:37:**  Exactly.  So we have a variety of seven, eight different varieties or different kinds there that we  will plant in rows with a different like four meter 40 from row to row.  
**1:17:50-1:17:51:**  And this is going to be for the cows.  So it's basically a pasture system, a climate adapted pasture system.  And we'll combine that with the production of, one second.  
**1:18:07-1:18:14:**  Yeah, there's no translation for that.  With two trees that are incredibly valuable in terms of wood as well as walnut trees.  So this is a system that is specifically designed for a pasture model if you want.  
**1:18:26-1:18:30:**  So there's the first integration, which is directly linked and the agroforestry system  that we've done beginning of this year with all the sort of wild berries is a system that  we've already integrated basically with the chickens.  
**1:18:41-1:18:48:**  So it's always thought in a process that basically they have to live from each other with each  other.  And I mean, on a sort of visionary note, I guess my idea of having a couple of fields  
**1:18:57-1:19:03:**  in a system where we have a nurse crop and a cover crop and grain, then we harvest it  for the grain for the production for humans.  Then you have the nurse crop growing, again, protecting the soil.  
**1:19:12-1:19:15:**  So photosynthesis, bringing back the nutrients in the soil, then we'll have the cows come  and harvest or basically graze through it with holistic grazing.  We can sell the meat of the cows, then we'll have the chickens that come, we can sell the  
**1:19:25-1:19:27:**  eggs and the chickens.  And then basically in autumn we will come and have the sort of the tree lines, the centropic  agroforestry lines, and they all can start harvesting different nuts and different berries  
**1:19:38-1:19:39:**  and whatnot.  So there is this idea of obviously bringing it all together, but again, we try to stay  as humble as we can because we'll see how it goes and how the weather develops and how  
**1:19:55-1:20:02:**  our learnings will be in which directions and take it from there.  But yes, of course we want to at some point integrate all of it into one more or less  adaptable system, I guess.  
**1:20:15-1:20:22:**  Basically given your background in finance and investment, which must have brought about  some very interesting or very interesting perspective to farming as well, in your opinion,  what's some of the most interesting ways in funding agroforestry systems?  
**1:20:37-1:20:42:**  Well two things come to mind immediately.  The Perennial Fund, everything the guys over at Mad Agriculture, Phil Teller, for example,  are doing I think is incredible work.  
**1:20:52-1:20:59:**  Basically saying that if we want to help farmers go through that transitional phase, that basically  mentioned early on as well, that we need to find a new way of a financial product because  just giving more loans and loans is not going to help quite the opposite.  
**1:21:12-1:21:18:**  I think we have to find ways where farmers become less dependent.  So basically saying if a farmer is open to go and change the system, let's say from conventional  to ecological or to regenerative or in which direction ever, but basically more with regards  
**1:21:32-1:21:39:**  to soil health and biodiversity and so forth, then we need to offer him capital through  that phase, but without basically asking for annual repayments.  Because if there's a drought, he or she can't repay, then we need to take account of that  
**1:21:50-1:21:51:**  somehow.  I think the system that the guys at Mad Agriculture developed in a sense where you're not obliged  to pay back in times where you're not earning a profit, but only when you do earn a profit  
**1:22:04-1:22:09:**  and then you have like a revenue split model until a certain time, I think that is a beautiful  model and this is something that I hope that will become mainstream at some point in time.  I think progressive industry leaders such as Trilladoes or GLS or Umbelbank in Germany  
**1:22:21-1:22:24:**  are also thinking that direction.  This is one thing and then there's another example also.  We had him also on the podcast with Kun together.  
**1:22:32-1:22:41:**  It's Thomas Ripple and the work that he is doing, basically leveraging a community around  a farm and people around a farm that believe in the kind of work that the farmers are doing  and making, let's say, a cooperative model where they can kind of invest into the business,  
**1:22:54-1:23:02:**  thereby enabling the farmer to use that money to actually change his or her operation in  a sense that it becomes more sustainable and towards the way of regenerative agriculture  in some sort of sense as well.  
**1:23:14-1:23:21:**  Basically overcoming that problem of land ownership, which is often obviously only for  people who are either investors or have some other forms of money, but we really need to  try or we really need to put it in the hands of people that do it for the love of the land  
**1:23:33-1:23:39:**  and then do it because of the right reasons, not as a speculating object, but wanting to  grow healthy food and thereby making sure that you have healthy land.  These are two very different models coming from different directions, but I think they  
**1:23:49-1:23:55:**  are just two examples of so many incredible and brilliant models of rethinking also the  financials when it comes to farming.  I think there's going to be huge developments in years to come and I really hope so because  
**1:24:01-1:24:05:**  this is one of the most desperately needed ones.  But if I could choose, I would make Thomas and Phil, those guys, they have to be known  everywhere basically and governments should be thinking about putting more focus and action  
**1:24:18-1:24:21:**  into that direction as well.  Great.  So, well, I think we'll be taking things to an end now and just as a few final questions,  
**1:24:34-1:24:38:**  what would you personally want to hear about in this podcast?  What are the topics that you're excited to discover?  What would you want us to ask about?  
**1:24:44-1:24:52:**  And this is the moment where you get to give us some input on the following episodes.  I mean, first of all, I have to say thank you so much for inviting me and it's been  great talking to you, although it's always a bit of an unpleasant situation if you're  
**1:25:04-1:25:07:**  the one who has to answer because you only hear yourself talking.  So sorry for that.  I would have loved to hear more about you guys.  
**1:25:13-1:25:18:**  And I mean, I think it's a very personal, it's a personal question.  So I don't know what anyone or everyone likes or wants to hear.  If you ask me individually, I always love to hear the whys.  
**1:25:33-1:25:35:**  Why did people start?  Why what's their motivation?  How do they see that?  
**1:25:39-1:25:46:**  I mean, having been sort of a numbers guy, I am not intrigued by those that much anymore.  Of course, I calculate, I've got my spreadsheets and whatever, but I think the personal stories,  the emotions, the things that happened to them that have made them change, the understandings  
**1:26:00-1:26:06:**  that have gained, the people that they have met, the reasons why they are starting a process  that is to do with uncertainty and a certain risk.  I think that's always, for me, something that is most interesting or most inspiring because  
**1:26:18-1:26:24:**  you can somehow relate or you can't, or at least it helps you reflect upon your own life  and see how maybe you've had situations similar to that, or if you are in a situation, you  can relate to that somehow.  
**1:26:32-1:26:39:**  So I love these kinds of personal stories because in the end of the day, it's what drives  us.  So yeah, more about the whys.  
**1:26:45-1:26:46:**  Yeah, thanks for that input.  We'll make sure we explore that with everyone.  Although it's really hard to do everything in an hour, an hour and a half it goes so  
**1:26:53-1:26:55:**  quickly as we discovered today.  So Benedict, what would be the one piece of advice, most important piece of advice you  would give to somebody that's starting out a similar project to what you have started  
**1:27:06-1:27:11:**  out there on your farm?  Just start.  I think that's just get going.  
**1:27:16-1:27:20:**  You can ask all the questions, you can read all the books and at the end of the day, you  just have to get going, like buy a tree planted or buy a couple of trees planted, buy the  first animal, get someone to come to stay at your farm and do it with you.  
**1:27:32-1:27:40:**  I think that's, we always say, and I nicked this expression from Phil Taylor also, but  we built the ship by sailing.  I think that's really what we do and this is part of the journey because this is what  
**1:27:47-1:27:52:**  Aaron Sketch always says, 5% is the start, planting the first couple of trees and then  is the real start, is only starting then.  95% is observing and adapting and observing and adapting.  
**1:28:01-1:28:06:**  So if you don't start, you can't start observing, I guess.  So I guess, yeah, just get going as soon as you can and then take it from there.  Yeah, great advice and yeah, thanks for that.  
**1:28:17-1:28:22:**  Maybe the last thing, can you tell our listeners where they can find out more about your farm  and your website and all of that?  Sure.  
**1:28:27-1:28:36:**  I mean, we're not that strong on the whole website and I'm slowly starting to start like  an Instagram live.  So whoever wants to follow us, we are on Instagram with my name, Benedict Bozel.  
**1:28:47-1:28:50:**  And we'll start to be more active on that front.  And then we have our website, which is gutenbozel.org.  And yeah, I mean, there's some info you can get or some way to have connection to us,  
**1:29:04-1:29:11:**  but we'll hope to become a bit more active on those kinds of fronts.  But one step after another, I guess.  Yeah, thank you so much for coming on the podcast.  
**1:29:17-1:29:22:**  Yeah, thank you guys so much for having me and thank you for all the incredible work  you're doing and looking forward to check in soon or later again and see what's what  and where you guys are at.  
**1:29:32-1:29:35:**  And yeah, thank you so much for having me.  It definitely seems like we'll need to dig into some more details in a later episode  at some time.  
**1:29:42-1:29:46:**  There's a lot of things that we wanted to talk about and that we didn't manage and  that are important to share with your work.  For sure, anytime and obviously you're both more than welcome to anytime to comment  
**1:29:55-1:29:59:**  and visit the farm as soon as that's feasible and possible again.  Thank you for listening to this episode.  Below, you'll find all the useful links to find out more about Benedict's farm.  
**1:30:06-1:30:10:**  Also, we'd love to have your feedback so we can make the show better.  And most important of all, include your questions.  So reach out to us through our website and we hope to see you there.  