
    ---
    title: #30 Soil fertility and the role of trees in the agricultural transition by Francis Bucaille
    ---

    ### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2021-10-31)  

**0:00:00-0:00:16:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:23-0:00:27:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  these challenges.  
**0:00:33-0:00:38:**  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Hello and welcome to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:00:47-0:00:52:**  I'm your host Dimitri and today we have the immense pleasure of interviewing Francis Boukay  who is a farmer, consultant, author as well as owner of the company Galago.  So I wanted to talk to Francis because after reading his book I was very much inspired  
**0:01:03-0:01:09:**  by his understanding of agronomy and how he is really going into a lot of depth into the  science behind agroecological systems, looking at how soil functions.  And one of the things that really came out in all of these, in his book and all of the  
**0:01:17-0:01:24:**  concepts that he talks about is the importance of having a healthy soil system based on fungi  and lignin.  Now of course in agroforestry this is very pertinent, it's extremely interesting and  
**0:01:30-0:01:36:**  agroforestry can serve as a source of this lignin material but on top of that what really  is becoming clearer and clearer to me is that agroforestry will only have an impact on an  agricultural system if we first start dealing with the soil health.  
**0:01:46-0:01:49:**  And Francis will go into a lot of depth with this, talking about this and I really hope  that you enjoy this interview.  Hello Francis and welcome on the podcast.  
**0:01:55-0:02:01:**  Yes, thank you Dimitri for welcoming me and for having invited me.  No, it was an absolute pleasure to have you on here and we usually start with our guests  with an introduction as to how they got into farming and how they got to where they are  
**0:02:13-0:02:17:**  right now so it would be great if you could tell us a bit about yourself.  Yeah so just to give you some hints about me, I am at first a farmer.  That is to say I farm about 600 hectares in the centre of France and mainly with rabble  
**0:02:39-0:02:49:**  crops but in fact there are many many species from hemp up to corn and winter wheat, winter  barley, sunflowers, grain sorghum and so on.  Also 100 hectares of grasses of patches because up to recent times I had herds of goats and  
**0:03:08-0:03:17:**  finally on my own farm I got aware that some, I would say perhaps not problems, I don't  like the word problems, but some limiting factors were appearing.  Salt compaction, decrease of humus, to speak about the main challenges I had to face and  
**0:03:33-0:03:42:**  then I began to try to understand what was happening, why the global fertility was slowly  decreasing.  The soils are not dead, they are never dead.  
**0:03:48-0:03:55:**  They can be sick but they are not dead and after many searches, many trials on my own  farm I got aware that there were two limiting factors.  First, the mineral balance, the mineral balance is so important.  
**0:04:07-0:04:20:**  Up to now it was dealt with only from an analysis and from the pH and three elements, N, P and  K.  It was not enough.  
**0:04:23-0:04:27:**  I will come back to this point if necessary.  The second limiting factor, the second bottleneck is the mineral balance and that's why I began  to bear interest to the forest, to forest tree because in our Western Europe countries  
**0:04:45-0:04:56:**  show the climax, that is to say the natural vegetation, the natural plants is forest and  I began to look at what was happening inside the forest and what was striking and mainly  in this season which is autumn, you have many, many fungi, mushrooms.  
**0:05:12-0:05:21:**  I like mushrooms but in my fields there were some, there were even many 50 or 60 years  ago when I was young and now you never see mushrooms, something happens.  So it was the beginning of my searches, of my trials and if necessary we will dig more  
**0:05:41-0:05:47:**  in detail to speak about these points.  One last point, I began also to work as a consultant to give advice.  After understanding some points, let's be modest, let's be modest, after understanding  
**0:06:08-0:06:19:**  some points I thought I could share some ideas, some tracks to follow with my fellow farmers  and finally I began to travel all around the world in America, North America, South America,  all over Europe, also sometimes in Africa, one time in New Zealand and Australia just  
**0:06:37-0:06:45:**  to share what I knew but also to learn, to learn and to learn and still to learn from  other scientists, farmers and I began to get aware that advice was not enough.  I had to go absolutely further because sometimes I told people, oh you should use such stuff,  
**0:07:06-0:07:13:**  such material, such fertilizer, such trace elements and they came back to me while telling  me, wow, but I can't find it, my distributor has not this rare material and that's why  I came to the conclusion I had to make the products which were ideal to balance again  
**0:07:32-0:07:41:**  the soils and I created a company which is devoted to this work of making, of manufacturing  my special recipe and this company is called Galago.  I created it in 2014 and now it's a company with 50 people and we are now working all  
**0:08:02-0:08:14:**  over Europe and we have also some intentions to go beyond Atlantic Ocean.  Very nice.  I would not say in a few words, in many sentences I explain who I am and where I come from.  
**0:08:24-0:08:25:**  Very nice.  And I mean, are you a farmer?  Is your family farming for multiple generations?  
**0:08:32-0:08:35:**  How did you come into it in the first place?  Oh yes, all my family is in farming, farming industry.  My father was a small farmer in Normandy and he decided to move to the center of France  
**0:08:53-0:08:57:**  just to find a bigger farm.  You know, it was very difficult at the time, it was in the 70s to find a lander in Normandy  at this time.  
**0:09:07-0:09:17:**  And when he decided that I was not at all ready to go, to come back on the farm.  I had a diploma in translation in English.  I had a diploma for literature and for some economics.  
**0:09:32-0:09:44:**  And I had just been hired by a bank, French international trade bank, Banque Francaise  du Commerce Exterière.  And exactly the day where I had to join this bank, my dad, my daddy had a heart attack.  
**0:09:58-0:10:04:**  And of course, I had to assist him, to support him.  And I told him, oh, don't care.  I will replace you for a few days or a few weeks.  
**0:10:12-0:10:16:**  And finally, he never really recovered.  And I was really thrown in farming without being able to swim in this almost new space  for me.  
**0:10:32-0:10:39:**  But I have to tell you something which is very positive in this story.  What is positive is the fact that I did not know what I should have sought and I did not  know what it was forbidden to think.  
**0:10:52-0:10:58:**  So of course, I could use the tracks I found.  And I read, I read, I read many, many books, English written books.  And I found so many wonderful, wonderful thoughts, agronomic approaches in the US, in Australia,  
**0:11:18-0:11:25:**  in India, Pakistan, Chinese, Russian, the Russian school, the agronomic Russian school  is absolutely wonderful in Cuba and so on.  So I got aware that there were so many, so many, so many bright ideas which were unexplored,  
**0:11:42-0:11:49:**  unexploited, I should say, which existed, but which were unexploited.  And it's very surprising.  We have here the proof.  
**0:11:53-0:11:57:**  We have many ways of communicating.  We have internet, we have many social networks and so on.  Nevertheless, the knowledge doesn't go very easily and is subjected absolutely to the  
**0:12:15-0:12:26:**  culture, the culture of peoples, the habits of farmers, the pressure of agrochemicals,  the legislation which doesn't always understand why they impose such regulation.  They think it would be useful.  
**0:12:39-0:12:41:**  Sometimes it's counterproductive.  When they say you have to put your slurry deep inside the soil, but they don't understand  anything, it should be left on the ground to be simply sterilized by the UV light.  
**0:12:59-0:13:08:**  It should be cleaned by the sun and it should be re-excisionated.  And if they say you have to dig it into the soil, they think only on disturbances for  the noise, for the noise.  
**0:13:25-0:13:31:**  It's just for the noise of the neighbors, but it's not for nature.  So I began really to think somewhat differently.  That's my story and why I came to the point where I am now, nowadays.  
**0:13:47-0:13:53:**  I can't help myself to ask the question about when you're talking about culture and some  of the challenges, the belief systems that are preventing people from creating change.  What about you and the fact that you didn't have an agricultural engineer as you have  
**0:14:06-0:14:08:**  in France degree?  Was that ever limiting to you in your communication and in the way that you managed to interact  as a consultant?  
**0:14:16-0:14:27:**  Oh, of course, it's a very important, an important question because we have a certain need to  overcome this difficulty of communication.  And we have bright people who made studies.  
**0:14:41-0:14:44:**  They know things I don't know.  They use Excel tool much better than I do myself.  But I think the very young generation is evolving.  
**0:15:01-0:15:10:**  But in my own company, I have just hired very young agronomist bright people.  But I get where we have a still to try to transfer another point of view.  That is to say, if I speak only about pH, you know, acidity, I have just to explain  
**0:15:31-0:15:42:**  them that an alkaline soil doesn't mean you have enough calcium because alkalinity can  be caused by too much sodium, too much potassium, too much magnesium.  I found very acidic soils which had already too much calcium.  
**0:16:00-0:16:03:**  So I have just to explain that.  That is to say, it's a question of mind mapping.  But I believe very much in the power of communication.  
**0:16:14-0:16:20:**  And one of my job is to try to communicate.  That's why I wrote a book.  That's why I try to speak common sense language, common sense, not pure scientific work.  
**0:16:40-0:16:42:**  You know, it's a secret.  I will give you a secret.  I asked to science direct to be accepted in the network of scientists.  
**0:16:55-0:17:05:**  I gave all what I did, my book and so on, on the conclusion, you are not a scientist.  I am sad, not for my own pride.  It's not a problem of my own pride.  
**0:17:13-0:17:20:**  But I think what you are lacking really is not scientist.  We have brilliant scientists, but people who are able to put together again everything  which is known to make again an agro-system.  
**0:17:35-0:17:48:**  Because an agro-system is very complex and we need many, many specialists, many technicians,  many people who go very, very deep in the knowledge of mechanisms.  But at the time you absolutely need a very good generalist who put that again all together.  
**0:18:07-0:18:11:**  And I think I am a good generalist.  Apparently a generalist is not a scientific.  That's quite sad to hear.  
**0:18:21-0:18:28:**  But I have to say that I am happy you introduced your book and if you hadn't I would have explained  to our listeners how enthusiastic I was about reading your book, which is in front of me  right now.  
**0:18:34-0:18:44:**  Because I really appreciated how you were discussing about breaking apart from some  of the ideas that we carry in agroecology and in regenerative agriculture and looking  going a bit deeper in the sense, not taking for example no till as an end in itself, but  
**0:18:56-0:19:01:**  as one of the means to an end, as one of our tools that can have its own limits.  And so I really appreciated how it made me think of things in a non-dogmatic way and  to also understand the complexity and the nuance of each of these techniques that we  
**0:19:10-0:19:16:**  sometimes have a tendency to hail as an almighty solution to some of our agricultural problems.  And so I read it, it's in French and I, is there an English translation?  Not yet.  
**0:19:22-0:19:29:**  Oh, it has been decided the last week and it will be translated.  Very nice.  It will be translated.  
**0:19:31-0:19:39:**  I think it could be useful and I will make some addendums, you know, because I think  for the English speaking people, some references maybe will not be very prevalent, will not  be relevant.  
**0:19:55-0:19:57:**  So pertinent, so relevant.  Relevant, yes, exactly.  I feel there will not be a relevance.  
**0:20:03-0:20:13:**  But from a technical point of view and absolutely I will stick to what I already wrote.  Even after a few months, I don't regret many lines.  Very nice.  
**0:20:21-0:20:23:**  So I think that's going to be very exciting.  And if anybody's listening, it's a book that one of the most interesting books I've read  recently on agriculture.  
**0:20:29-0:20:31:**  So I highly advise it.  And actually, I think it's a good way to get into the core of the topic, which was agronomy.  Because one of the things that you said in the book was, you know, the soil organisms  
**0:20:43-0:20:45:**  don't like to eat salad.  And it's one of the lines in the book.  And of course, it needs to be put into context.  
**0:20:49-0:20:52:**  But basically, that kind of, that was one of the things that started, you know, that  was already making me think because I hadn't quite realized that how, you know, we talk  a lot about cover crops, but depending on how we use cover crops, we may not be reaching  
**0:21:01-0:21:03:**  the objectives that we're looking for.  And I would love it if you could a bit explain to us how that works.  And, you know, what are some of the current mistakes that we're making with cover crops?  
**0:21:10-0:21:14:**  And that's naturally going to lead us into the soil fertility question.  You know, even agriculture doesn't avoid or escape the, what is fashionable.  There are fashionable ideas.  
**0:21:30-0:21:39:**  And now it's, the reward is given to the guy who doesn't kill at all.  No tines, no discs, nothing.  And we go from one extreme to another one.  
**0:21:48-0:21:53:**  And of course, that's what is striking for me.  I was dealing, I give another example, which is not in the book.  I have to give something else or otherwise we will be boring.  
**0:22:05-0:22:06:**  I will be boring.  We will be bored.  But I was speaking to a very, very big vine grower this same morning.  
**0:22:21-0:22:28:**  And he told me he has a problem of salinity, you know, too much salt in the soil.  And of course he was told you have to put a gypsum, what he did and cover crops.  But I looked deeper in details.  
**0:22:41-0:22:48:**  What happens just because of the cover crops?  He has been growing now for six or seven years.  The salinity is worst, worse on worse.  
**0:22:57-0:23:00:**  And he doesn't understand why.  But we have only to think about the fluxes, the flows, you know, of the nutrients.  And when you have evapotranspiration, which is much higher than leaching, than the rain,  
**0:23:22-0:23:32:**  the rainfall, then of course the salt will come back to the surface just through the  capillarity.  He told me I had some small problems five or six years ago, but now I thought having  
**0:23:43-0:23:51:**  corrected everything through agrobiology, regenerative agriculture and so on.  But I told him what you did is exactly the opposite of what you should have done.  Why?  
**0:24:01-0:24:09:**  Because during the winter rains, you have a cover crop which evaporates.  So the water which should take the salt down finally doesn't do its work just because we  have the use of this water by the surface, by the plants, by the cover crop.  
**0:24:32-0:24:34:**  And then you have an accumulation.  And he told me the cover crops is poorer and poorer, is smaller and smaller.  So you know the world which tells the hell is paved with good intentions.  
**0:24:51-0:24:55:**  So in agronomy, it's also true.  It's also true.  We have always to think about the agrosystem.  
**0:25:01-0:25:04:**  What is really happening?  And that's why sometimes my conclusion, I am not fashionable.  They are not fashionable.  
**0:25:13-0:25:17:**  And sometimes I tell people you have a still to plow.  So it's curious in these times, but I have to tell them, yes, it's a way to cure, to  maintain your soil at the upper level.  
**0:25:32-0:25:37:**  Because you have no biology, you have not the roots of trees which do that and that  and that.  And so you have to replace.  
**0:25:40-0:25:47:**  One pivotal idea is the following one.  When you are cultivating the soil, you have to adjust to understand that before man appeared,  certainly it was a forest.  
**0:25:59-0:26:11:**  And the only questions to be asked is which functions have been weakened or destroyed  through deforestation?  Perhaps maybe it can be the fungal population.  
**0:26:20-0:26:30:**  Maybe it's the fact that the roots of the trees are able to catch water even at 20,  30 or 40 meters deep.  So it can be, I would say, an ecological help to pump and to irrigate because you replace  
**0:26:48-0:26:53:**  simply a function which disappeared because of deforestation.  And in many, many environmentalist head, you have not to irrigate, you have not to do anything,  but it's not fair towards the nature because nature have many, many possibilities.  
**0:27:12-0:27:21:**  But of course, you deprive it of the means which it had before deforestation.  So it's a question of responsibility since you deprive this ecosystem from some means  and trees are so powerful means.  
**0:27:35-0:27:43:**  It's an obligation, a moral obligation to replace these functions which have been weakened.  You know, what I tell you is very important.  I think when you look at agrosystems with these eyes, you begin to think that maybe  
**0:27:56-0:28:02:**  glyphosate, for example, is perhaps not the main problem.  The main problem is perhaps the goats which heat the grass very short and you have sun-dried  pastures all over the summer while the trees are green in the forest, while these trees  
**0:28:29-0:28:35:**  are evaporating, they are giving back water in the atmosphere.  And I go beyond, I think I explain it in my book on the leaves, on the canopy, on the  phytoplhere.  
**0:28:44-0:28:56:**  There are millions and millions of small bacteria which are taken by the winds, the whirling  winds, you know, whenever there is a storm and then they go in the clouds.  And once these very small bacteria are in the clouds, they are the kernel of the future  
**0:29:15-0:29:17:**  drops of water.  That is to say the very small droplets of a stream, of the clouds, aggregate around  the bacteria and once the critical weight is reached, then the droplet falls.  
**0:29:34-0:29:41:**  But you need absolutely vegetation, canopy during the winter.  So an irrigated corn, even if it is irrigated, it can make sense, it can be ecological.  It can be ecological if you think only you restore the functions which have been weakened  
**0:29:59-0:30:01:**  by the deforestation.  It's certainly another view and I tell exactly the same about the sugar beads.  And for everybody, for everybody sugar bead, it's a sheet, you know, it's a sheet.  
**0:30:16-0:30:26:**  Basically it's the worst thing on the planet because it's industrial, but if I give you  another point of view, it's still more adapted to the change of the climate.  Just because this plant grows on two years, you know, the first year is for the root and  
**0:30:50-0:30:54:**  the second year it's flowers and it's for the seeds.  Under the first year, and that's what is interesting for the sugar bead grower, there is no key  stages for the sugar bead, that is to say, even if this plant is lacking water for two  
**0:31:12-0:31:15:**  months, it's not a problem.  Its potential is not at all damaged.  It's not damaged at all.  
**0:31:22-0:31:29:**  And when the rain comes back again, then the growth starts again.  And it's wonderful because it has a very, very deep rooting system first and it can  overcome a drought without any problem.  
**0:31:45-0:31:54:**  So when I hear organic winter wheat, it's wonderful, the solution, no, it's not true.  From an ecological point of view, it's crazy, absolutely crazy, because most winter wheat  takes absolutely, I would say, two herbicides at least between one and three fungicides  
**0:32:14-0:32:19:**  and some years, one insecticide.  Corn?  Nothing.  
**0:32:22-0:32:33:**  Only one or two herbicides, but no fungicide, no growth regulator, nothing else.  You understand what I mean?  So when I told you that I did not know what I was allowed and what I was forbidden to  
**0:32:43-0:32:48:**  think, that's the result of my free thinking.  Yeah, naturally, very interesting.  And I know that in the book you go in a lot more detail explaining all of these things  
**0:32:56-0:33:01:**  and it's worth it because you put lots of graphs and lots of illustrations as well to  assist us to understand in more detail what you mean there.  But for me, it makes me think of the idea that for farmers, it can be quite challenging  
**0:33:11-0:33:18:**  to have to manage their operations and on top of that, gain such an in-depth, holistic  understanding of all of the mineral flows, the water flows, the carbon cycle and everything.  How do you advise farmers to start to really gain a grasp of this reality without necessarily  
**0:33:32-0:33:34:**  having to depend on a consultant?  Is it even possible?  Oh, you are absolutely right.  
**0:33:41-0:33:50:**  It's not that simple and it can be challenging, of course, to face such a change.  My advice is to go from step to another step, just not to run any risk.  A farmer, of course, is also a manager of an industry, of a company.  
**0:34:15-0:34:21:**  He has liabilities, responsibilities towards his farm workers.  He has some.  He has his family, his wife, children.  
**0:34:26-0:34:31:**  We have also to pay for the studies of your children.  So of course, it can look like being very distant from agronomy, but you have to think  absolutely about all that when you give some advice because there are consequences behind.  
**0:34:52-0:34:58:**  So my advice is to go step after another step.  And my advice is first, have a look at your soil and look at it.  And the first thing to have a look at is the following one.  
**0:35:14-0:35:22:**  Is the surface still connected to the deep light layers?  For me, the best definition of a dead soil or of a dying soil is the fact that there  is really a border, a pan, a plough pan or a pan between the surface layers and the deep,  
**0:35:43-0:35:44:**  the bedrock.  You have absolutely to have a still communication in between.  And it's not very complicated to have a look at it.  
**0:35:54-0:36:02:**  But if there is a pan created by man, that is to say by farm equipment, only farm equipment  will solve it rapidly.  Otherwise you could have to wait, don't know, five years, 10 years, 20 years.  
**0:36:14-0:36:21:**  And if you let trees growing, otherwise it will never happen.  But you have a time enough to go bankrupt before the plants have solved the problem.  So I say, when I see that, I say it's the first step.  
**0:36:36-0:36:43:**  You have absolutely to reap, to subsoil your soil.  You have not to plough it again, but you have to subsoil it just to break this pan.  And so you have no longer wet soil after heavy rainfall, you know, and you have a storing  
**0:37:06-0:37:12:**  water in the deep layers and the roots can go immediately much, much deeper.  So it's really the first point, the first step to follow.  So even with my own company, Galago, which is a commercial company, we can call it commercial,  
**0:37:26-0:37:28:**  but it's my first advice.  I have nothing to sell, but I want absolutely my clients to be satisfied.  And the first economic step is the following one.  
**0:37:38-0:37:41:**  Yeah, is this one.  What is surprising?  I was myself surprised.  
**0:37:45-0:37:55:**  And I described in some papers, even in no-till situations with cover crops, you can find  very hard pans and sometimes which are still harder than plough pans.  Just because when you have too much moisture, water logging in the soil, then the minerals,  
**0:38:16-0:38:24:**  iron and manganese mainly are reduced, chemically reduced.  And then they are soluble, water soluble.  They go somewhat deeper and when they find oxygen again, they deposit, you know.  
**0:38:35-0:38:45:**  And so what was initially only a question of physics, that is to say a compacted layer  becomes a chemical layer, a chemical cement, you know, with a hyron and manganese as cement  between drains of sand, silts, loaves and clay, you know, and it becomes like rock.  
**0:39:04-0:39:10:**  And I found it even in these situations of no-till.  So the second point, it was the first, the second point, the chemical balance between  calcium and magnesium beyond the, just beyond the pH indicator.  
**0:39:30-0:39:38:**  These two minerals have a very, very strong action on the physics of the soil.  That is to say, in a nutshell, magnesium, it's a glue and calcium can aerate, give porosity.  But we have absolutely to get a balance in between.  
**0:39:55-0:40:02:**  That's why my pH, the pH for me is not an indicator.  Actually it can be very deceiving, you know, to follow only the pH.  The third step, you can believe me, when you already did that, you still, you already see  
**0:40:21-0:40:28:**  many, many bigger changes and you gain confidence in what you are doing.  And you know, by observation, but also instinctively that you run less and less risk if you go  further.  
**0:40:39-0:40:52:**  And then the third step, I absolutely advise the clients who are willing to do it, to use  one of my recipes, which is commercially called a natural gel.  It's, and I close, you know, the loop I opened a few minutes ago.  
**0:41:08-0:41:17:**  That is to say, we are lacking mushrooms, fangos, you know, the, this fungi with caps,  we lack them because they are pivotal, they are the masterpiece of soil biology.  And the good news in that the spores of mushrooms are very, very, very resistant.  
**0:41:35-0:41:44:**  Their half-life, if I can speak half-life about living organisms is decades, really  decades, because they are protected by melanin layer, you know, so they resist the microbial,  the bacterial attacks.  
**0:41:54-0:42:00:**  And even if you don't see them, they are still dormant sport.  So what I want to do is to wake them up so that they can do their job.  I will come, if you are willing, of the advantages of waking them up because it has something  
**0:42:16-0:42:20:**  to do with agroforestry, with agro systems and so on.  Please go ahead.  You don't even need to wait for me.  
**0:42:23-0:42:25:**  Go ahead.  Okay.  So the main advantages, I give just some advantages of waking up the mushrooms.  
**0:42:37-0:42:45:**  They store much more efficiently than anything else on earth, the carbon.  They are able to store carbon with an efficiency, which you will never find anywhere else.  That is to say, to put it in a few words, when they intake, when they take in carbon,  
**0:43:06-0:43:20:**  they breath out only 50% of the carbon under the C2 form, you know, the oxygen carbon.  And in the area, they breath out up to 85%.  So if you want to store carbon, that is to say for a farmer to make humus, carbon is,  
**0:43:35-0:43:40:**  you know, adjusted for administration, for authorities, or to get the credits, carbon  credits.  But carbon for a farmer, it's humus, it's life.  
**0:43:46-0:43:54:**  So if you want life, you need fungal population.  And if I just describe one or two more advantages, they produce glomalin and oxalic acids in  huge quantities, glomalin is so recalcitrant to decay that it can last up to 40, 50 years,  
**0:44:27-0:44:31:**  40, 50 years for half life.  You imagine the store, the carbon which was stored by fungi today will be decayed, used  for only 50% in 2017.  
**0:44:49-0:44:52:**  I will be dead.  So imagine it's very, very efficient.  And you have also a stability, that is to say, through the miscellium and glomalin,  
**0:45:07-0:45:17:**  which are soft glues, they are able to resist erosion, wind erosion, water erosion, very,  very efficiently.  I have many, many, many examples of people who used my solutions with the slopes and  
**0:45:27-0:45:34:**  even in the same conditions, that is to say the same crop rotation, the same fertilizer  and so on and so on, the main species, winter wheat and so on, after a heavy rainfall, then  you have big ridges with the neighbors when it crosses the field of my clients, no ridges  
**0:45:51-0:45:52:**  at all.  That is to say, there was such a rainfall that it flowed over the field, but without  carrying anything, without taking anything from the field itself.  
**0:46:06-0:46:12:**  It goes out from the field of our clients, then again the ridges.  It's absolutely incredible.  So that's what is important.  
**0:46:18-0:46:27:**  It was a third step only and I have 55 steps.  We maybe will have to stop there.  Go ahead.  
**0:46:35-0:46:42:**  So the fourth step, we have to take care of the seeds.  Once you have looked at your soil, you have absolutely to take care of the seeds because  that's where everything is initiated.  
**0:46:55-0:46:57:**  That's where everything begins.  That is to say, it's like a children which was born with the microbiology of his or her  mother.  
**0:47:12-0:47:24:**  This microbiology is inside the intestines up to his death unless you take too many antibiotics  during your life.  Otherwise, your mother gave you health, transmitted to you health.  
**0:47:37-0:47:41:**  The seeds are not sterile.  They bear many, many, many bacteria, fungal spores and so on.  So they deserve much more than only receiving fungicides and insecticides.  
**0:47:57-0:47:59:**  And that's what I do.  Of course, fusarium does exist.  The smut, you know, in French, the smut does exist.  
**0:48:19-0:48:30:**  But we can counteract their action only with some organic molecules and trace elements  and to favor the beneficial microorganisms which are already on the seeds on my own observation.  When you do it, you can create such a beneficial environment in the spermosphere.  
**0:48:53-0:49:02:**  That is to say, the young rhizosphere, you know, when you have only a small sprout around  the seed, then everything begins.  And the microbiology which is there at the starting point will go ahead with the crops  
**0:49:18-0:49:19:**  up to the harvest.  And I already saw stubbles, you know, which had a completely different color when treated  this way or not.  
**0:49:34-0:49:44:**  Gray with fungicides and perfectly bright yellow when you respected the original microbiology  which is around the seed.  And then, and I will go rapidly because I don't want to be too long, but I will try  
**0:49:58-0:50:06:**  to give some help to the plant, to the crops whenever there are some stresses.  It can be hail, for example, it can be hail or heat or frost and so on.  That is to say the habiotic stresses.  
**0:50:24-0:50:34:**  You have some biotic stresses, including the biotic stresses due to the physiology itself  of the plant, that is to say, when the seed, you know, the seed of corn, for example, is  empty, then the plant is weaned, sevret, weaning.  
**0:50:51-0:50:55:**  I think weaned is the right word in English.  That is to say the seed is empty and there is nothing more to give to the plant itself.  So it has to be self-sufficient, you know, and the plant has to live absolutely 100%  
**0:51:14-0:51:18:**  through the uptake of its roots.  At this time, sometimes it makes sense to help it and just to end the steps, we see  if we took care of all these one, first, second, third, fourth steps, then the diseases, the  
**0:51:39-0:51:44:**  insects are much more violent.  They are much weaker, they are easy to master, to harness.  And then only some biocontrol products work in this situation.  
**0:51:58-0:51:59:**  It does work.  Of course, if the agro system, the soil is unbalanced, you absolutely need modern, useful,  efficient, but also dangerous fungicides.  
**0:52:22-0:52:32:**  On this last point, I take care also of all the microflora, which is on the leaves, on  the canopy, on the stems.  At the beginning of our conversation, I told you there are billions and billions and billions  
**0:52:43-0:52:49:**  of bacteria on leaves and some are very useful.  Very naturally, for example, you have yeasts.  That is to say saccharomyces cerevisiae, you know, yeasts.  
**0:52:58-0:53:10:**  And if you take care of them, first, they don't leave much room for pathogens, for airborne  pathogens.  They consume, they feed on leaves exudates.  
**0:53:17-0:53:25:**  So there is a food competition, you know, between good and bad guys.  And they win it.  For most yeasts, for example, they exudate also antibiotics, they exudate molecules which  
**0:53:38-0:53:47:**  help the crops to resist everything which could damage it.  So it's the last point.  What is tricky, you know, of course.  
**0:53:54-0:54:04:**  For those who are selling biosolutions, they immediately think of diseases, of insects,  and they propose, you know, a natural enemy, natural foe, an enemy of such and such parasite  to sell it.  
**0:54:15-0:54:26:**  They don't think of health, you are first to build a good, strong, deep rooting system,  a soil, a living soil, a good and balanced nutrition of the plant before thinking of  striking against insects and fungi, fungal pathogens and so on.  
**0:54:43-0:54:54:**  And when you do it, then the farmer, the producer is more and more conscious that he can go  further without running any risk.  And it was rather long, what I explained, but I could not give you only the titles.  
**0:55:08-0:55:16:**  I had absolutely to go more in detail for you and those who could listen what I told  to understand all that.  But when they see that they can go further without running any risk, really, they cross  
**0:55:29-0:55:38:**  this apparently dangerous border from one step to another one, to another one, and then  to end.  Don't begin by the end of the story.  
**0:55:44-0:55:48:**  Don't begin by bio fungicides.  Very bad idea.  Very bad idea.  
**0:55:52-0:55:54:**  Begin by your soil.  Very interesting.  Was it clear, Dimitri?  
**0:55:56-0:56:05:**  Yeah, I mean, for me, it's always important to complete the idea in the picture and we're  discussing very complex, holistic type thinking.  And so it's also very encouraging to hear these things from a person that has the experience  
**0:56:16-0:56:18:**  that you have and that worked with so many farmers.  So there's encouraging solutions out there.  But linking things back a bit to agroforestry, I'm curious to know for you, what is the role  
**0:56:30-0:56:33:**  of the tree on the farm?  Before we start going into the challenges associated with it, just from an agronomical  perspective, what can the tree provide to us and how can it help complete and meet some  
**0:56:43-0:56:48:**  of our ecological objectives to create a sustainable agriculture?  Oh, agroforestry for me is very relevant for the new challenges, is very useful and for  at least two main reasons.  
**0:57:06-0:57:10:**  If you want, I can find other reasons.  But the first...  55 other reasons.  
**0:57:17-0:57:22:**  I can find 100, I think.  The first reason, I would say, if you want to draw many benefits from agroforestry, I  would say is not only mathematics, it's also quality.  
**0:57:42-0:57:53:**  I already thought when you have a century, one century or centuries old tree, you can  be sure this tree met already many, many, many challenges.  Insects, diseases, drought, wet storms, everything God can offer to us.  
**0:58:13-0:58:16:**  And he survived.  Why did he survive?  Certainly because he developed himself some mechanisms.  
**0:58:27-0:58:40:**  And in many, many occasions with the help of some auxiliaries, insects, fungi and so  on.  So when you leave it, at least I would say some islands, oasis of these trees, you are  
**0:58:52-0:59:04:**  absolutely sure to get on your farm a library of the best of what can be done by nature  to protect your farm.  So don't think about how many cubic meters is this tree.  
**0:59:15-0:59:22:**  It is so many hundred or thousand euros worth.  So it makes sense to cut it, to plant again new, young trees and so on.  No bad calculation.  
**0:59:31-0:59:37:**  You absolutely to keep your libraries on your farm.  From point, second advantages, you are absolutely sure that from point to point, you have at  least a huge, I will call it a pit, you know, which connects the surface with the bedrock.  
**1:00:04-1:00:10:**  And so there are still exchanges of minerals and so on.  And the way I would say a motorway to drive waters deep into the bedrock.  So you are absolutely sure that at some places in your fields, on your farm, you have this  
**1:00:34-1:00:38:**  connection, which is absolutely essential.  Without life, without trees, these poles, these channels will be rapidly filled and  so closed and then everything is over, game over.  
**1:00:58-1:01:09:**  And for example, the calcium, which is in the soil, can easily be transformed very rapidly  into calcium carbonate, calcite, you know, and it is really perfectly, how do you say,  perfectly, closely uncrossable sealed.  
**1:01:33-1:01:38:**  So it's the second advantage.  I would say, may I add a third point?  I said two points.  
**1:01:48-1:02:05:**  From a diagram point of view, we hear so often, you know, in French, I think in English, it's  rameo, chipped wood, I think the right wording, R-C-Y, if I remember well.  Of course, it can be these trees on the farm, can be a source of wood chips.  
**1:02:31-1:02:41:**  If you want to favor the fungal populations, if you want to favor the mushrooms, you absolutely  to put again lignin, recalcitrant tissues in the agro system, because only the mushrooms  are able to decay, to heat, and to break the bonds of the lignin, because they are equipped  
**1:03:03-1:03:06:**  with the right enzymes.  Bacteria have not.  Bacteria can break cellulose, but not lignin.  
**1:03:16-1:03:20:**  They break cellulose in the goat's rumen, you know.  They are perfectly able to do it, but not the lignin.  So you give an advantage, a competitive advantage to the fungal populations if you spread lignin,  
**1:03:36-1:03:41:**  if you spread wood chips on your soil.  And it's also a way combined with my recipe which wakes up the fungal spores, it's a way  also to maintain a minimum population on the soil.  
**1:03:58-1:04:12:**  Of course, what is called the white wood are slightly more efficient, that is to say those  who contain too much tannins like oak, for example, they are not that good immediately,  that is to say it takes time for biology to decay and to really make good use of these  
**1:04:33-1:04:38:**  very hard and resistant wood species.  So my advice would be to use poplars, for example, all these white helms, all these  white wood trees.  
**1:04:54-1:04:57:**  Does it answer your questions?  Definitely, yeah for sure.  I'm thinking a lot about some of the things you're talking about in your book where you're  
**1:05:06-1:05:11:**  linking also, as you mentioned before, the importance of being able to favour the fungal  populations in order to store the humus, to be able to store carbon in the soil long term  with all of its fertility benefits.  
**1:05:22-1:05:27:**  And also one of the things that is talked about a lot, at least in French agronomy,  there's a lot of talk about it, is the rations du sol, and it's about bringing in that organic  matter, enough organic matter per year in order to keep going, to keep the engine, the  
**1:05:40-1:05:48:**  micro biological engine running in order to supply the health and the vital functions  of the system.  To what extent do you think this type of RAMUEL chipped wood system could be used in this?  
**1:05:58-1:06:03:**  How does it fit into the agro-cological transition of our farms?  Yes, of course.  It makes sense to give food, feed to the soil biology.  
**1:06:16-1:06:20:**  I would sum up here this way.  If you have cattle, if you have cows or goats, it's as if you decided to give them only minerals,  but no more hay, no more corn silage, no soy, no pellets, nothing else than minerals.  
**1:06:41-1:06:51:**  And sometimes in our crop rotations, we give only NPK, ammonitrate and so on.  So it's not enough.  Of course, there remains some roots.  
**1:06:59-1:07:09:**  We don't harvest the roots, except for some crops, but we don't harvest the roots.  So there is something remaining.  But the advantage at least of the RAMUEL chipped wood is that it's another kind of food, of  
**1:07:29-1:07:31:**  feed.  That is to say, what we give back to the soil oftentimes is too soluble, too digestible,  too quick, too fast.  
**1:07:45-1:07:47:**  It's fast food.  So for our soils, we need slow food, absolutely slow food.  I come back to the pseudo solution behind the cover crops.  
**1:08:06-1:08:14:**  Oftentimes it is destroyed before maturity, when they are still young.  That is to say, you give back to your soil a diet for pigs or for hens.  It's too fast, too quick.  
**1:08:28-1:08:31:**  You have no recalcitrant molecules.  You feed only bacteria, not the fungal population.  So of course, with the cover crops, you have advantages such as the protection against  
**1:08:45-1:08:46:**  erosion.  That's absolutely true.  You are able to take up the nitrates, which were leaching in the subsoil and so on.  
**1:08:58-1:09:01:**  These advantages are absolutely true.  But it's not a balanced diet nevertheless.  In nature, nothing, nothing is left on the soil without being either mature, really mature,  
**1:09:22-1:09:30:**  or digested by browsing animals like cows or goats.  It doesn't exist.  But man invented it, this way of doing.  
**1:09:37-1:09:53:**  Man is very strong, intelligent, but he lacks modesty.  When you reminded me of a diet, I spoke about a diet for the soil.  That's absolutely true.  
**1:10:03-1:10:09:**  We have to think of a balanced diet to the soil.  If you give only greens, only salad, I call it salad to the soil, then of course there  is a microbiology which will adapt.  
**1:10:25-1:10:35:**  But it will not be necessarily the microbiology which is able to store carbon to make long-living  humus for decades and decades.  Absolutely not true.  
**1:10:42-1:10:45:**  We have absolutely to think of it.  It's not only a calculation, inputs, outputs.  I know farmers who do this, the wheat straw or the barley or oats straw has value in some  
**1:11:06-1:11:08:**  areas in France.  So they sell it and they sow a cover crop and they say, no problem, I replace the carbon  I sold by the carbon which is in the cover crops.  
**1:11:24-1:11:30:**  Very very bad calculations because it's not the same carbon, it's not the same sugars.  I will just take a striking example.  There are sometimes in some places where you have a tea, in a tea room and so on, those  
**1:11:58-1:12:09:**  small tips, wood sticks with sugar at the other.  So you see that you can move your tea and stir your tea and so on to sweet it.  So you mix everything just to give you an idea.  
**1:12:29-1:12:40:**  This sugar and the wooden stick have exactly the same CN ratio, carbon nitrogen ratio.  That is to say 50% pure carbon for each sugar and the wooden stick.  We have very very little percentage of protein inside.  
**1:13:03-1:13:15:**  Of course, so the CN ratio is around one for 2000 you imagine, it's nothing.  So the calculation, you see the comparison between the straw and the cover crop, it's  the same.  
**1:13:26-1:13:35:**  You say oh it's carbon and carbon, okay, but really the sugar and the wood have not the  same taste.  The taste, it doesn't taste the same.  
**1:13:42-1:13:47:**  And the bacteria, do you imagine, and the microbiology, it will not be the same which  will take care of the sugar and the wooden stick.  So this pure administrative calculation with an Excel, an informative tool that is completely  
**1:14:02-1:14:03:**  deceiving.  I tell, yes, you have to take care of the diet of your soil and don't make any confusion  between different sugars.  
**1:14:16-1:14:23:**  There are very very very long chains on one side and very short chains on the other side  and the result will not be the same.  So the Ramiol chipped wood really brings the second type of carbon.  
**1:14:41-1:14:52:**  This one which will definitely favor the fungal population and thanks to this type of long  chain carbon, the agro system will be able to make long lasting humus.  It will be my conclusion on this topic.  
**1:15:06-1:15:07:**  Was it clear enough?  Yeah, no, definitely it was very clear and I just feel like maybe some of the people  hearing this might think, yes, but I can also achieve similar results with, for example,  
**1:15:21-1:15:25:**  certain types of cover crops or leaving the cover crops mature.  Is that true?  I mean, I'm just questioning sometimes if we really need to have the trees everywhere,  
**1:15:31-1:15:37:**  if we really need to be doing Ramiol wood chips with our trees, also to try and see  the other side of agroforestry, because it does require a big change in our practices.  It requires a big change also in the economic or in the business plan of the farm.  
**1:15:48-1:15:53:**  So I'm just wondering, can we still achieve our agro-cological objectives without the  tree?  Yes, of course, we can have this salt and it makes sense also.  
**1:16:11-1:16:16:**  And I think we can, we can absolutely.  But then the objective will not be the same about the cover crops.  So first, the main crop itself, you have to keep the crop residues which are mature, the  
**1:16:32-1:16:39:**  stalks, the stalks, the corn stalks and so on.  You have to keep them, don't sell them, don't try to make money, I don't know, with all  these crop residues, keep them.  
**1:16:51-1:16:57:**  They have more value than only the P and the K they hold.  They have a much more value than these only two minerals.  It's the first point.  
**1:17:05-1:17:13:**  Secondly, we can still go further, but considering the cover crops quite differently, that's  what I did on my own farm.  What I thought was not to produce as much biomass as possible, but I looked very much  
**1:17:25-1:17:29:**  at the time I had before the next crop.  And I just looked at this time and then decided which cover crop could go mature, reach the  maturity before I had absolutely to destroy it, to chop it or to spray it with glyphosate.  
**1:17:57-1:18:06:**  I tried not to use glyphosate, but sometimes when necessary, I used it.  Okay, I closed the bracket.  So the main indicator is not how much, but which maturity on which quality I will be  
**1:18:21-1:18:26:**  able to reach before the next crop.  And then I will make everything possible so that the fungal population is there.  I have just to add this because it's so important.  
**1:18:39-1:18:50:**  So many people, so many farmers fear there is an hunger for nitrogen if the cover crop  is too mature that they say, oh, the CEN ratio is now 30 or 40.  I have absolutely to chop it to hold it.  
**1:19:02-1:19:12:**  We have this hunger only because there are no longer mushrooms in the soils.  Just think of it.  In the forest, you have trunks, you know, oak trunks and so on, which are fallen on  
**1:19:25-1:19:27:**  the soil.  No need, no hunger for nitrogen.  Nothing.  
**1:19:33-1:19:43:**  You have a small shrubs, you have a small plants all around the trunks and the leaves  there and the branches.  No hunger for nitrogen, no hunger.  
**1:19:48-1:19:49:**  Why?  Because the fungal population is there.  And the fungi are absolutely wonderful because they are able to thrive on needles, on gross  
**1:20:02-1:20:15:**  needles with CEN ratio of up to 4,000.  That is to say one part nitrogen for 4,000 part carbon.  And why are they able to do it?  
**1:20:26-1:20:36:**  Just because they have mycelium, because they transport, they carry nitrogen from their  dead tissues towards the new cells of the myceliums.  So they recycle it regularly.  
**1:20:49-1:20:53:**  So they are not in competition with crops to do it.  Whereas bacteria needs absolutely natural nitrogen.  But it is not able to transfer it to its colleagues, to the other bacteria.  
**1:21:07-1:21:17:**  And they have such a powerful metabolism that they deprive the crops from the nitrogen.  So it's not an hunger for nitrogen, it's an hunger for mushrooms, what we observe.  So we can absolutely do a very, very good job without wood chips if we take care of  
**1:21:35-1:21:43:**  the maturity of cover crops and we take care of, of course, not to spray too many fungicides  in the fields.  Of course, fungicides kill fungi, mushrooms.  
**1:21:56-1:22:07:**  If the straw is full, the wheat straw is full of fungicides, of course, only slowly the  bacteria will be able to do the job.  So there is a competition with crops and so on and so on.  
**1:22:14-1:22:20:**  And of course, it's a vicious circle, you know.  My advice is always, I tell all my clients, please, if you could not to spray the last  fungicide on your weeds, barley and so on, it would be wonderful.  
**1:22:36-1:22:43:**  It's still acceptable for the first or the second spray, but the last is absolutely a  disaster because we have, of course, many residues in the straw, fungicide residues.  And so the fungal population can't do its job properly.  
**1:23:02-1:23:09:**  So that was my short answer to your long question.  No, I think, you know, I don't want to take much more of your time.  We could keep discussing these issues and break things down much more.  
**1:23:22-1:23:30:**  And you know, as a concluding remark, I think it's interesting to observe the natural ecosystems  and to understand, you know, when the trees have got the leaves out, when they are harvesting  the mineralization that's happening during the summer, what they're doing with that biomass,  
**1:23:42-1:23:47:**  you know, they're producing lignin and the same thing with the grasslands as well, the  perennial grasslands, which is where our ecosystems always tend towards perennity.  And also, you know, they are producing lignin, they are producing or at least cellulose and  
**1:23:58-1:24:03:**  complex carbon molecules that are difficult to break down, favoring a fungal life.  And so, you know, it's interesting to see that you've been able on your operation and  through your clients and your company as well to be practicing biomimicry.  
**1:24:15-1:24:19:**  So yeah, I really appreciated the conversation.  It was really interesting.  And with the wood behind you, it's a really pleasure to speak about lignin.  
**1:24:33-1:24:43:**  Thank you so much for listening.  I hope you enjoyed.  Don't forget to check out all of the links below so you can find out about Francis' book  
**1:24:48-1:24:53:**  and the company that he works with, the company that he owns.  And as well, you can check out our website, get more information.  And if you feel like donating to help us out, don't hesitate.  
**1:25:00-1:25:06:**  You can go on our webpage and all the links are there for you to very easily donate and  help us keep going with this podcast.  