---
title: 31 Designing Planting And Managing A Silvopasture System With Brett Chedzoy
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2021-11-24)  

**0:00:00-0:00:14:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:21-0:00:26:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  these challenges.  
**0:00:32-0:00:36:**  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Hi and welcome to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:00:47-0:00:49:**  I'm your host Etienne.  Today we have the pleasure of having Brett back on the show.  We did an episode with him about a year ago and learned a lot about silvopasture and we  
**0:00:59-0:01:03:**  really wanted to have him back a second time because he has so much more knowledge to share  with us.  And this week we were able to really focus on planting a silvopasture system, you know,  
**0:01:12-0:01:17:**  which trees to plant, where to plant them and we're able to cover lots of practical  details from the design to the management of establishing new silvopasture systems.  We were also able to go into living barns, which is a really smart way of using some  
**0:01:28-0:01:32:**  coniferous plantations to shelter animals during the winter.  I hope you enjoyed the episode as much as I did.  Hi Brett and welcome back to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:01:40-0:01:46:**  Thank you so much for coming back for a second conversation and a second round.  Thank you Etienne.  I was thinking we could kick this episode off with a brief introduction of what you  
**0:01:54-0:02:00:**  do and who you are for people who haven't listened to you in the previous episode so  they can get a sense of your context.  I'm Brett Chedzoy.  
**0:02:05-0:02:10:**  I work as a forester for Cornell Cooperative Extension in upstate New York.  I cover 11 county region of the state helping woodland owners and land management professionals  be better stewards of their woods.  
**0:02:21-0:02:29:**  I also work part time in agricultural issues, particularly grazing management.  And agroforestry though is my unofficial passion.  I've been working in education around civil pasturing but also other agroforestry systems  
**0:02:43-0:02:49:**  such as maple syrup production for my 15 years in extension.  And that's the day job our family owns and operates ranching operations in the Watkins  Glen New York area and also in central Argentina in the Sierra Mountains.  
**0:03:03-0:03:08:**  My wife Maria is from central Argentina.  We bought our ranch there in 1994 and have been developing it into a civil pasture ranch  ever since.  
**0:03:17-0:03:20:**  And the same is true of our family farm in New York.  It was a dairy farm until the mid 80s and when we settled back here in the early 2000s  we tried to take what we were doing in Argentina and apply it here and we raised our three  
**0:03:32-0:03:34:**  children here on the farm.  They're all off into college and adulthood now but it's civil pasturing has been a great  fit for our farm in both corners of the world.  
**0:03:45-0:03:52:**  And here in New York though it's helped us in many ways keep our farm more profitable  and enjoyable.  So look forward to talking with you about that.  
**0:03:56-0:04:01:**  Yeah well you know there's so much to talk about and last time we did a pretty good first  shot at it and we were able to cover a lot of a bit of a bigger picture of silver pasture,  a lot of the different interactions and it was a really fascinating introduction to silver  
**0:04:13-0:04:22:**  pasture and we also covered a bit how to establish, you know convert wood to a silver pasture  system but this time I would like us to go a bit more into some detail about that and  specifically on your experience on those two farms understanding what choices you made  
**0:04:34-0:04:38:**  and you know what worked and what didn't and what you learned from all of that.  So to get us started maybe you can tell us which silver pasture systems did you establish  on both farms.  
**0:04:49-0:04:56:**  So here in New York we live in the middle of the forest and our farm is was well was  and still is predominantly covered with trees but that's true of much of the northeastern  United States.  
**0:05:04-0:05:16:**  So here we were using primarily the existing trees to use as the base for creating productive  silver pastures what we call wood silver pastures and we also though had been planting trees  on our farm since 1988 so we've used since taken those plantations and developed them  
**0:05:34-0:05:36:**  into plantation silver pastures.  Now on the ranch in Argentina the Argentines like to quip that God gave them great soil  and rainfall and climate for growing trees but then forgot to put the trees there so  
**0:05:53-0:05:58:**  when I started working there in the early 1990s with these large ranching operations  many of whom were owned and being managed by people with forestry backgrounds they saw  it as their mission to put the trees there and that's what we've been doing on our ranch  
**0:06:10-0:06:18:**  there as well since 1998 was the first year we planted trees on our ranch in Argentina  several years after we bought it.  So there it's entirely plantation silver pasture where we're starting from scratch so we have  
**0:06:30-0:06:37:**  the grasslands and we have good rainfall this is a in central Argentina it's about a 40  inch or a thousand millimeter a year rainfall climate but then so that that is very conducive  to growing a lot of different types of trees there although we found that some species  
**0:06:51-0:06:57:**  work better than others and we can talk more specifically about that later on.  Perfect thanks for recapping a bit of those different systems and I think it would be  good to start with what you call plantation silver pasture systems and bringing trees  
**0:07:11-0:07:17:**  then into pasture maybe starting with what you've been doing in the US you could tell  us a bit about the function that you that these trees have and why you felt the need  to bring them into pastures in the first place.  
**0:07:27-0:07:34:**  I feel that trees on both of our ranches contribute significantly in a number of ways but just  to talk about in the context of our farm here in New York I feel that the trees obviously  are a timber crop but they also provide shade for our grazing livestock which is very important  
**0:07:48-0:07:56:**  throughout the grazing season here if you look on any sunny day where it's more than  mildly warm the animals are actively seeking out shade so in the silver pastures we can  create extensive disperse shade for them versus just a field edge or a couple shade trees.  
**0:08:11-0:08:16:**  It certainly helps enhance habitat for a lot of the wildlife that's important to us here  on the farm.  We love the way our silver pastures look for their aesthetic quality and then I think finally  
**0:08:26-0:08:33:**  but equally important the keeping the trees in these more natural grazing systems these  silver pastures helps improve the health of the soil and also gives us other so-called  ecosystem services.  
**0:08:42-0:08:48:**  And how has this then you know translated into the design of these systems what trees  that you select to both accomplish you know shelter but also with the timber value as  you just mentioned.  
**0:08:57-0:09:04:**  Here in New York we rely primarily on natural regeneration trees are what want to just come  into the landscape on their own when we stop mowing fields or mowing the lawn or planting  a garden and we've planted tens of thousands of trees here on the farm in New York over  
**0:09:19-0:09:26:**  the past 30 some years particularly though where we felt something was missing.  In Argentina that numbers more in the hundreds of thousands of trees in both cases though  both New York and Argentina we chose trees that we felt would not just survive but thrive  
**0:09:40-0:09:45:**  and contribute to the goals of our grazing farms.  We weren't successful in all cases in terms of picking trees that would survive over time  but over the past 30 some years we've made a lot of progress.  
**0:09:57-0:10:03:**  And I'd like to add though in case I forget to do so later on I keep saying we I'm obviously  talking about Maria my wife and our family our children Ian, Claire and Joe but particularly  in Argentina where we're relying on some some great people to make all this happen.  
**0:10:17-0:10:25:**  I have to credit a longtime Forester friend Esteban Zuppan who has been the caretaker  of our ranch for since we left there in the early 2000s and if it wasn't for Esteban and  a lot of other great people that have helped us over the years Antonio, Vicente, Juan it  
**0:10:40-0:10:45:**  just wouldn't have happened because we can only really be farming in one place at one  time.  Just coming back to this design of silver pasture systems could you give us the name  
**0:10:53-0:11:01:**  of some of the trees then that you've established in the US and in Argentina?  Here on the farm in New York we've planted a mix of both coniferous species, pines, firs,  starch, spruce and hardwood species.  
**0:11:13-0:11:22:**  Two of our favorites have been black walnut, juglans nigra and black locust, robinia pseudoacassia.  Black locust which is a tree my understanding is it's widely planted in parts of Europe.  I think in many ways is the perfect tree for agroforestry systems particularly silver pasture  
**0:11:36-0:11:39:**  systems because it checks all the boxes.  It's a fast growing tree, it's relatively easy and inexpensive to establish.  It's a nitrogen fixing tree, it has foliage that leafs out late in the spring so it allows  
**0:11:55-0:12:03:**  a lot of sunlight to come through and promote early spring ephemeral growth in our pastures.  But I think most importantly it's a tree that can be harvested at a relatively small size  or young age and be used for valuable products.  
**0:12:15-0:12:21:**  Being a grazing farm one of our biggest expenses is building fences and maintaining fences  and that requires a lot of fence posts.  About 80% of the cost of a fence is the cost of the post and installing that post.  
**0:12:34-0:12:42:**  So over time we've tried to utilize living trees more as our living fence posts.  We can go back and talk about that more if you're interested.  It's not a simple matter of just attaching your fence or fence insulators directly to  
**0:12:51-0:12:53:**  a living tree.  That wouldn't work.  But where we have to harvest trees, turn them into fence posts, locusts is really our only  
**0:13:03-0:13:07:**  truly durable native species.  So we found these locusts and when we were planting these locusts over 30 years ago,  I should add that at that time we were not, even though it was a family dairy farm, we  
**0:13:19-0:13:26:**  really weren't grazing livestock so there wasn't a lot of importance to us to be planting  trees for silvopastures or for producing fence posts.  But when we really started to turn the farm into this grazing operation in the early 2000s  
**0:13:42-0:13:49:**  we realized that we could either go buy pressure treated pine posts from somewhere halfway  across the United States or we could be harvesting the black locust trees that we had planted  15 and 20 years earlier and use those for our fence posts.  
**0:13:58-0:14:06:**  And it became a big savings for us to be able to use these homegrown posts.  So I really like locusts for a lot of reasons but not least of which is it's rather unique  for us in that it's a tree that we can be harvesting and utilizing in 15 to 20 years  
**0:14:19-0:14:26:**  versus 50 or more years which is more typical of the tree species that we grow here for  saw timber products.  Yeah that's interesting because I was wondering in terms of layout if sometimes there was  
**0:14:36-0:14:42:**  a clash between the function of shade and trying to produce decent timber because you  know for example you might put trees out for shade and animals might spend a lot of time  underneath and create a lot of compaction or vice versa but it seems that what you're  
**0:14:51-0:14:56:**  saying is that you've managed to find a tree like acacia that's actually very hardy and  can take like the presence of animals pretty well and is you know pretty tough.  So if we're doing if we're setting up our civil pastures correctly and managing them  
**0:15:06-0:15:13:**  correctly the livestock impact to those trees should be pretty minimal and I think we talked  about this pretty extensively last year in our first episode of how we go about doing  intensive rotational grazing and allowing long rest and recovery periods between each  
**0:15:27-0:15:33:**  time that they pass through a given paddock or a portion of our entire pasture system  and that's really I think the most important way that we reduce the impacts on trees particularly  young trees is we just never let the animals stay there long enough to where they become  
**0:15:45-0:15:53:**  bored and restless and start to rub on the trees or spend too much time loafing around  under the trees they go in they put their heads down they graze the portion of the pasture  that we want them to graze they may take some nibbles off of any low-lying tree limbs or  
**0:16:08-0:16:10:**  shrubs that are there as well.  It's really interesting and enjoyable to watch grazing animals because they know and I'm  sure it's a subconscious process but they know what they need to seek out in terms of  
**0:16:25-0:16:30:**  food selection so in our civil pastures we have a lot of plant diversity we don't have  just herbaceous plants like grasses and forbs we have these woody plants and browse as well  and when we watch our animals move every day into a fresh paddock they will often first  
**0:16:43-0:16:49:**  walk over to any woody browse nibble on that for maybe the first five to ten minutes and  then they seem to get their fill of whatever it was they were subconsciously seeking out  in that browse and then they turn their attention to what we think of as the pasture the grass  
**0:17:01-0:17:03:**  plants.  We're actually preparing an episode with Fred Provenza who's been writing on nutritional  intelligence of livestock so you know I'll have a few more answers for you in a few weeks  
**0:17:15-0:17:21:**  or you can just listen to the next episodes because that's what we'll be exploring.  I'm really pleased to hear that because Fred I have found to be one of the most knowledgeable  and most interesting people that can talk so eloquently about that process of how animals  
**0:17:38-0:17:48:**  behave and how they select and seek out this food source versus that food source.  So that is definitely a podcast episode I will be listening to.  And so if I'm to recap a bit and to make sure I understood you have these acacias that were  
**0:17:59-0:18:06:**  actually planted before you were even thinking of silvopasture and then are there any other  trees that you added since then a bit with a more like conscious design of the animals  needs for example in mind?  
**0:18:14-0:18:20:**  So to give you just a really broad overview of our planting history on our farm in New  York in the past 33 years we've planted at least 33 different tree species at a significant  scale now that doesn't count all the other oddball species that we plant more just for  
**0:18:37-0:18:44:**  fun what we would think of as like a specimen tree.  But here's what we've learned the hard way of those three dozen or so tree species that  we've planted.  
**0:18:54-0:19:04:**  We've lost probably almost two thirds of those trees over time to mostly pest issues that  we didn't anticipate when we were planting those trees so many of the tree species that  we've planted were to complement and build on the several dozen tree species that grow  
**0:19:21-0:19:24:**  on our farm naturally.  So we have very diverse mostly deciduous forest here of oak and maple and cherry and walnut  and basswood I believe you call it lime or Tilo and parts of Europe hickories just lots  
**0:19:43-0:19:46:**  and lots of different tree species.  What we lack are more the conifer species and then we don't have enough of some of these  other hardwood trees that we value such as black locust even though black locust is somewhat  
**0:20:01-0:20:05:**  a naturally occurring tree here in parts of New York.  So we tried to pick trees we weren't planting the same things that already grew here but  planting additional trees and what we found is that when you plant trees that don't naturally  
**0:20:18-0:20:26:**  occur here many of them end up being susceptible to pests that eventually catch up to them  in these new locations.  To give you some examples we've planted a lot of Douglas fir which is a western US species  
**0:20:36-0:20:43:**  and Douglas fir suffers from a foliar fungal disease called rhabdicline needle cast.  So we have beautiful looking Doug fir for the first 15 years we planted here and then  for the past 15 years we've all but lost it to this fungal disease and the same has happened  
**0:20:54-0:21:01:**  to some of our pine species it's happened to some of our spruce species and of course  now we have pests that are attacking some of the hardwood species too.  One of the more serious current pests is called the emerald ash borer which causes essentially  
**0:21:14-0:21:20:**  100% mortality in all species of ash or fraxenus.  But to understand kind of your thought process and your design process you started with an  open field or pasture and then you know where did you place trees and how did you decide  
**0:21:34-0:21:39:**  for example spacings and lines etc.  Early on we followed the models that had been used traditionally and that was plantation  forestry at fairly high densities per acre.  
**0:21:50-0:22:00:**  We were planting trees on as little as a 2 by 2 meter spacing and that worked okay for  the conifers like the pines and the firs and the larch because those seedlings were relatively  inexpensive and they also didn't require as much tender loving care to get them established.  
**0:22:17-0:22:26:**  With hardwoods, hardwoods are a little more difficult to get established in the first  few years because they're more sensitive to herbaceous competition.  They also seem to be magnets for a variety of wildlife that want to come and either eat  
**0:22:36-0:22:41:**  the foliage or the roots or the bark off those young trees.  And they're also typically seedlings that are more expensive.  So we've done different designs with different groups or mixes of trees.  
**0:22:54-0:23:03:**  In what I would do today and we haven't done extensive tree planting here on the farm for  not since the first few years we moved back and today what we find is we're planting Rosa  trees along our internal fences more for shade but we're also using species like black locust  
**0:23:14-0:23:22:**  to have the ability to spread naturally on their own over time once you have a row of  bigger trees.  What I would do today is probably plant fewer trees per acre, add more species to the mix  
**0:23:29-0:23:35:**  to hedge against those risks that I just talked about with unforeseen pest issues.  But first and foremost I always would be thinking about ease of maintenance and people that  have not planted trees before I think underestimate how much work goes into it after that first  
**0:23:50-0:23:53:**  step of putting trees in the ground.  So to me that's just the very starting point and I want to always try to design any tree  planting in a way that I can go in there and maintain it for at least several years and  
**0:24:07-0:24:13:**  in some cases you may be able to get trees to a point where you can leave them largely  onto their own in just a few years and in other cases it may take 10 years or more for  those trees to get to the point where you can then give them less attention and less  
**0:24:24-0:24:27:**  care.  In situations where we're going to have to think about managing the weeds or the grass  that's growing in between the trees we need to think about straight rows would work better  
**0:24:39-0:24:49:**  to be able to mow between the rows than groups of trees or something where the trees aren't  in nice straight patterns.  The other thing we need to think about is the probability that we may have to irrigate  
**0:24:58-0:25:05:**  or water those trees and if it's fairly small planting in rows we might be able to set up  drip irrigation and if not then we have to think about how can we haul water out to those  trees which honestly may not be even possible in areas that are too steep or too rocky or  
**0:25:18-0:25:23:**  have other barriers and obstacles.  So it's interesting because in a sense most of the planting of trees occurred before you  started really focusing on grazing then.  
**0:25:32-0:25:37:**  It more happened in the sense that first you had plantations of wood for timber and then  you were thinking how can I run through my animals.  Here in New York most of our tree planting happened prior to becoming grazers but everything  
**0:25:48-0:25:56:**  that we've planted since we started raising livestock we're planting in ways that we can  maintain it and protect it and that's why planting single rows adjacent to our existing  internal subdivision fences what we call our paddock fences that has worked well because  
**0:26:10-0:26:15:**  we already have a fence on one side of the row of trees and then it's pretty easy to  set up a temporary fence on the other side to exclude animals at least temporarily from  those young trees and if we set it up properly so most of our internal fencing is just a  
**0:26:31-0:26:37:**  single hot wire and keep in mind that we raise cattle we used to raise a lot of sheep and  goats with cattle a single hot wire fencing will usually be effective in keeping the animals  in or out of where you want them with sheep and goats a single hot wire probably is not  
**0:26:57-0:27:04:**  so what we've tried to do where we're planting single rows of trees along our internal fences  is keep that wire just high enough above the ground usually 50 to 60 centimeters and just  far out enough from the trees that the cows can't quite reach over and heavily browse  
**0:27:21-0:27:30:**  the young trees or rub on the trunks and possibly girdle or damage the bark of those young trees  but to the extent that the cows can reach under those single wires and graze at least  part of the grass that not only helps maintain the fence but it also reduces the amount of  
**0:27:43-0:27:52:**  vegetation that we have growing around those young trees and we still have to do some supplemental  maintenance whether it's mowing or mulching or in some cases we've had to spray because  it's not just the part of the grass and other weeds that's growing above the ground that  
**0:28:07-0:28:12:**  are affecting those young trees it's the roots below the ground that are competing with those  young trees as well it's quite interesting that you you had this progression and you  know that you were planting trees for different reasons in different phases and I'm interested  
**0:28:24-0:28:31:**  to see the different rationales if you were to continue planting trees would you still  include some in the middle of some paddocks or in the end you know do you really recommend  circling around the paddocks following those existing fences for example I think to do  
**0:28:42-0:28:49:**  it all over again etienne I would probably try to get the trees planted and established  before we even started grazing it and that's just inadvertently how it worked out on much  of the farm here in New York now in Argentina we've always been planting concurrently with  
**0:29:00-0:29:08:**  the grazing and but there we're planting fast growing mostly fast growing pine species and  we find that we can start to graze those young plantations within just two to three years  of planting what's really important to keep in mind though is that the way we would graze  
**0:29:27-0:29:32:**  in and amongst young trees is probably quite different than the way we would graze in and  amongst older larger trees so when I talk about starting to graze in a young plantation  or a young plantation silvopasture whether it's in two years or five years or ten years  
**0:29:49-0:29:57:**  that doesn't mean it's the same same duration of grazing or the same timing of when the  animals are in there as we would in a like a mature wood silvopasture because the larger  trees are largely resistant to things like animals that want to scratch themselves on  
**0:30:15-0:30:23:**  the tree or nibble on the foliage doesn't matter if they nibble on the foliage of low  hanging branches that doesn't affect a mature tree to any significant extent but it would  if it was a young tree that was maybe just a couple meters tall and one hungry animal  
**0:30:37-0:30:42:**  comes over and strips half the foliage off that tree that's going to put quite a bit  of stress on that young tree I think the bigger vulnerability there though is that the animals  will come over and rub on the trees and so we try not to ever have animals on either  
**0:30:56-0:31:06:**  ranch in areas of young trees during times of the grazing season where they're being  stressed by external parasites particularly horn flies biting fly that just drives the  animals crazy during the hot summer months and for them for the cattle at those times  
**0:31:22-0:31:29:**  of the year a young tree looks like the ideal scratching post because it's flexible and  it usually has low hanging limbs so we've we've lost some trees in the past because  we've perhaps put them in there for a little too long or not quite the right time but that's  
**0:31:45-0:31:52:**  not to say that we can't graze young plantation silvopastures at all we just need to think  about doing it either before the trees start to leaf out in the case of hardwoods or we  need to think about moving the animals through there more quickly and doing it at a time  
**0:32:04-0:32:11:**  where they have really lush grass and the animals will just focus on grazing like we  call it flash grazing they'll they'll take off that young succulent growth but then we  move them out of there perhaps just a few hours later before they turn their attention  
**0:32:20-0:32:27:**  to the young trees but I'm wondering because clearly it's a bit different to you know plants  out a timber plantation and then graze your animals through it or to plant trees around  a grazing system with the aims of you know increasing its productivity or animal welfare  
**0:32:39-0:32:45:**  etc and I'm wondering now that you you have both experiences you've been both planting  for timber production and also then you have grazing what what would you do today or how  might those two different types of planting differ in terms of spacing for example the  
**0:32:57-0:33:06:**  needs of hardwood trees or deciduous trees like nut trees for example are quite different  than those of coniferous trees so many coniferous species like pines, large fir, spruce those  trees tend to grow in a we call it a pyramidical form so just think of a classic pine tree  
**0:33:25-0:33:35:**  it has a typically a nice straight stem the branches grow out to form a nice well-shaped  crown so but if you if you can picture a pine tree the way we draw a little stick diagrams  of pine trees it looks like a little pyramid whereas if you think about how a hardwood  
**0:33:47-0:33:55:**  tree grows it grows like a wine glass so the the crown grows outwards and it may still  be a nice straight trunk but hardwoods typically can out compete softwoods because they just  get their heads up above the softwoods more quickly and they spread their crowns out over  
**0:34:09-0:34:21:**  the top of these little slender pointed shape softwoods therefore if we're going to plant  a mix to establish silvopastures we probably need to think about a design that segregates  the hardwoods the the broad crowned hardwoods from the pointy crowned softwoods for at least  
**0:34:36-0:34:42:**  enough time that the softwoods don't get quickly over top like putting an umbrella over the  top of the pine tree and most conifer species need pretty much full sunlight there are some  exceptions of conifers that have significant shade tolerance but many are sun lovers and  
**0:34:58-0:35:04:**  hardwoods most species that we value in silvopasture systems are also sun lovers not least of which  is black locusts but they they have the ability to send out a branch up through that hole  and maybe grow more off to the side where they they they see sunlight and grow away  
**0:35:18-0:35:27:**  from competing neighbor trees conifers don't do that well they typically grow straight  up and if something gets over the top of them it'll really slow down the growth and possibly  cause them to perish over time because they're not getting enough sunlight for photosynthesis  
**0:35:39-0:35:49:**  to sustain themselves so i like to try to when we're planting trees we're usually thinking  about either hardwood mixes or softwood mixes in that combining them together now i can  think of many cases where it may make sense to combine them together but that just adds  
**0:36:03-0:36:08:**  one more layer of complexity to the design and the ongoing maintenance for those trees  and in argentina we plant mostly conifers particularly pines because they seem to be  best adapted to the conditions of our ranch these are soils that they're fertile soils  
**0:36:25-0:36:32:**  but they're relatively low in organic matter they're granite based soils that are very  drought prone and the pines tend to tolerate those periodically droughty conditions better  than hardwoods that's not to say that we don't have good sites within our ranch there to  
**0:36:46-0:36:53:**  plant hardwoods but pines are what thrive here in new york it's really just the opposite  that the the conifers grow and can grow great quite well but the hardwoods just grow so  much better so we're taking better advantage of the site quality here in new york to plant  
**0:37:09-0:37:18:**  hardwoods that said we've planted many softwood mixes over the years and when we were planting  those we planted them for reasons that had more to do with the site quality than thinking  about using those in the future silvopastures today many of our conifer plantations today  
**0:37:36-0:37:43:**  we i think we generally think of them as silvopastures but we more specifically think of them as  our living barns and a way of another way of thinking of a living barn would be like  a wooded shelter area for livestock during extreme weather particularly winter weather  
**0:38:00-0:38:11:**  and that's one thing that sets us apart here in new york sorry and perhaps where some of  your other audiences tuning in from like canada was that we have we have months of very cold  winter weather and the cold is not really the issue for livestock it's it's the cold  
**0:38:26-0:38:38:**  when it's combined with uh prolonged snow storms and most of our grazing livestock in  silvopasture areas are ruminant animals if we're ruminant can keep its belly full of  good quality feed whether it's stockpiled pasture or hay in the winter it can usually  
**0:38:51-0:38:58:**  generate all the heat it needs to keep itself warm but if you have a winter storm or blizzard  where you might have a day or two or sometimes even more of prolonged precipitation snow  and sleet combined with cold and wind chill allowing them to get into those conifer plantations  
**0:39:18-0:39:27:**  to reduce the wind chill and get their faces out of that driving snow really helps them  stay more comfortable and it's much like silvopastures help grazing animals stay more comfortable  during periods of high temperature as well and so the difference the basic difference  
**0:39:39-0:39:47:**  between how i would see our conifer plantation silvopastures as living barns from our other  plantation silvopastures that are more hardwood mixes is that we don't focus as much on growing  forage under our plantation under our living barns what we're really managing them for  
**0:40:00-0:40:06:**  is we still have to manage them meaning we still have to thin trees out to promote good  growth of the best trees but we're trying to preserve a little bit more tree density  in there because it's that tree density that's giving us the biggest benefit and by having  
**0:40:18-0:40:26:**  on our farm here in new york we have six different areas totaling about 20 little over 20 acres  of these living barns and that has pretty much eliminated the need to have other structures  like pole barns or what we call coverall structures to house our animals during these extreme  
**0:40:44-0:40:50:**  winter events and any of those structures would be very expensive not only to build  but maintain  yeah i know that a bit too well because i'm in a mountainous region where everyone has  
**0:40:58-0:41:04:**  big big barns and big buildings so i'll be thinking of the living barns and i want us  to go into some detail on living barns and and and what it means in practice but before  that i i wanted to i wanted to understand uh still on this idea of design um have you  
**0:41:18-0:41:26:**  found a good uh balance between you know planting for a good quality timber but still allowing  enough light for forage because i'm assuming and correct me if i'm wrong because i don't  know so much about timber production but we often see sometimes fairly dense plantations  
**0:41:36-0:41:43:**  to you know encourage uh straight long trunks and you might have all the foresters parameters  uh to try and make the best production possible but that might not completely align with including  animals in the mix and you know letting sunlight come in and having a herbaceous strata so  
**0:41:55-0:42:00:**  obviously you're managing to combine both uh is that something obvious to you or did  it require some adjustments between the needs of the grazing animals and the need of producing  high quality timber i don't think we've had to really adjust the way we manage our plantation  
**0:42:13-0:42:22:**  plantations for those two different objectives that is plantations just for timber production  versus plantations for civil pasturing i think we probably discussed this in our first episode  last year but to make the point again atn the way that we would manage any woods be  
**0:42:44-0:42:50:**  it a artificially established woods that is a plantation where we plant the trees versus  a natural occurring woods there's the stocking level of trees or the density of trees that  we would want be it for timber production or for good forage production is really quite  
**0:43:03-0:43:10:**  similar and i'm not going to get into the kind of the technical forestry explanation  of that but one thing that does make a plantation for timber a little bit different than a plantation  for civil pasturing is that we need to control the competition between our better trees that  
**0:43:27-0:43:33:**  are growing in that upper campy level but in civil pastures we also need to think about  thinning anything that's below that upper campy right down to the ground level so if  we have a layer of invasive shrubs growing under our big trees our nice trees we need  
**0:43:48-0:43:56:**  to make additional investments to remove that layer of interfering invasive shrubs because  it's that shrub layer that's intercepting that sunlight which is the critical ingredient  to grow forage in our civil pasture understory but last time we mentioned we talked a lot  
**0:44:08-0:44:14:**  about taking a already existing forest or plantation and then thinning that out to allow  light for forages but in in this scenario where you're starting from let's say pasture  supposedly if you had plant the trees that are too far apart that would affect the shape  
**0:44:25-0:44:30:**  that they take and not incentivize them to grow tall and produce nice straight trunks  so you're having to start with a density that's much higher than what allows animals to come  in or how does that work you're right so i understand what you're asking the first thing  
**0:44:44-0:44:53:**  we have to think about when we design our tree planting project is well i think there's  several important things i already talked about the importance of being able to maintain  it but we also have to think about costs because to the extent that we can minimize the investment  
**0:45:05-0:45:13:**  we're making up front the more positive the financial outlook is going to look off into  the future so one of the ways that we control the the upfront costs of course is to plant  fewer trees what does not work well is trying to cut corners and if you know that trees  
**0:45:25-0:45:33:**  are going to just need a certain level of care in those early critical years then you  can't say well okay instead of spending a hundred dollars a hectare a year to maintain  this let's only spend 50 because 50 might be the difference between most of the trees  
**0:45:44-0:45:51:**  surviving and most of the trees dying or at least taking much longer to get established  and start growing so that you can get in there and do things like raise your animals much  earlier so the number of trees per hectare we're balancing several different important  
**0:46:07-0:46:16:**  considerations there we we every tree represents a cost so we want to plant as few trees as  possible to get the results that we want now that depends on the type of trees we're planting  and the design of those trees that we're planting so to go back to that example of hardwoods  
**0:46:29-0:46:37:**  versus softwoods softwoods depending on the species they might do quite well at fairly  open spacings because they're so shade intolerant that the limbs prune themselves off naturally  that's particularly the case with many of the pine species whereas hardwoods if you  
**0:46:53-0:47:02:**  don't create enough shading and side competition they'll grow as like big open lawn type trees  or just require so much more investment in going in there and doing corrective pruning  and pruning the lower limbs off one of the ways that we can compensate that for that  
**0:47:14-0:47:22:**  though is to plant some rows tighter together and then maybe leave valleys in between with  broader spacing and one of the designs that I like although I think there are many that  would work well for silvopastures is to plant a row of the trees that we really want to  
**0:47:37-0:47:45:**  be there for the long term and then fairly tightly on both sides of that row of say the  long term trees is plant rows of trees that we can harvest more in the short term and  locust would be what black locust would be one of those examples where the black locust  
**0:47:59-0:48:04:**  is going to probably grow a little faster than say the nut trees that we plant in the  middle and that locust is going to get up there and push those nut trees to grow taller  and straighter but we can go in there maybe after a couple decades and remove those rows  
**0:48:20-0:48:28:**  of locust and utilize it for things like fence posts and then leave the nut trees to grow  off into future decades so there's and you could do the same thing by planting say conifers  on both sides of your hardwoods.  
**0:48:42-0:48:47:**  And then having this kind of high density per line you can space out your lines as much  as you want and be very flexible in the amount of grazing or paddocks you leave in between  them so yeah it seems like quite a flexible design.  
**0:48:58-0:49:05:**  So when we talk about this also Etienne it's important to note that sometimes so you keep  using the example of trees that were growing for timber, timber products most timber products  seek to grow a tall straight tree not all trees that we're planting on our farms or  
**0:49:22-0:49:30:**  planting for silvopastures are necessarily being planted for growing timber products  particularly saw timber so in the case of say like European or Asian chestnuts and hazelnuts  and fruit trees like apples those trees are not being grown primarily for saw timber so  
**0:49:51-0:50:02:**  in fact it's almost preferable to plant those trees so that they can grow broad spreading  crowns and in those situations the design or the initial planting density might be different  than where we're trying to grow high quality saw timber.  
**0:50:15-0:50:21:**  And on your farm you have planted quite a few of more nuts or fruit trees then?  No on our farm pretty much everything we've planted have been what we consider timber  species.  
**0:50:29-0:50:38:**  That said if we ever find the time and money to do more extensive planting our farm that's  really where I'd like to focus next is to try to have more of these orchard type groves  that are dual purpose silvopastures.  
**0:50:50-0:50:56:**  It does require a lot of knowledge and skill to grow proper beautiful timber trees and  get a good product out of them so let's say I'm a livestock farmer and you know I know  mostly about cows and grazing but I do want to include some trees into my operation would  
**0:51:09-0:51:14:**  you recommend that I stick to kind of black locust and get a simple product out of it  like posts would that be a safe bet for me or are they other trees that you think are  reasonable for someone with limited skills and experience in terms of forestry to include  
**0:51:23-0:51:25:**  with animals?  The answer to that question Etienne really depends on where you live in the world so  black locust is more of a northern climate species it seems to be very adaptable so I've  
**0:51:36-0:51:44:**  seen black locust growing from subtropical regions all the way up into boreal regions  where it can be very cold in the winter but many tree species and there's keep in mind  that there are literally dozens maybe even hundreds of tree species worldwide I think  
**0:51:58-0:52:04:**  can be very very useful in silvopasture systems.  What we need to look for though whenever possible is to try to start with native species and  the reason I say that is not because I have anything against non-native species but I'm  
**0:52:17-0:52:25:**  basing that comment on the lesson that I mentioned earlier of where we planted lots of different  trees years ago on our farm and then found out eventually that pests from wherever those  trees originated from eventually caught up with those trees and wiped them out so I think  
**0:52:41-0:52:50:**  trees that have been growing in a given area for centuries if not thousands of years those  are trees that probably have inherently lower risk of pest issues there are some notable  exceptions to that such as the emerald ash borer however whenever you bring something  
**0:53:05-0:53:14:**  new in and put it there I have really no problems with that from an ecological perspective because  I think nature eventually sorts it out what belongs and what doesn't belong if it doesn't  belong some plague or pest is going to take that organism out as long as you're not introducing  
**0:53:29-0:53:35:**  something that becomes invasive in nature and that's rarely the case with trees at least  in northern climates now I know there's cases of invasive trees that is trees that become  pests in warmer parts of the world where the trees can grow so fast that they just displace  
**0:53:49-0:53:59:**  native trees here on our farm though I'm gonna pick things that are best suited for the site  but also complementary to our objectives so locust has been one of those trees that has  worked very well for us but locust even though it grows on our ranch in Argentina it's not  
**0:54:13-0:54:20:**  I don't think is well adapted to growing there is some other hardwood species oaks seem to  do very well on our ranch in Argentina but we also have native species there such as  mesquite is there any places on your farm where you would not put trees you know because  
**0:54:34-0:54:39:**  we often say you know we should put tree where should we put trees but when you have animals  for example and are there some some mistakes and including trees where they shouldn't be  I struggle to think of examples of where we wouldn't want to plant trees trees in a general  
**0:54:53-0:54:59:**  sense but there are some tree species and I'll go back to using black locust is a perfect  example black locust is one of a handful of tree species that spreads through its root  system we call it a clonal species and over time it'll send up new shoots from the root  
**0:55:15-0:55:23:**  system so wherever you plant locust today you expect it to creep outwards over time  so another common example that I think many of much of your audience would be familiar  with is poplar particularly what's known as white poplar populus alba I believe is the  
**0:55:39-0:55:45:**  botanical name that's another example of a tree species that is clonal in nature so if  you plant it too close to areas where you don't want trees such as your gateways your  laneways the public road the homestead over time you've created a situation where you're  
**0:56:01-0:56:08:**  going to be trying to fight back the encroachment of the trees and is that an issue in pasture  for example because if you're grazing animals there might be some areas where you want the  black locust to stay where you intended them to be or is the animal pressure enough to  
**0:56:19-0:56:24:**  keep that under control are you having to come in and cut those small black locusts to  keep them in check?  On our farm we've made the mistake of planting black locusts too close to the power line  
**0:56:31-0:56:38:**  right of ways and the public road and that's become a growing problem over the years because  the locusts wants to just keep encroaching under the power lines and into the road right  of way and grazing alone won't usually keep that in check keep in mind that in civil pasture  
**0:56:55-0:57:02:**  systems we're usually doing well not usually we should be doing intensive rotational grazing  with long rest and recovery periods and if you have a fast growing species like white  poplar or black locust that two or three times during the grazing season where the animals  
**0:57:16-0:57:21:**  may pass through that area and take a bite or two off the top of those young suckers  or shoots that are coming up that is probably not enough to keep that tree from eventually  outgrowing the browsing height of the livestock and then a little problem turns into a bigger  
**0:57:35-0:57:36:**  problem.  What would you recommend then for making sure that doesn't happen?  Let's say I'm putting a line of black locust in the middle of my pasture to offer a bit  
**0:57:44-0:57:52:**  of protection to my animals is it to pass with some kind of cutting device once a year  will that be sufficient then?  One of my favorite sayings is I guess a way of paraphrasing it would be prevent the problem  
**0:57:59-0:58:06:**  before it happens so if we know a particular tree species has characteristics such as suckering  through the root system then we shouldn't plant it adjacent areas where we don't want  that tree spreading into whereas other trees that don't sucker from the root system it  
**0:58:18-0:58:28:**  may be perfectly fine to plant them uptight to access areas and roads because the tree  could possibly produce seedlings from seed over time but it's going to happen at such  a slow rate that we can stay on top of that whereas if you think about the difference  
**0:58:40-0:58:50:**  between young trees or regeneration from seed versus young trees from vigorous mature tree  root systems that's like an order of magnitude difference in the rate at which those trees  grow and the ability to which they can spread outward.  
**0:59:05-0:59:15:**  So I don't think we want to set ourselves up for situations  where we may have to do unnecessary maintenance and prevention down the road so just understand  what the characteristics are of the trees you're planting and species that may have  
**0:59:33-0:59:42:**  that ability to encroach or invade into unwanted areas just don't plant them in those areas.  I guess one point I couldn't emphasize enough, Etienne, is I think any tree planting even  if it's just for timber but particularly for any agroforestry system and especially for  
**0:59:55-1:00:03:**  silvopasturing we want to we're going to have our preferred species but I think we want  to mix it up and add as many species to the mix as possible.  Keeping in mind don't plant species that are doomed to failure 10 years down the road when  
**1:00:16-1:00:19:**  they get taken out by a well-known pest.  I think it would be useful if we kind of took a practical step-by-step of going from the  moment where you plant a tree and going through the different maintenance steps you have to  
**1:00:31-1:00:38:**  go through you know and when do you include animals again and for how long and maybe looking  at some of the choices and also successes and mistakes that you made in that process.  So it all starts with having a good plan and that plan is only a little bit about the tree  
**1:00:51-1:00:57:**  species and the design of the planting or the plantation.  I think it's equally if not more importantly about how much can you afford to invest are  you planting trees that are going to be compatible with what your vision or goals are for those  
**1:01:10-1:01:21:**  trees and are they trees that you can commit to taking care of because if it's something  like what we think of as the hardy pioneer species so blank locust would be a hardwood  example of what I consider a pioneer species.  
**1:01:31-1:01:38:**  These are trees that in nature you see are the first to show up on a disturbed site and  kind of pave the way for other tree species to then come in through that natural succession.  So in nature we often see things like aspen, locust, pines, birch, alders, all tree species  
**1:01:55-1:02:03:**  that are able to become established in less than ideal conditions and then over time we  might see oaks, maples, other nut trees they come in once these other early pioneer trees  come in and have started to shade out the grass competition and created a little bit  
**1:02:20-1:02:29:**  more shade and cut down on the moisture losses of the soil a little bit more.  And when we're planting trees into a farm field however we want to think about okay  first of all am I putting the right tree in the right site so don't plant a tree that  
**1:02:44-1:02:50:**  needs very fertile well-drained soils and a heavy clay-based soil that's seasonally  wet you're just it's not that that tree might not survive or persist for years but it's  never going to reach its full potential there and if we're really going to achieve the benefits  
**1:03:07-1:03:13:**  out of tree planting that we're seeking then we need to plant trees that will perform well  over time regardless of what our objectives are whether it's just shade and habitat or  it's nut production or it's timber production or it's just I want pretty long-lived trees  
**1:03:27-1:03:37:**  out there we want trees that are well suited to that site and will grow well and the bigger  tree becomes the more limiting a marginal site becomes to the health of that tree.  That's why I say you can probably get almost anything growing there for the first decade  
**1:03:49-1:03:56:**  or two but will it really continue to grow and do well 50 years and 100 years down the  road so to go back to your question so we want to start with a plan that is carefully  thinking it all through and not just species and planting design but are these trees going  
**1:04:17-1:04:24:**  to give me the outcomes I'm looking for and are they trees that I can take care of so  are they trees that I can pretty much plant and walk away which is what we do on our ranch  in Argentina with pines or are they trees that I may have to be out there maintaining  
**1:04:36-1:04:43:**  them several times each year through the first five or ten years that I planted those trees  so that's where it starts and then obviously where it all really hits the pavement is where  we go out the trees show up and by the way part of that planning process is seeking out  
**1:05:00-1:05:04:**  quality sources of trees and that's easier said than done.  I find it's always been difficult and maybe even more difficult today to go out and find  really good sources of good quality trees so there are many forest nurseries out there  
**1:05:19-1:05:26:**  that might sell run-of-the-mill stuff but if we're going to invest a tremendous amount  of time and money into planting trees plant the best quality trees that you can both quality  in terms of how they were raised in the nursery in other words they come out of there with  
**1:05:37-1:05:45:**  good root system and good stem mass and things that meaning they're a healthy vigorous seedling  that's going to be able to overcome those stresses of being out planted and start growing  from day one versus some little wimpy seedling that's gonna just sit there and barely stay  
**1:06:00-1:06:06:**  alive for the first few years but also think about the genetic quality so in that weather  again your goal is fruit production or nut production or timber production there are  certainly it's not that all trees are created equal in that sense so within any given tree  
**1:06:20-1:06:28:**  species there's potentially sources out there that will give you better growth for timber  or better nut production or better quality nuts or fruit and it costs more to buy that  improved stock but when you pencil it out it's usually very cost effective to spend  
**1:06:45-1:06:52:**  that additional money on better genetics up front so the trees show up we get them in  the ground it takes a lot of labor to do that we need to make sure that when game day arrives  we've got our volunteer paid workforce out there ready to get the trees in the ground  
**1:07:08-1:07:16:**  in a timely fashion and then once we get the trees in the ground we can probably take a  deep breath for a little bit but if we then need to be thinking almost immediately about  okay what wants to come and eat my little trees is it my livestock is it the outbreak  
**1:07:33-1:07:39:**  of some defoliating insect that's gonna happen that spring is it the rodents that are out  there living in these grassy pasture systems is it the other wildlife like deer deer would  be one of the biggest barriers to planting any trees here in the northeastern U.S. an  
**1:07:57-1:08:03:**  adult deer white tail deer eats about 5,000 tree seedlings a day as part of its diet year  around here in New York so young plantation of freshly planted trees that are chock full  of nutrients right out of the forest nursery bed that's like a delicacy for deer and they  
**1:08:17-1:08:24:**  can go in there at a very inopportune moment that is just as these weak little seedlings  are leafing out for the first time and overnight take a bite off the top of everything and  that may not kill those seedlings but it certainly doesn't help them either so protecting those  
**1:08:36-1:08:43:**  young trees is really the next step and then I think kind of the final phase is being able  to reduce the herbaceous plant competition around those trees for a few years as they're  trying to get their small root systems established herbaceous plants grasses in particular are  
**1:09:00-1:09:09:**  very effective at keeping woody plants from invading their turf so we need to think about  either some sort of mechanical or chemical way of reducing that root competition around  those young trees and that also in turn often helps reduce the habitat for voles and moles  
**1:09:22-1:09:30:**  and shrews and bunny rabbits and other critters that want to come in and girdle that succulent  nutrient filled bark off that young tree seedling.  And I'm wondering on your farm just going back one step what kind of soil preparation  
**1:09:41-1:09:43:**  do you do?  You dig individual holes?  Do you prepare lines?  
**1:09:49-1:09:55:**  I'll answer that but first I want to say that I've made every mistake imaginable over the  years with planting trees and I attribute a lot of that to thinking like a forester  so where I live forestry is highly reliant upon natural regeneration and we don't often  
**1:10:17-1:10:25:**  plant trees here in New York in the northeastern US because if we just do the right silvicultural  treatments nature will plant the trees for us.  We talked a little bit at the beginning about why we may still choose to plant other trees  
**1:10:35-1:10:42:**  just to put things there to either enrich the mix of species or because we can plant  trees that we find very useful like blank locusts if we're going to grow trees for fence  posts then locusts is the tree of choice and we don't have a lot of naturally occurring  
**1:10:55-1:10:59:**  black locusts.  But what I've learned the hard way is that to plant trees I need to stop thinking as  a forester where I'm expecting nature to do it for me and I need to be thinking more like  
**1:11:13-1:11:23:**  a very skilled horticulturalist where I'm going to put very intensive care into this  horticultural crop and the success of any tree planting project I think is directly  proportional to the effort that goes into it both on the planning side that is carefully  
**1:11:38-1:11:44:**  thinking through all the steps and making sure that you're able to meet the minimum  requirements of those steps but also making sure that you realize that putting the tree  in the ground that active planting is just where the work really begins.  
**1:11:57-1:12:04:**  So when I look at some of my neighboring farmer friends that are orchardists and vineyardists  I think that's really more of the model that we need to follow for planting any trees and  that isn't necessary in all parts of the world with all tree species but it's much more of  
**1:12:28-1:12:38:**  a commitment than I think many of us initially estimate that putting trees in the ground  and mowing it for a couple years may not cut it.  Watering trees is sometimes going to be important.  
**1:12:50-1:12:52:**  Controlling pest issues on the trees is going to be important.  Controlling herbaceous competition around the young trees is going to be important.  In Argentina we have a prolonged fire season in the winter and protecting young trees from  
**1:13:04-1:13:13:**  fire is a big challenge for us and there's probably no bigger threat to young trees than  fire.  And what can you do to protect trees from fire than in Argentina?  
**1:13:19-1:13:26:**  We treat them as silvopastures and graze cattle in them as early as we can because it's really  a very symbiotic relationship where the trees over time benefit the cattle, they give them  shade and shelter and also help shift the pastures into more palatable and better quality  
**1:13:42-1:13:47:**  forages over time because of that cooler moisture microclimate that the trees create but the  cattle in turn are essential for controlling fuel loads and in the absence of grazing we're  letting a lot of dry dead plant material accumulate under those young trees and it's just a matter  
**1:14:03-1:14:09:**  of it's not if but when fire is going to hit us and if we can control that fuel load through  grazing then we can usually make it through a fire without significant damage whereas  if we were not grazing our plantations I think we'd just have a ticking time bomb sitting  
**1:14:26-1:14:27:**  there.  Going back to our planting methods, have you always used the same soil prep?  Is that a variable that's changed as well?  
**1:14:39-1:14:47:**  The way I would do it on our farm today is to try to auger the trees in versus planting  them with a shovel or planting them with a tree planter.  A lot of the trees we planted in the past we did with a tree planter which makes a slit  
**1:14:56-1:15:03:**  in the soil and it's a method that's well suited for small bare root seedlings but it  doesn't work well for larger containerized seedlings and I think that when we plant hardwoods  we need to be thinking more about containerized seedlings versus bare root seedlings because  
**1:15:16-1:15:20:**  we want those trees, yeah and we're going to spend more on those larger containerized  seedlings up front but if we get higher survival and the trees become established much quicker,  meaning less maintenance over time, it probably more than paid for itself.  
**1:15:34-1:15:43:**  To plant any type of seedling though that has a fairly well developed root system you  have to make a pretty big hole.  I just want to jump in here because we often hear that bare root seedlings have a much  
**1:15:51-1:15:57:**  better root structure because they're not root bound by pots but for you basically avoiding  the initial stress of being bare rooted and being potted still pays off, like you're not  worried of the long term effect of root bound.  
**1:16:07-1:16:12:**  I think it has a lot to do with the production method here in the US.  There's what they call bottomless containers or bottomless pots so it's an air root pruning  method that seems to work well with many hardwood species.  
**1:16:24-1:16:28:**  To answer that question though the first thing we have to recognize is that not all tree  species are created equally so some tree species they can transplant quite well as bare root  seedlings.  
**1:16:37-1:16:45:**  Other species they perform very poorly, they might survive but they go into a planting  shock phase where that tree...  Our goal should always be besides survivability is to get that tree off and running as early  
**1:16:58-1:17:05:**  as possible and that's a combination of both what we plant in terms of a small bare root  seedling versus a containerized seedling and the planting method but it's also a reflection  of the early care that we put in to getting those trees, getting their roots in the ground  
**1:17:21-1:17:28:**  and getting them growing as quickly as possible as early as possible.  That's why more and more especially for the type of trees that we would be planting for  our silvopastures today which would be primarily hardwoods versus spruce and pine and I'm talking  
**1:17:41-1:17:47:**  about New York not Argentina I'm going to auger them in so all the trees that we planted  in recent years we use an auger on one of our farm tractors it's a heavy duty auger  with a pointed self-feeding tip.  
**1:17:58-1:18:04:**  It's not nearly as productive as the tree planter that we were using 20 and 30 years  ago but I think it gives us better results it also helps to an extent with the site preparation.  The act of augering that hole in kind of destroys those herbaceous grass roots in close proximity  
**1:18:21-1:18:25:**  to where those young tree roots are going to be at least through part of the first growing  season.  I think that we need to think a little bit more though about especially some of the more  
**1:18:32-1:18:37:**  delicate hardwoods where we would either then need to follow up and mulch heavily around  the tree.  Mulching can be a double-edged sword because on one hand it helps suppress weed growth  
**1:18:47-1:18:53:**  and tramps in moisture but it can also suck nutrients out of the ground if we're not using  the properly composted wood chips.  It can also create habitat for some rodents and sometimes it does sometimes it doesn't.  
**1:19:05-1:19:12:**  Mulching would be a more organic alternative to using herbicides or chemical controls to  control the herbaceous competition.  I personally don't like herbicides not because I have any philosophical opposition to the  
**1:19:21-1:19:29:**  herbicides but herbicides when you spray a patch of sod that is a patch of dense grass  and you kill the grass in that spot whatever is in that seed bank is going to quickly express  itself and just probably be a bigger headache than what the grass was.  
**1:19:45-1:19:54:**  So wherever we spray grass here with something like glyphosate what we get back are very  fast growing aggressive warm season weeds that could be even worse than the grass for  those young trees.  
**1:20:06-1:20:13:**  Is there any other options in terms of you have wood chips, herbicides, is there some  kind of mechanical tilling?  Mechanical so you could be rototilling you could scrape the sod in a strip and that might  
**1:20:24-1:20:30:**  work fine in soils that are like loamy soils where you don't have a lot of rocks to contend  with the sod stripping doesn't seem to work very well on our farm because we have too  many large stones in our soil.  
**1:20:38-1:20:46:**  It also then creates an uneven surface that is hard to mow around so the first year it  looks great because you have this strip that might be half a meter wide of where you've  basically scalped the sod off and planned your trees into that but by the second year  
**1:20:58-1:21:06:**  where you have tall weeds and woody plants and grass and other things starting to encroach  back around those trees you've now created this spot that's hard to get the mower especially  if you've left large stones laying on top of the soil surface.  
**1:21:21-1:21:31:**  Rototilling would be similar in that it's in essence the same effect as spraying where  you've removed what was suppressing the expression of the seed bank there and what's worse is  you've churned the soil up so in that act of scarifying the soil you temporarily remove  
**1:21:47-1:21:53:**  that herbaceous competition but what comes in after that could be much worse.  That's why I like mulching probably the best but we just need to make sure that we, and  a common mistake I've seen with tree planting projects here is they plant the trees and  
**1:22:07-1:22:12:**  then either they never quite get around to putting the mulch down or they go out and  scramble to try to look for mulch but they don't find mulch that's been composted adequately  so they're putting more or less fresh chips around the trees and that can rob a lot of  
**1:22:26-1:22:33:**  nitrogen out of the soil as the decay fungi try to break those fresh chips down and really  jeopardize the growth of those young trees.  Is that something you've witnessed on your farm?  
**1:22:39-1:22:46:**  Because I'm aware of that mechanism but we haven't witnessed it in Greece when using  fresh wood chips and I'm wondering if you then saw that lack of nitrogen.  Yeah we haven't done much mulching over the years when we have.  
**1:22:56-1:23:00:**  We have tried to use chips that have been sitting in a pile probably for at least a  year or so but I think that it depends on what you're starting with in the soil so if  you have a soil that is already quite fertile and quite healthy and has lots of microbial  
**1:23:13-1:23:20:**  activity in it there might be plenty to go around so to speak.  Whereas if you're planting on a site that is already limited perhaps in decomposers  or macronutrients like nitrogen adding a organic material there that may take away from what  
**1:23:39-1:23:46:**  the young tree needs so I think you can't generalize accurately because in some cases  I think using green chips or fresh chips may work perfectly fine in other cases it may  not and wood chips would just be one example though of a mulch that we could use for or  
**1:24:01-1:24:05:**  a compost type material that we could use for mulch.  In Argentina not on our ranch but in some other areas that were adjacent to a large  peanut shelling factory we were using the peanut shells as the mulch and we were doing  
**1:24:18-1:24:22:**  direct seedings into.  We basically went through made a furrow put the seeds in that furrow mostly nut species  like oaks and walnuts and hickories and then we went over and in that furrow laid a layer  
**1:24:38-1:24:46:**  of it was probably somewhere between five and ten centimeters in thickness it wasn't  that we were super accurate or consistent and those nuts thrived like they came up through  those peanut shells and grew wonderfully and that those peanut shells suppressed the weed  
**1:25:00-1:25:08:**  growth for what I remember is in some cases up to three growing seasons.  So that was a system that worked very well but it was flat ground it was it was loamy  soil and it was and we didn't have any because this was all cropland before I don't think  
**1:25:21-1:25:28:**  we had the wildlife to contend with as much as we would in a like a small farm field that  might already be full of rodents that want to girdle young trees but we were also planting  at very high densities there too so we were planting nuts at like almost a 50 centimeter  
**1:25:42-1:25:49:**  to 100 centimeter spacing because we had lots of nuts so I think we had so many trees per  row that we we could afford to lose a significant percentage and still have plenty of trees  per hectare.  
**1:25:58-1:26:02:**  That's what I was gonna ask you know because you said once your trees are established the  first thing you want to be thinking about is what's gonna eat my tree now and what are  the options then that you've put in place on your farm to try and protect those young  
**1:26:11-1:26:12:**  trees?  That's why to do it over again Etienne I think that I would plant the trees first and then  let the trees get started and keep the keep the animals out until I felt the trees were  
**1:26:24-1:26:30:**  the stage that I could either graze it on a more regular basis or at least opportunistically  go in and flash graze it at the right moments.  Now in our ranch in Argentina just because of the species that we're predominantly using  
**1:26:40-1:26:46:**  mostly pines and the fact that we want to control the fuel loads in these young plantations  at the early stage possible we have to push the envelope a little bit and we pay the cost  for that to a small extent not because the cattle really want to graze young pines but  
**1:26:58-1:27:05:**  because they will rub on these young pines and break the limbs off and girdle the bark  if we're not careful about how long we leave them in there and when we put them in there  and how quickly we move them from one spot to the next.  
**1:27:16-1:27:23:**  The bigger issue here in New York though is not our grazing livestock it's deer and deer  again are probably by far the largest herbivores that want to eat our young trees and that's  a challenge both in systems where we're using natural regeneration and situations where  
**1:27:37-1:27:44:**  we're using artificial regeneration that is tree planting so I can easily keep my livestock  out of young forest plantations I can't keep deer out of young forest plantations as easily  and one thing that we're doing here today we have a whole extension website dedicated  
**1:27:56-1:28:04:**  to it is building what we call slash walls so think of slash as logging debris we're  about to build our first brush walls where we're taking invasive shrubs and bulldozing  them into large windrows around the perimeter of these areas where we want to plant young  
**1:28:14-1:28:25:**  trees and using that as a like a natural organic barrier to exclude deer for five to ten years  long enough to either get the naturally occurring young trees up and running or trees that we  plant in there up and running and our experience is showing we've been building slash walls  
**1:28:38-1:28:44:**  now in this area for five years we can build them at a much lower cost per foot of fence  or per foot of barrier than building a fence fence and to build a fence that will keep  deer out it's a fairly significant fence and the beauty is though we don't really have  
**1:28:58-1:29:03:**  to maintain these slash walls we can build them and pretty much walk away from them and  if a tree falls on them it just makes them better we all have to it's not like our eight  to ten foot high deer resistant fences that if a branch falls on them it flattens the  
**1:29:15-1:29:20:**  fence and the deer can walk right back in there again sorry you're talking about eight  to ten years for deer but what would be the ideal time to exclude animals including livestock  from the young plantation again is it to graze as often as we want and for as long as we  
**1:29:35-1:29:40:**  want or is it to just be able to go in there and graze a little bit here and a little bit  there so i think that you can probably in most cases be back to grazing a young plantation  within two to three years after planting but only if you're using very skillfully and well  
**1:29:59-1:30:08:**  controlled rotational grazing this is not so if you're gonna put animals into a young  plantation that's not a situation where you want to have your newbie summer intern that  doesn't really have the grazing skills yet be in charge of that because the intern is  
**1:30:23-1:30:27:**  probably going to make the mistake of doing the same thing in that young plantation that  you might be doing in other areas either more mature silvopastures or pastures that don't  have young vulnerable trees and it doesn't work the same way we talked about earlier  
**1:30:40-1:30:46:**  but shorter durations that is normally maybe you would leave your animals in there for  a day maybe you can only leave them in there for a couple of hours and putting animals  in there either right before leaf out or right after leaf drop or putting animals in there  
**1:31:02-1:31:08:**  say when you see a week of cooler weather where they might not be as heat stressed and  being driven quite as crazy by biting flies like horn flies so it's it's understanding  how your animals think and then being able to anticipate what could cause the animals  
**1:31:22-1:31:28:**  to go in there and show destructive behavior or damaging behavior to those young trees  other management inputs like pruning atn or going in and doing early what we think of  as pre-commercial thinnings that is thinning trees at a cost or a loss versus thinning  
**1:31:42-1:31:52:**  a weed delaying those thinnings till we can be harvesting something that's usable or sellable  all those management activities may or may not be necessary it depends partly on it depends  partly on the the initial design and implementation of the planting it also depends on responding  
**1:32:11-1:32:20:**  to unforeseen issues so a common example here in new york is that sometimes we have late  frost that can damage young trees just as they're leafing out in mid-may and that kills  the terminal growth in that young tree and then you get side branches that start to and  
**1:32:36-1:32:42:**  you so what what happens in that case instead of having a nice straight single stem you  now have multiple stems so you may have to go in and do some corrective pruning to retrain  it to a single stem when when at all possible we want to avoid those types of management  
**1:32:56-1:33:01:**  activities because they cost money and it's not it's not just that they cost money they  take time and that time is i feel the biggest limiting factor for all farmers today so we  want to set this up in a way that it minimizes like we don't have to do things that are potentially  
**1:33:19-1:33:25:**  avoidable things but if we're going to grow trees and our objectives is to have straight  tall trees then doing some pruning at some point may be necessary we also prune for example  we prune our pines in argentina not because we need to for timber quality or because the  
**1:33:41-1:33:49:**  trees won't eventually prune themselves pines typically self-prune very well we just we  want to get that those ladder fuels away from the ground as early as possible so we typically  go in when the trees are starting at around three meters tall and will prune up the first  
**1:34:03-1:34:09:**  meter and a half in other words the the lower half of the living branches on that tree and  that way if a hot fast fire comes through it's not potentially jumping up and scorching  the crowns of those young trees you were saying handling for example disease or pests  
**1:34:26-1:34:33:**  is that a big time input well those are the things that nature throws at us and we just  have to be prepared to respond the best that we can so spraying trees for pests may be  necessary watering trees or irrigating trees during drought may be necessary we we would  
**1:34:50-1:34:58:**  like to try to reduce or minimize the need for those things by starting with trees that  are less vulnerable to pest issues or that may be less susceptible to drought stress  but you just you can't control those things you can't control pest outbreaks you can't  
**1:35:10-1:35:18:**  control floods or droughts you can't control hail storms so you just sometimes need to  have you need to go in there and help correct damage or loss that's been done from some  natural occurrence after the fact maybe as a final part to this episode i'd really like  
**1:35:32-1:35:40:**  to understand how you've managed to integrate living barns and coniferous tree plantations  into the management of your animals and you've mentioned the benefits in terms of shelter  that they provide but did you actually plant those plantations with that in mind or is  
**1:35:52-1:36:00:**  it was it more an opportunistic use of them our living barns on our farm here in new york  came about as an opportunistic use of these conifer plantations that we had planted a  decade or more earlier at that time not thinking about okay someday we're going to use these  
**1:36:13-1:36:21:**  to provide shelter during extreme winter weather to our animals we planted conifers in those  spots because we wanted to have some more conifers on our farm and the conifer species  that we chose for those sites seemed to be well adapted to those sites we also felt that  
**1:36:36-1:36:41:**  with the limited time and ability to care for young trees that the conifers were going  to be easier to establish than hardwoods so our living barns were a after the fact use  of plantations that we had planted years earlier and in hindsight though i'm very glad that  
**1:37:03-1:37:10:**  we did plant those conifer plantations and i think that they've probably been one of  our greatest assets across the entire farm or one of the greatest benefits of our tree  planting efforts because i just first and foremost i want my animals to be comfortable  
**1:37:28-1:37:35:**  and i think happy comfortable animals perform better they stay healthier they create less  headaches for me and as i mentioned earlier i think that livestock particularly ruminant  livestock with the fermentation in their rumens they're able to generate enough heat to stay  
**1:37:51-1:37:59:**  warm but they definitely benefit from having some place that they can get out of the wind  and the driving snow or freezing rain and be more comfortable during those those types  of winter storms now what i'm talking about is is common during a winter here in upstate  
**1:38:15-1:38:22:**  new york it may not be as common during a winter in greece for example or in central  argentina nonetheless i i'm sure you can think of examples of where your animals would like  to have some shelter from the extremes and and maybe it's not cold maybe it's more heat  
**1:38:34-1:38:43:**  but to me living barns is living barns is a concept that to me makes sense 10 times  out of 10 i i don't really see a downside to it when compared to the alternatives of  having to build a roofed shelter and to build even a very minimal pole barn type structure  
**1:38:55-1:39:05:**  here in new york you're starting at a cost and this is pre-supply chain shortages you  would be looking at a minimum cost of probably ten dollars per square meter of roof shelter  and today it's probably closer to twenty dollars per square meter but then on top of that it's  
**1:39:17-1:39:24:**  a structure that we have to maintain over time and here in new york at least agricultural  buildings are only exempted from property taxes for the first 10 years so every building  that i build on the farm i'm eventually paying taxes and our taxes are very significant here  
**1:39:40-1:39:49:**  on the value of that structure so i see buildings as a asset that requires maintenance and depreciates  over time i see living barns on the other hand is uh it requires some maintenance or  at least it requires some some care we still want to go in there and thin the same way  
**1:40:00-1:40:06:**  we would thin our woods for timber production or thinning our woods for civil pasture production  because we want to reduce the competition amongst trees take out the poor quality trees  and promote the growth of our better trees but our living barns appreciate over time  
**1:40:19-1:40:24:**  because these are trees that continue to grow bigger and more valuable but in the living  barns our primary objective is creating good shelter for animals from winter storms it's  not necessarily trying to maximize the amount of forage that we're growing underneath so  
**1:40:37-1:40:43:**  in our living barns we tend to use species or favor species in this thinning because  these were all mixed coniferous plantations we're favoring species that tend to have denser  foliage denser canopies so spruce and fir versus say pine and larch and larch would  
**1:40:58-1:41:04:**  be deciduous anyhow it's not that we have thinned out all of the pine or all of the  larch we're just not favoring those as much as we do the more dense canopy conifer species  so when we use the term living barn atm i think that uh might create a false impression  
**1:41:22-1:41:27:**  of like these are areas where we put the animals for the duration of the winter we have them  for extensive periods of time in the winter that's not at all how we use our living barns  on our farm so i said earlier that we have a little over 20 acres of living barn areas  
**1:41:39-1:41:44:**  but it's six different plantations that range from about half a hectare in size to about  three hectares in size and that was that wasn't something we planned 30 years ago we again  we weren't planting these trees as living barns today i might make them perhaps a little  
**1:41:57-1:42:02:**  bigger and design them a little differently but we were utilizing what we had already  put there in previous years through our planting efforts we don't what we we try to do with  our living barn areas is we we put hay either in or adjacent to them so like we might put  
**1:42:17-1:42:25:**  them on the down downwind sides of these plantations most of our storms here come from the west  or north so we try to have hay on the say the south and the east side but you you don't  always know so we have storms called nor'easters where the wind of course comes out east so  
**1:42:36-1:42:43:**  in some of the living barns we might put the hay on the west side or the north side and  we hold those areas in reserve until we really need them so with our farm grazing across  these 500 acres during the growing season in the winter we might utilize half to two  
**1:42:55-1:43:04:**  thirds of that total grazing base that by the way is divided into about 120 permanent  paddocks we're rotationally bale grazing throughout the winter but when the animals when the weather  is relatively mild we can put the animals pretty much wherever we want when the we look  
**1:43:17-1:43:23:**  at the 10-day forecast and see that severe winter weather is coming we start moving them  in the direction of one of these living barns and not all of our living barns are the same  in terms of access to water or the drainage of the soil so if it's going to be a kind  
**1:43:37-1:43:43:**  of a short duration storm we might be able to use one of the smaller living barns or  one of the living barns that say is on a lower wetter heavier soil type especially if we  know that the ground is going to be frozen for the day or two or three that the animals  
**1:43:55-1:44:02:**  are in there and then we have other living barns where if they need to ride it out for  several days of bad weather those living barn areas would be better suited so it's not that  we move the animals from one end of the farm to the other just because this living barn  
**1:44:14-1:44:19:**  might be a little better but we have multiple options around the farm so that's something  that I would recommend if people are considering establishing living barns as well first of  all don't wait because it'll take time for those trees to grow so the best time to plant  
**1:44:31-1:44:40:**  tree was yesterday right or 30 years ago but it's never too late either so but think about  having instead of just like one big living barn area where you're beating up on it more  frequently having multiple smaller living barn areas these living barns really only  
**1:44:52-1:44:59:**  need to be big enough that for whatever the size of your herd is or your flock is that  they can most of the animals can get shelter for most of the time and we lay in bed during  a winter blizzard and think oh it's so miserable out there my animals must be miserable too  
**1:45:13-1:45:20:**  well the animals are probably more comfortable than you think but giving allowing them or  giving them access to these areas where they can get out of the wind a little bit get their  faces out of that driving sleet like snow that just makes them it's taking one like  
**1:45:34-1:45:42:**  we don't like to stand out there in the blizzard and get pelted in the face by hail like granular  snow so don't our animals don't enjoy it either and if they can just get out it's it's not  even that it's necessarily keeping them dry even though if they get under a fairly dense  
**1:45:54-1:46:03:**  canopy of dense conifers they're they're probably gonna get soaked much less and in this by  the way doesn't necessarily work with all livestock species like goats for example goats  once they get soaked and they're subjected to cold temperatures they're more vulnerable  
**1:46:13-1:46:21:**  to things like pneumonia respiratory diseases than sheep or cattle but every little bit  helps so I think living barns is just a very practical and cost-effective way of where  we can be using trees to meet one of the important needs of our animals versus having to build  
**1:46:33-1:46:41:**  very expensive high maintenance roofed barns or sheds but I feel like listening to you  it's quite important to be able to rotate between different areas and having multiple  sites to avoid for example I was thinking one of the things I would like to avoid is  
**1:46:52-1:46:58:**  concentrating manure and one part of the farm where it's actually not needed and might even  be detrimental but actually by having this constant rotation and just including them  for short amount of time at certain periods of the year you're still able to distribute  
**1:47:08-1:47:13:**  nutrients where you want them and avoid any damage to those areas either I guess.  Yeah so to put it in context you know in here in upstate New York it's a we have a real  winter here so we have six months potentially or more of winter weather but of those six  
**1:47:27-1:47:36:**  months we may have six weeks where it's really feels like winter meaning snow and really  cold temperatures and of those six weeks we probably only have six days that our animals  would seek out shelter if they had access to it so it's not like we need to have our  
**1:47:54-1:48:02:**  animals in or around these living barns all winter long but there are certainly days every  year where the animals they could probably weather out these storms fine without the  shelter but again the more happy and comfortable we can make our animals the better that works  
**1:48:16-1:48:26:**  for all of us so these living barns it's just taking something that is there or that we  can pretty practically put there and using it for another important purpose which is  giving some refuge to our animals when they really need it.  
**1:48:41-1:48:45:**  Thanks for listening to this episode unfortunately the end cut off with Brett so you didn't get  to hear our goodbyes but I'm glad we could still get all the content we wanted all the  relevant links are below you can also suggest guests or give us some feedback through social  
**1:48:59-1:49:04:**  media or websites please consider supporting the podcast as well to make this sustainable  in the long run thank you very much.  