---
title: 32 Carbon Sequestration And Current Research On Alley Cropping With Eric Toensmeier
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2021-12-21)  

**0:00:00-0:00:23:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:23-0:00:33:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  these challenges.  
**0:00:33-0:00:50:**  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  I have the pleasure of interviewing Eric Tonesmeyer who is the author of The Carbon Farming Solution  
**0:00:50-0:01:02:**  among other great books on agroforestry and perennial crops.  The first part of the interview is focused on understanding the carbon sequestration  potential of agroforestry, focusing especially on silvopasture.  
**0:01:02-0:01:14:**  I found this very helpful to recap how essential it is to increase the number of trees in our  landscapes as we attempt to tackle climate change.  Another great part of the conversation is his current work on alley cropping and outlining  
**0:01:14-0:01:26:**  where it makes more sense as well as what prevents its uptake.  Hello Eric, welcome to the show.  Thank you so much for joining us today.  
**0:01:26-0:01:36:**  Thanks very much for having me.  It's good to be here.  Maybe to get started, you could just tell us how you first started getting interested  
**0:01:36-0:01:53:**  in agroforestry and trees in general.  Sure.  I was just out of high school in 1990 and I came across a conference talk on permaculture  
**0:01:53-0:02:11:**  and read some of the very early books, the first books on permaculture which were really  about what today we would call multi strata agroforestry.  I decided that's what I wanted to do with my life and that's really what I've done ever  
**0:02:11-0:02:20:**  since.  How did you come to write your book on carbon and the role of farming and carbon sequestration?  Sure.  
**0:02:20-0:02:35:**  Well, I had been doing work with agroforestry and perennial crops for many, many years but  it was in maybe 2008 that I read a book by Tim Flannery who's an Australian scientist  whose work.  
**0:02:35-0:02:49:**  Anything he writes on any subject.  He had a new book on climate change called Now or Never.  That was my realizing that this wasn't just a problem for the future but it was very much  
**0:02:49-0:03:09:**  a time of reckoning on that.  There was a particular passage where he said, yes, trees can play a really important role  but there's only so much land available for trees because we have to keep land for farming.  
**0:03:09-0:03:30:**  I thought, well, there are kinds of farming that involve trees and if so esteemed a scientist  as Tim Flannery maybe doesn't know that yet then maybe there's a role for me here to promote  these perennial agricultural systems and their potential role for climate change.  
**0:03:30-0:03:49:**  So that's when I began work on what became the Carbon Farming book which came out nine  years later.  So there was a long learning curve of coming to understand the science and the issues around  
**0:03:49-0:04:10:**  climate change mitigation in general and then learning the systems and the species doing  sort of a global search through those in a global inventory of species and practices.  And after researching the topic for so many years are you still convinced that necessarily  
**0:04:10-0:04:25:**  storing carbon has to go through trees?  Just to clarify my question, a lot of people are working also on other types of regenerative  agriculture that don't include trees and I think many people still think trees are one  
**0:04:25-0:04:38:**  possibility but not necessarily an obligation into regenerative processes.  What's your view on that?  Well I don't think that they're the right fit for every farm in every case but the numbers  
**0:04:38-0:04:58:**  seem pretty clear that wherever they can be included they greatly increase the amount  of carbon both in the soil and in the biomass of the trees.  So in almost every case we see that a good system let's say with cover crops and crop  
**0:04:58-0:05:09:**  rotation and compost application is good but when you add trees it becomes better.  In terms of carbon it's better.  That doesn't mean it's necessarily more profitable.  
**0:05:09-0:05:25:**  It doesn't mean it's the right choice for that farm.  Whether water is limiting that could still be a bad idea.  There isn't any one uniform way to do it but it's almost always better when you add more  
**0:05:25-0:05:38:**  trees like a lot better.  Three times better, five times better, ten times better in terms of carbon.  And that still people read that tell me they've read that book all the time and then don't  
**0:05:38-0:05:50:**  think about the trees at all.  I'm like the only talk about soil so I think the core concept of that book really is if  you can add trees you should still is something that very much needs to be advocated for while  
**0:05:50-0:06:03:**  the notion that soil can sequester carbon which was sort of new at that time is very  widely accepted now that the importance of trees I think is still really not taken as  seriously as it should be.  
**0:06:03-0:06:19:**  And of course it's difficult to go into too much detail in this short podcast and I really  recommend all of our listeners to go straight to your book because there's a ton of really  useful information and it's really a fascinating read.  
**0:06:19-0:06:27:**  But just maybe to give a short context what makes trees so good at storing carbon?  Why are they so important?  Sure.  
**0:06:27-0:06:44:**  Well first the biomass of the trees itself, the wood of the trees, the branches and the  trunk and the roots all hold carbon.  If you dry them out they're about 50% carbon on a dry weight basis, about half carbon.  
**0:06:44-0:07:01:**  So first of all there's that.  But also they do a very good job increasing soil organic matter which is one of the fundamental  components of carbon farming as well.  
**0:07:01-0:07:12:**  They have deeper roots.  They have roots that are alive all winter long unlike in an annual system where there's  periods where there's no living roots in the soil.  
**0:07:12-0:07:24:**  The roots die back, the root hairs die back every year and that contributes a lot of organic  matter.  The roots drop to the soil and decompose and that provides a lot of organic matter.  
**0:07:24-0:07:36:**  So they just do a good job.  And of course there's as you mentioned two dimensions.  There's storing carbon and wood products maybe in through their biomass that can be used  
**0:07:36-0:07:50:**  in construction etc.  And there's the fact that they help store carbon in the soils.  Would you argue that it's more long-lived to export those tree trunks and keep them  
**0:07:50-0:08:04:**  in houses for example or construction because I mean carbon stored in soils can easily be  reverted right?  One of the weaknesses of any kind of agricultural carbon sequestration is that that carbon can  
**0:08:04-0:08:25:**  be lost if let's say there's a fire, the tree carbon may be lost or if the farmer returns  to plowing the soil again the soil carbon can be lost very quickly or if the climate  dries out which we're seeing happening in many places in the world already that the  
**0:08:25-0:08:41:**  land is becoming a net emitter of carbon because it's just getting so dry that it is losing  the carbon that it has.  Whereas carbon that's stored in a building or furniture or books or something like that  
**0:08:41-0:08:59:**  is stored for the life of that product.  Now books and houses and furniture can burn as well and that is a concern with climate  change but that is a pretty good secure storage and if and only if that new trees are planted  
**0:08:59-0:09:18:**  or if the old tree re-sprouts and regrows then you start the cycle again of carbon sequestration  and actually that's one of the real advantages of trees in carbon farming systems is that  in an ordinary grazing system or an improved regenerative annual farming system you get  
**0:09:18-0:09:34:**  a few decades of carbon sequestration and then it stops or it slows down to almost nothing  and then you're back to where you began you can become a source of emissions again or  whatever.  
**0:09:34-0:09:50:**  What's unique about agroforestry is you can plant trees and then they can be harvested  at some point stored in some long-term way like we were saying timber or books or what  have you and then replanted or resprouted and they begin the cycle of active carbon  
**0:09:50-0:10:11:**  sequestration again so instead of only lasting 30 or 50 years you could maybe continue for  centuries by operating in that way so that's sort of a hack of saturation which is really  important especially if you're trying to offset let's say the emissions of the methane and  
**0:10:11-0:10:28:**  nitrous oxide emissions of grazing animals on a farm like that once your soil is full  of carbon you're out of luck unless you can reset the cycle with trees.  So you would disagree with you know we've heard some claims saying that for example  
**0:10:28-0:10:41:**  intensive rotational grazing alone or on a very large scale would be enough to sequester  enough carbon to reverse climate change it seems that what you're saying is that through  your research you found that that wouldn't necessarily be the case.  
**0:10:41-0:11:02:**  I would very much say that's not the case first of all because of the issue of saturation  that it only goes for so many years and then slows down but also just if you look at the  sequestration rates of that are actually shown in science and apply them to the amount of  
**0:11:02-0:11:18:**  grazing land that they could be applied to that's not enough to to do the job at all  it's it's one powerful tool it's a very important very powerful tool but at Project Drawdown  for example we found that it wasn't that it was wasn't even our most powerful agricultural  
**0:11:18-0:11:37:**  practice it's only as part of a program that includes action across agriculture and the  food system and also in transportation and electricity generation and building design  and urban planning and everything else reducing of consumption in the wealthy countries only  
**0:11:37-0:11:55:**  with all those things together can we achieve mitigation.  So I think some of the grazing advocates in their enthusiasm have over promised what kind  of impact is possible with that and in fact if you look at the numbers that have come  
**0:11:55-0:12:16:**  out recently in studies funded by enthusiasts of that kind of grazing mostly the sequestration  rates have not been as high as they initially promised in fact they've gone down the last  couple of studies they've been going down so I don't think it's enough to say there's  
**0:12:16-0:12:29:**  no single practice that's going to do it it takes lots of action everywhere and I think  ultimately we're not well served by that kind of over promising.  Which is an over promising that happens as well in the world of agroforestry and on trees  
**0:12:29-0:12:48:**  and I think for now we often discuss this with Dimitri but I think we've reached the  conclusion of being very cautious with any silver bullets and very seductive unique solution  because there's a part of us that really wants to believe in them and it's probably linked  
**0:12:48-0:13:07:**  to psychology of despair or something faced with the situation we're in we want to think  about the savior that changes it all but definitely I agree with what you're saying.  One of the things we learned at Project Drawdown and I went to work for Drawdown just as I  
**0:13:07-0:13:24:**  was finishing work on the draft of the carbon farming book is that you can sort of make  estimates of what the technical potential might be if you took this practice and did  it to all of the world's grassland but you don't get to have all of the world's grassland  
**0:13:24-0:13:43:**  the way to do it sort of responsibly is to say well how much is there now how much land  is there in alley cropping or in managed grazing or whatever practice now and how much could  there be how much potential land is there available for that and what rate is it spreading  
**0:13:43-0:14:00:**  at now what's the sort of most ambitious rate that it might grow at but you're never going  to get a hundred percent of the world's farmers to do anything because farmers are very independent  minded people so first you'll never get a hundred percent for that and then some countries  
**0:14:00-0:14:16:**  are in the middle of you know wars and conflicts those are not places where it's going to be  easy to get a practice to achieve a hundred percent adoption right and so on so we the  difference between the technical potential and the achievable potential can be a very  
**0:14:16-0:14:39:**  big difference and really we should be more concerned with what's achievable than what's  theoretically possible although I do believe in in thinking really big when it comes to  climate change mitigation we don't get there without extremely ambitious programs but I  
**0:14:39-0:14:55:**  don't see us achieving the full technical potential and 100 adoption of all these practices  and often they want each other's land too this person wants grassland for grazing this  person wants it for silva pasture this person wants it for afforestation well there's only  
**0:14:55-0:15:15:**  so much land we can't in some cases we can use it for multiple things but we can't always  so there's a lot of practices maybe trying to make themselves give themselves all of  the available land when really they may need to share that with other practices and approaches  
**0:15:15-0:15:36:**  some land needs to be reforested for example so those are some of the kind of complexities  when you get to looking at it at the global level which we did with Rotem which was really  new and really fascinating for me to learn about that was really fun and interestingly  
**0:15:36-0:15:53:**  because we talked about trees and we also talked about grazing well the one one of the  surprisingly high impact solutions that you put forward was silva pasture so the mix of  those two elements could you tell us a bit more about you know that's that's agroforestry  
**0:15:53-0:16:10:**  system and how come it scored up so high on the in the drawdown project yeah that's we  got that question a lot because to many people it's such a new practice it is pretty widely  practiced around the world but not in some places really barely at all so like here in  
**0:16:10-0:16:34:**  the us it's barely practiced at all there's a couple of reasons one is that it's already  very widespread on an estimated 15 of the world's grazing land so it starts with a good  it has a head start you might say and then it has a there's quite a bit of grassland  
**0:16:34-0:16:56:**  that is suitable for silva pasture so the sort of maximum potential you could do it  on is pretty high not all grassland we figured that you could that all humid grassland would  serve for silva pasture and that some semi-arid grassland i've heard people say like darren  
**0:16:56-0:17:13:**  dowry says he can establish trees down to about 450 millimeters of rainfall a year but  really there's a point where it's kind of too dry for silva pasture or where it becomes  much more difficult to establish trees so sort of taking only the grassland that we  
**0:17:13-0:17:32:**  think gets enough rainfall to establish trees this still gives you an awful lot of an awful  lot of of potential grassland i think it was over 700 million hectares i mean really a  lot which is a small percentage of global grassland but still and then you have a very  
**0:17:32-0:17:48:**  high carbon sequestration rate the annual rate of carbon sequestered per year is very  high so when you take a lot of land plus a very high carbon sequestration rate you you  do okay and actually the the growth rate the adoption rate we modeled for silva pasture  
**0:17:48-0:18:09:**  was very modest we because we didn't have any examples of it spreading really rapidly  to to base that assumption on so it didn't nearly achieve its potential in the drawdown  its technical potential in the drawdown model but it just it does a really great job sequestering  
**0:18:09-0:18:28:**  carbon it's very very powerful and and we do see certain places where particularly columbia  and central america where it's and parts of mexico where it's taking off very very rapidly  and um i think that's uh something i'm paying close attention to i was just at the latin  
**0:18:28-0:18:50:**  american congress of silva pasture last week uh virtually and um there's a lot of excitement  that columbian national government is is including silva pasture as one of the like three core  pillars of their national uh mitigation efforts so um i do think there is some um we we may  
**0:18:50-0:19:09:**  be seeing a really big transformation of land in columbia um uh into silva pasture because  they've done so much of the the groundwork to make that possible already they're maybe  ready with excuse me with some extra um money and resources behind them to really take off  
**0:19:09-0:19:26:**  and transform the landscape there which would be fantastic i guess we'll have to start a  spanish podcast then to follow uh follow all of that uh action over there but i was going  to ask why does silva pasture then perform uh so much better than other agroforestry  
**0:19:26-0:19:48:**  systems sure well okay um it has to do with the com with the combination of the available  land the growth rate and the sequestration rate so alley cropping i think we actually  showed growing faster well we called it um tree intercropping because it includes alley  
**0:19:48-0:20:06:**  cropping and various other kinds of silver wearable systems um that's growing very rapidly  so we have a fast rate of growth but a lower carbon sequestration rate because you're typically  plowing between the trees you're burning up a lot of the carbon and it goes back into  
**0:20:06-0:20:27:**  the atmosphere again so the rate is lower even though the growth rate is faster um and  with multi-strata agroforestry has even a higher carbon sequestration rate than silva  pasture but um we chose to model it that it was restricted to the humid tropics which  
**0:20:27-0:20:50:**  mostly to all practical intents and purposes it is um on a commercial level like shade  coffee and shade cacao and things like that really we don't have that and then dry places  or cold places yet commercially um and also the amount of the area in multi-strata agroforestry  
**0:20:50-0:21:09:**  hasn't really changed in the last century in any discernible way that scientists have  been able to notice so it's not whereas like urban food forests and backyard food forests  have taken off really well there's not a million hectares of that even in the whole world yet  
**0:21:09-0:21:29:**  right so it's still very micro scale um so we we so there was a practice where we only  had a very small gain in the area but because it has such a high sequestration rate it still  has a big impact compared to let's say um nutrient management you know applying fertilizer  
**0:21:29-0:21:48:**  more thoughtfully um the per hectare impact is very very slim but because it can be it's  spreading so rapidly and it can be done on almost all of the world's cropland you have  about the same impact as multi-strata agroforestry even though one is growing really fast and  
**0:21:48-0:22:11:**  one is growing really slowly so it's this kind of um mix back and also uh all of the  agroforestry systems tend to be much more expensive to install to establish and to take  more years to pay back the farmer so there is this um a there are some economic barriers  
**0:22:11-0:22:30:**  without really friendly policies it's harder to establish those practices than say cover  cropping or managed grazing or nutrient management or low methane rice or some of these other  um agricultural practices so then you had to make a bit of a hypothesis on silver pasture  
**0:22:30-0:22:46:**  and kind of assessing you know how easy is it for this to be taken up by farmers because  one thing is to say potentially you know this many uh hectares are available in terms of  climate and conditions as you mentioned about rainfall but then it's another thing of saying  
**0:22:46-0:22:59:**  socially and economically how realistic is it for farmers to take it quickly so that's  if i understand properly that's also part of the hypothesis you you have behind different  models that is something that we took into account  
**0:22:59-0:23:22:**  and um uh and uh it's hard to do that i think uh one of drawdown's longer term goals is  to is to do more regional analyses and national level analyses and at that once you drill  down to a more specific region like if you looked at even just the eu level for example  
**0:23:22-0:23:44:**  it would be much easier to do that than looking at the whole planet where circumstances are  very different from different countries um and even the kind of silvopasture is different  like what we see in um a lot of eastern africa is that um um the land is managed by pastoralists  
**0:23:44-0:24:03:**  who don't own the land but bring their traveling herds through and there it's not so much a  matter of planting trees as managing the grazing in such a way that um the trees that naturally  emerge are allowed to do so and not browse down by livestock so that's a a different  
**0:24:03-0:24:22:**  it's sort of a passive silvopasture where you just let it happen you stop preventing  it from happening um which is really different from the sort of european mode where you go  out and you plant the trees in a row and all of that um so it's much more affordable to  
**0:24:22-0:24:44:**  establish costs nothing to establish except a little bit of extra work um but it would  take really different policies to encourage those two different kinds of silvopasture  and there might be um uh it might be much easier to market um european silvopasture  
**0:24:44-0:25:03:**  as a climate-friendly meat and milk and wool as opposed to you know um the livestock being  raised by messiah pastoralists who do not have access to those kinds of premium climate-friendly  markets things like that so um so it's hard to figure that out at a global level i guess  
**0:25:03-0:25:22:**  it makes more sense to to break it down region by region and think about what um uh what's  going to work but we did take that into account and that's why we don't have all of the world's  land in silvopasture or all of the world's grazing land and managed grazing because while  
**0:25:22-0:25:43:**  that would be lovely we don't see that um we don't see any historical evidence that  that's possible well at least from our uh regional perspective um we chatted to fabian  from the french agroforestry association a few months back and we asked them which which  
**0:25:43-0:26:02:**  agroforestry systems that have most uh demand and traction on and silvopasture was one of  them and definitely it's it feels that one of the let's say uh uh strong points of silvopasture  is that a lot of people with animals are already feeling very intense heat stress in summers  
**0:26:02-0:26:19:**  and just looking for shelter for their animals if only that you know which is already uh  you know a simpler objective to reach than for example fodder or really providing of  an animal's forage from silvopasture that's i think still quite experimental and has some  
**0:26:19-0:26:37:**  practical limitations but seeing people planting hedges and trees to just give some shade to  the animals is definitely something we see all around us at least in france um for sure  that's that's really the global trend yeah is is shade for livestock is increasingly  
**0:26:37-0:26:54:**  important and just going to get and i would add shade for farm workers is also very important  um uh the number of days that are above the temperature at which um humans and livestock  begin to take damage from heat is is is on the rise almost everywhere in the world and  
**0:26:54-0:27:16:**  is projected to uh be catastrophically bad so shade is is really important for that for  sure yeah just to wrap up the topic on silvopasture i just want to make sure we understand really  the mechanisms of of carbon sequestration you know we said that after a while uh grassland  
**0:27:16-0:27:38:**  stops storing carbon because it's saturated to its full potential um how does a tree help  taking that limit further sure the first thing is it does is it adds carbon above ground  often quite a lot of carbon above ground um so that's a huge it it takes the um carbon  
**0:27:38-0:28:01:**  that's being sequestered into another dimension you know um up into the air um but also it  increases both the the annual rate of carbon sequestration in the soil um but also the  total amount that can be stored so whereas what you mostly see with managed grazing systems  
**0:28:01-0:28:25:**  is a gain of maybe 30 to 50 tons of carbon per hectare in the soil with silvopasture  that can be as high as 250 just in the soil so you're expanding the soil storage capacity  um uh you're expanding its potential while also increasing above ground biomass from  
**0:28:25-0:28:46:**  functionally zero maybe four to twelve tons per hectare in the grass itself but you're  taking that quite a bit higher 30 40 50 sometimes 100 tons per hectare in in that above ground  biomass so um it really uh and ratonel writes about this that um you know we sort of think  
**0:28:46-0:29:02:**  that you can hit a certain point and then you're full in terms of saturation but if  you add another practice you can increase it again and then another practice and another  practice how many layers can we add while planting trees might not be the first practice  
**0:29:02-0:29:27:**  that a farmer does they might start by optimizing their stocking rate of livestock and so on  um seeding uh legume forages or something for example um from from the numbers that  i have seen uh uh nothing is as powerful as trees in a pasture and have have researchers  
**0:29:27-0:29:47:**  been able to to understand uh how it increases that uh potential is it through bringing carbon  deeper into the soil profile or is it maybe another type of carbon i would say i know  more about that in the alley cropping area than in silvopasture but a lot of it is just  
**0:29:47-0:30:10:**  because of the increased inputs of uh of biomass between the dropping of leaves and the shedding  of root hairs um uh it's kind of like dumping a bunch of compost on the on the field every  year um quite a lot um so a lot of it has to do with that and often the growing season  
**0:30:10-0:30:28:**  of the trees and the grasses are not the same so you have a longer overall season of photosynthesis  then you might like let's say in the summer when it gets dry and the grass is going dormant  if you have cool season grasses the trees are continuing to photosynthesize during that  
**0:30:28-0:30:46:**  period and at the same time those cool season grasses are going to photosynthesize in the  winter when the trees are dormant and have lost their leaves so um there's some complementarity  that trees and grass are doing different things at different times and they if it's well designed  
**0:30:46-0:31:03:**  and you have the right density of trees that aren't shading out all the grass and so on  um then then you can get sometimes you can do better than either trees alone or pasture  alone would get and that's really what we're aiming for with with agroforestry is to do  
**0:31:03-0:31:22:**  better than either trees or or grass or crops alone great but there isn't a special there  isn't a different kind of carbon sequestration or a different pathway or mechanism that i  that i know of it's just the same thing but but uh more more powerful and again not in  
**0:31:22-0:31:40:**  every situation if it's not in really dry places and not under certain other circumstances  but overall it seems much more powerful i guess what's so complicated is within within  just silver pasture you know because we're taking this example they might miss very different  
**0:31:40-0:31:57:**  uh practices you might have silver pasture where you're actually growing timber and exporting  that wood and using it for construction or furniture as we mentioned before or you might  just have some you know short cycle shrubs or trees that are just have a role of of providing  
**0:31:57-0:32:14:**  shade in our cycled back pretty quickly into the soil with obviously like a very different  potential in time to sequester carbon so i imagine that was quite a headache and that  when when governments like you were mentioning south american governments basing a mitigation  
**0:32:14-0:32:31:**  policy on on such practices um yeah it's quite uncertain and broad in a way isn't it it's  nice in that case let's say you're looking at columbia because you can say well the  main practices are you know this and this and that and the sequestration rate for those  
**0:32:31-0:32:49:**  is this and we think they can grow that much um they have less variables to work with than  a global study and it's not only the sort of the the patterning and the management of  the trees the layout and the density and the management but also the species of trees some  
**0:32:49-0:33:08:**  trees sequester more carbon than others and some will go um fast growing trees like poplars  will sequester more carbon in the first few decades but in the long run oaks slower growing  trees with denser wood will sequester more carbon so um it sort of depends what kind  
**0:33:08-0:33:25:**  of time scale you want to measure it on and a lot of it we don't really fully know yet  i think um um yeah if you're cutting the trees very short like if you're pollarding to feed  the foliage to livestock then there's carbon in that trunk and in the roots but you don't  
**0:33:25-0:33:44:**  have the whole crown of the tree so there's probably less carbon in that system than in  one that has full-size trees um there are um many many variables to to think about yeah  yeah great well yeah it's anyway thank you for that work because it's very useful to  
**0:33:44-0:34:02:**  have a bit this attempt at least to have a big picture view of these very complex questions  and this brings me to another theme that's very present in your book which is basically  as a as a solution you put forward is shifting towards more towards perennial cultures because  
**0:34:02-0:34:22:**  of their potential for carbon sequestration and my first question as a as a frenchman  that absolutely loves bread made with wheat um you know how how do you change people's  diets and and their culture um because i can just imagine uh the face of my neighbors as  
**0:34:22-0:34:43:**  i try and offer them a loaf of 100 chestnut flour bread and you know that that would be  a big step i um yes uh um and one of the folks in in in permaculture who advocates around  agroforestry and parental crops a lot is a guy named jeff lotton who um said to me once  
**0:34:43-0:35:01:**  that uh the hardest thing to get anyone to do that that as soon as someone is about two  years old they will never want to change what they eat for their basic staple food again  if it's rice if it's potatoes if it's bread it's locked in by the time people are two  
**0:35:01-0:35:21:**  years old and i i love bread as well so um i couldn't it would be hard for me to switch  to bananas or plantains or breadfruit or or or whatever um i think the first thing to  do is to change what we feed to livestock because they a pig doesn't care nearly as  
**0:35:21-0:35:40:**  much as a person about what kind of carbohydrates it's eating they're very happy to eat those  chestnuts or acorns or whatever it might be um and given that about a third of the crops  that we grow in the world are to feed livestock that's a big potential transformation right  
**0:35:40-0:36:02:**  there they don't care so or they don't have the option of caring anyway so i that that's  a third of our cropland right there that could be perennialized if everything else was working  well if the yields were appropriate and so on um and also um um somewhere around nine  
**0:36:02-0:36:26:**  or ten percent of all of our crops in the world are grown for feedstock for industry  raw materials for industry um uh for bioplastic for the chemicals industry things like that  and again flavor is not as important to a you know bioprocessing tank uh as it is to  
**0:36:26-0:36:45:**  to a person so i think there's potential to perennialize that as well with again assuming  you have the same yields and everything else works as well um a fermenting vat doesn't  care what kind of starch goes into it to a certain degree um so that's you know almost  
**0:36:45-0:37:05:**  half of farmland is taken care of that way um and and one important thing is that we  are work people are working on perennializing grains and um i think that will offer um many  of the of the staples we're accustomed to like um rice there's some perennial rice yielding  
**0:37:05-0:37:26:**  very very well in its fifth year now um on a number of different farms around china and  southeast asia it's it's grown like rice it's harvested like rice it's processed like processed  like rice it's eaten like rice it tastes like rice it is rice so um that's very easy as  
**0:37:26-0:37:48:**  well so there are some direct now we'll never have a perennial potato or carrot you can't  really perennialize root production um and i don't think we need to make all of agriculture  perennial we just need to make it as perennial as we can so on flat prime fertile soil we  
**0:37:48-0:38:05:**  can grow annuals in good ways and that's great um but that's what is it may be only a third  or a quarter of the world's farmland is actually really very good farmland anyway a lot of  it is highly erodible or is on a slope or for some other reason not ideal and those  
**0:38:05-0:38:22:**  are the places to me where we at least want to begin with perennializing maybe by mixing  the annual crops like wheat that we love with trees so we have an annual system that has  a tree component um but those are also good places to think about as perennial grains  
**0:38:22-0:38:48:**  come in um or to work on chestnuts and i've had a wonderful chestnut polenta um and i  think in in the context of an economic system that actually values the the ecosystem services  and the climate benefits and drawbacks of agriculture it might start to make a lot more  
**0:38:48-0:39:09:**  sense to do a lot more things with chestnuts than we do now um to use one example so um  uh but i i don't see um the french abandoning bread for chestnuts entirely i don't think  that would be fair to do and i don't think we should ask china to stop eating rice and  
**0:39:09-0:39:26:**  so on right but uh how much can we perennialize is really the question how far can we go and  the answer is much farther than we are now much much much farther even with what we know  how to do now and then there are things that will be coming 10 or 15 years from now better  
**0:39:26-0:39:51:**  perennial grains and so on that will really um enable another round of further perennialization  that um is still um uh uh that isn't yet possible i guess part of the reason why this hasn't  happened until now is that it still requires to change uh that a lot of the farming economy  
**0:39:51-0:40:07:**  and the way people relate to their food and what they're willing to pay if i take the  example of livestock for example uh we do have pigs you know eating acorns or um or  chestnuts but they are like a niche product high quality and people are willing to pay  
**0:40:07-0:40:26:**  a lot of money for that because of course in terms of the production models you can't  produce at the same price the same amount of meat uh feeding you know ready-made formula  for pigs in an industrial way or having a more perennially based system so you know  
**0:40:26-0:40:44:**  that's that's the other issue is we still go back to culture and and these huge uh social  uh locks that it it seems um the the first step in some ways there or or a wonderful  step if we can make it happen is to to get rid of the subsidies that are making that  
**0:40:44-0:41:05:**  kind of unsustainable agriculture possible and i i read a study a year or two ago that  globally it's about 700 billion dollars u.s dollars per year are going into subsidizing  agriculture whether it's the cap or other kinds of efforts like that um and about one  
**0:41:05-0:41:28:**  percent of those were sustainable climate-friendly practices so we're paying for the wrong kinds  of agriculture already which makes it very hard to compete with so if we could remove  some of those subsidies for the kinds of agriculture that are not climate-friendly um that makes  
**0:41:28-0:41:45:**  a bit more of what we would call here a level playing field a more fair competition between  regenerative practices then if we could take some of that money that is freed up and actually  use it to encourage the adoption of these practices to build markets to build the supply  
**0:41:45-0:42:06:**  chain infrastructure we need to make chestnuts reach their full potential let's say um to  pay farmers to plant trees on their farms to develop the kinds of education and outreach  programs that are necessary to help farmers adopt those practices well which trees which  
**0:42:06-0:42:28:**  varieties of those trees what distance what planting technique uh um developing the mechanization  systems that can make those uh more economically efficient to to to use um it's not that there  isn't money to do those things it's that we're spending it on um you know feedlots and and  
**0:42:28-0:42:47:**  things like that on on all kind of maybe the wrong kinds of agriculture which one can argue  those are climate-friendly because they intensify production and grow more land on the same  let's say hectare of land you know um uh which theoretically means less deforestation perhaps  
**0:42:47-0:43:10:**  for agriculture but that argument ignores that silvopasture and alley cropping also  intensify production quite a bit um so you can have you can increase productivity without  increasing uh you know pollution and emissions and and the and um uh having animal welfare  
**0:43:10-0:43:29:**  issues and all of that it's not really that you have to choose industrial agriculture  or a low yielding regenerative agriculture there's very much high yielding regenerative  agriculture and um um uh that's a would be a very wise place for for money to go in terms  
**0:43:29-0:43:47:**  of those those subsidies and and research and development and outreach money and so  on but beyond beyond the fact that um perennial crops have to compete with a highly subsidized  system it still seems at least for the moment with the methods we have it still has a handicap  
**0:43:47-0:44:06:**  in terms of the labor it requires and the fact that it's sometimes harder to mechanize  and in a place like france or europe or i guess even the us where labor is so expensive at  the moment that might be a big yeah a big limitation it's a big hurdle and it's interesting  
**0:44:06-0:44:28:**  in the tropics the opposite is true that it's actually more late it's more labor efficient  to grow perennial staples than to grow annual staples because where labor is done by hand  or with draft animals um perennials are less work uh but where we have these huge uh combines  
**0:44:28-0:44:52:**  and other pieces of equipment um uh it's much more efficient to grow annual crops than perennial  crops at present i did a little work on that in the book where i compared um the hours  per ton of food um from some annual crops and some perennial crops in california and  
**0:44:52-0:45:14:**  all of the annual crops um were more efficient than any of the perennial crops and the most  efficient annual crop was a hundred times had a hundred times less hours per ton of  product than the least efficient perennial crop so some of them in the middle were pretty  
**0:45:14-0:45:36:**  close cowpeas and walnuts maybe or almonds were pretty close but overall it's clear that  with um that there's a need for more efficient uh harvest and mechanization um and yet with  the perennial grains again when when they're really fully ready and they're not really  
**0:45:36-0:45:57:**  fully ready yet we do have a few early ones out of the gate which is exciting um those  will um will use all of the equipment we already use so they'll use the regular combine and  everything else um which makes them um very exciting the drawback is that they don't really  
**0:45:57-0:46:20:**  exist yet in any serious way we do have kernza which has been released which yields about  as well as quinoa um somewhere around a ton or a ton and a half per hectare so not really  competitive with um uh weed or or or corn or something but it is um the value is higher  
**0:46:20-0:46:41:**  the value per ton is higher so it can be economically viable for farmers to do that now um and i'm  sure that the people who bred it um ultimately would like it to yield as well as wheat does  but we're not uh we're not there yet these things take time plant breeding is slow and  
**0:46:41-0:47:03:**  plant breeding with perennials is slow and if you were to look at them the research budget  let's say the global research budget for wheat versus kernza it must be you know 10 000 times  more euros being spent on wheat than on perennial grade so uh so again a reallocation of priorities  
**0:47:03-0:47:21:**  might be desirable there a reallocation of research money could really help to move the  perennial grain um effort forward and also i think there's some new ways to think about  perennial crops what i like about the badger set um uh research project that i i write  
**0:47:21-0:47:36:**  about in the book a little bit is they're rethinking tree crops from you know a tree  where you come out with a tree shaker and shake down the nuts and then you come with  another machine and make a windrow and another one and pick that up um they're planting the  
**0:47:36-0:47:58:**  trees very close in double rows like like half a meter or a meter apart um uh and then  they compass them every five to ten years and come with a um it's the kind of mechanical  harvester we use for blueberries here i think it might be like what you would use for black  
**0:47:58-0:48:16:**  currents that rides over the whole hedgerow and harvest all of the um nuts that way so  instead of growing hazelnuts let's say as a tree where you shake it and pick them up  off the ground you grow them as a hedge and you just ride over the whole hedge with one  
**0:48:16-0:48:44:**  machine and harvest all the nuts in one pass which makes for a much um uh many less hours  per ton of nut that is harvested and we do see that system a little bit being used in  um some mediterranean olive production um uh in greece i think and also with um seabuckthorn  
**0:48:44-0:49:02:**  in parts of europe so that that sort of approach to a really different way of thinking about  harvesting tree crops and both olives and seabuckthorn are perennial staple crops they're  oil crops so um i i think that's another interesting way to go is to think really differently  
**0:49:02-0:49:24:**  about how we grow these plants um and how we would approach harvesting them there's  also issues around harvesting in polyculture systems which sound like they're not impossible  to resolve it's just no one's really thought about that so much before so um none of those  
**0:49:24-0:49:42:**  are likely to be resolved right away i think we sort of have to start with growing let's  say chestnuts or hazelnuts as more specialty products right now and gradually figure out  how to transition them to occupying more and more of the staple crop market which unfortunately  
**0:49:42-0:50:02:**  means that the price will go down uh as well so um i don't have all of that um figured  out just yeah yes but listening to you and uh you know taking the example of mechanization  it seems that it all comes down to political will which kind of says a lot and says nothing  
**0:50:02-0:50:19:**  because you know you can wait it seems like you can wait a long time for for that to actually  be a force for change but you know we at the moment people are inventing much crazier technologies  to try and solve climate change with very complex capture carbon capture units etc i  
**0:50:19-0:50:36:**  mean if there was money and a political will to develop and efficiently mechanize perennial  crops i'm pretty sure that would be within the realm of human uh civility you know i  mean i mean if you put things back into proportion and i think that applies to a lot of the things  
**0:50:36-0:50:55:**  you've been saying throughout this um you know first uh 50 minutes of interview um you  know a lot of things are technically feasible now it's about building the economic and social  structures um you know enabling that on a large scale and uh yeah well i you know i  
**0:50:55-0:51:14:**  i i really want us to move on to kind of the the last uh theme i have uh in in stock which  is um alley cropping because uh you told me and mentioned that you had been working more  recently on specifically alley cropping and i'd love to hear a bit more about that research  
**0:51:14-0:51:42:**  sure i um i um am currently uh um under contract with uh an ngo here in the us called interlace  commons uh so i'm working with their director megan juro um on a manual on alley cropping  for the united states which we feel will have a lot of relevance anywhere in the cold climates  
**0:51:42-0:52:01:**  of the world in europe and argentina and canada and eastern asia and so on um and i i will  say that very much uh one of our big influences is certainly the work that's being done in  france and we've been reading uh reading that work very closely um we're certainly looking  
**0:52:01-0:52:19:**  at what people are doing in the united states and in canada and we're looking at um uh there  was some really great work done in china in the 1970s and 1980s there's some interesting  things happening in north korea um but i i think we could all agree that france is sort  
**0:52:19-0:52:38:**  of carrying the banner for alley cropping and mechanized alley cropping in cold climates  you all are really uh absolutely um uh the lead on that and we're we're very very happy  to be following in that lead as as best we can um particularly when it comes to some  
**0:52:38-0:53:01:**  of the calculations around um predicting how much shade is going to come at what time and  how that relates to the spacing and density of trees um uh and one of the things that  i really like that's come out of the french work is the emphasis on um winter grains winter  
**0:53:01-0:53:20:**  cereals with deciduous trees where you have two different seasons in which these different  plants are using the sunlight so they're not competing for like because there are different  seasons which is the same thing we see uh in in this hell region of africa there's a  
**0:53:20-0:53:41:**  practice called um evergreen agriculture where they use this um a tree fiderbia albida it's  a nitrogen fixing tree it's a sort of like an acacia um and that tree puts on leaves  in the dry season but drops its leaves for the wet season so you're growing crops under  
**0:53:41-0:53:55:**  trees but the trees have no leaves on them and then in the winter the trees have leaves  and there's no crops underneath so that's it's very much the same thing that we see  in france actually it's much more widespread in africa than alley cropping is in france  
**0:53:55-0:54:13:**  but that kind of um looking at the phenology the timing seems to be one of the keys worldwide  to making polycultures work into making agroforestry work so i really like that and we do have  some mediterranean climates here in the us parts of the western united states are mediterranean  
**0:54:13-0:54:31:**  quite a bit of our farmland there in the west is mediterranean climate um so that might  be more directly used the rest of us have to just sort of adopt the concept in some  way we do have winter crops here as well but um in in the central and eastern part of the  
**0:54:31-0:54:51:**  country but because we have rainfall all through the year um it's not quite as good a way i  know in the french systems the the winter cereals uh sort of train the trees to grow  their roots more deeply because of competition for water and here we have rain all year round  
**0:54:51-0:55:08:**  so that's not going to be quite as much of a of a benefit um to us yes uh let's see um  i could say more are there particular things you're curious about about that uh manual  well uh i definitely want to go a bit more into some detail but i think i'll be a bit  
**0:55:08-0:55:29:**  uh provoking and and ask if you think that alley cropping um does it really have a key  role to play in uh temperate climate agriculture uh both on climatic and also on economic realities  i'll just elaborate a bit on that but you know throughout the talk so many times we  
**0:55:29-0:55:47:**  come back to the fact that agroforestry performs better in the tropics it's also more linked  to traditional practices you know alley cropping is quite a recent practice here in europe  and and has come a lot i think from trying to adapt more tropical systems to temperate  
**0:55:47-0:56:06:**  climates so that does you know ask the question whether you think we can still make it work  or are we trying to go and and build something that's not really adapted  well that's a great question um i will say that uh in some ways it is a really new system  
**0:56:06-0:56:25:**  and in some ways uh you know if you think about bocage and other kinds of very traditional  systems in europe they go back to the origins of agriculture there so the um uh some of  the german fruit tree intercropping systems and some of the more mediterranean fruit and  
**0:56:25-0:56:45:**  nut and and vegetable and grain intercropping systems do go back quite a long way but that  has sort of mostly been really removed from the landscape for quite some time now uh here  in the u.s uh in the eastern part where i live um the indigenous people here the practice  
**0:56:45-0:57:05:**  was uh very much to mix trees with corn mulberry trees and walnut trees and persimmon trees  and all manner of things plums native plums and grapes were all intercropped with annual  crops here and that's a very cold part of the part of the world much colder than anywhere  
**0:57:05-0:57:34:**  in france where i live um so uh i think it's uh it's not that there was never any here  but it was never perhaps the dominant force in quite such a way yes um um well i guess  the question is this how much do we want a world that limits warming to 1.5 degrees uh  
**0:57:34-0:57:53:**  i don't think we i i think um if you could do a practice like alley cropping that sequestered  three to five times more carbon per hectare than the best annual cropping systems wouldn't  you want to do that i think that's really how much mitigation do you want and also in  
**0:57:53-0:58:14:**  terms of adaptation alley cropping is looking more and more like a good idea because as  um first of all for some shade you know but um as rainfall gets more intense and we do  see rainfall intensity going up in most of the world's cropland uh that makes erosion  
**0:58:14-0:58:34:**  much more powerful water erosion gets much more powerful and the practices that maybe  have been good enough for erosion control will no longer be sufficient um and rows of  trees with grass underneath uh on or near the contour of a field are a very very powerful  
**0:58:34-0:58:53:**  erosion control practice um so i think we're going to see more need for it as climate change  gets worse and yet we also need it to keep climate change from from getting worse so  i think um with but a bunch of things need to be in place to make it work there do need  
**0:58:53-0:59:11:**  to be markets for those products or there need to be and or there need to be subsidies  for farmers to plant those trees or financing like low interest loans for them to wait until  they actually get money from those crops and all of that has to be in place the biggest  
**0:59:11-0:59:32:**  barrier i see in the cold climate parts of the world in the global north let's say uh  is the use of herbicide it's so widely used um um with gmo crops uh in many parts of the  world and not so much in the eu i think right because you've been able to hold those off  
**0:59:32-0:59:59:**  a little bit better um that you can't establish trees in those fields because uh in the u.s.  and canada and argentina they actually spray herbicide from airplanes multiple times a  year so the buffer uh is uh like 200 to 600 meters if you want to have a row of trees  
**0:59:59-1:00:22:**  that's just not possible so the the spread of that system which does sequester a little  carbon where you reduce tillage and use cover crops and spray herbicide a lot whether it's  from airplanes or big sprayers on tractors um basically makes alley cropping impossible  
**1:00:22-1:00:40:**  uh and that's most farms in the u.s. and canada and argentina today and in southern brazil  the sort of temperate the southern cone they call it in south america um uh and there's  quite a bit of that in you know temperate india and china as well in certain parts of  
**1:00:40-1:00:56:**  the eu people are certainly spraying that stuff i think so um i see in a way that's  the biggest barrier to the wide scale adoption of alley cropping is you can't establish trees  in fields with herbicide with that that much herbicide of those kinds of broad spectrum  
**1:00:56-1:01:17:**  herbicides sprayed at that intensity and frequency so i think that's the um at least outside  of the eu i think that's the biggest strategic barrier is they have to choose that or this  you can't do both of those practices um but there might be a window of opportunity because  
**1:01:17-1:01:35:**  i mean some people do use uh herbicides to suppress weeds around trees so it must be  a question of dosage and maybe some kind of compromise can be found um you know that works  but um you know just uh i think some interesting elements to this uh alley cropping conversation  
**1:01:35-1:01:51:**  is also the legitimate questions of like do we really need to put trees in the part you  know in the plot or could we not leave them around and you know i always refer back to  this conversation and this interview that dimitri did with roan reed um a few months  
**1:01:51-1:02:07:**  back and he had a really interesting perspective because he was actually quite against the  idea of alley cropping saying you know you back in the eu have a very subsidized agriculture  uh back in australia farmers need to be much more responsive to the kind of commodity crop  
**1:02:07-1:02:23:**  um you know to the markets and be able to be very flexible in the kind of crops they're  going to grow and keep their hands very free and of course as you mentioned one thing that's  clear from books like christian dupras and fabian liaga's book on agroforestry which  
**1:02:23-1:02:42:**  i think you were alluding to earlier on is that it makes very clear that you you can't  just put any tree with any crop it's actually a very complex game of interactions with some  some facilitation mechanisms and some of competition and you know it's something that's highly  
**1:02:42-1:03:00:**  technical and that by no means is obvious so i think uh in certain cases it one could  make the the case of saying well trees are amazing but you know maybe let's uh subdivide  some plots and maybe let's have some hedges but maybe it's too risky to have uh these  
**1:03:00-1:03:16:**  lines with a defined interline which locks me into these spring um you know spring productions  because i have to do that before uh the competition of water is too high etc etc but i'm a bit  spoiling the work here because we should have christian dupran the podcast in not too long  
**1:03:16-1:03:34:**  so you know sorry for this monologue but i think it's an interesting point um well i  don't think it's the right thing everywhere and that everyone should always do it at all  and i and i certainly think um we can't blame farmers for needing to stay flexible in the  
**1:03:34-1:03:55:**  face of what the market does um absolutely uh i do think we could make it a more friendly  environment for them to make those decisions but i think also there's sort of like a set  of stages of perennializing a crop farm um or us making it more regenerative the first  
**1:03:55-1:04:16:**  might be cover crops um and anything to improve soil organic matter and probably nutrient  management goes in that first phase as well um then we might look at at the border the  edges of the fields and getting some hedgerows in or some plantings along water bodies along  
**1:04:16-1:04:36:**  streams and excuse me drainage and things like that so that's a kind of and then maybe  some strips of perennial grasses in the field as well a long contour for erosion control  and filtering out uh um excess nutrients and things like that those are all ways to perennialize  
**1:04:36-1:04:55:**  the field that don't um that preserve the flexibility of that farmer to grow what they  need when they need and those are all very good things and they have modest carbon benefits  um and i think particularly for for as i said before flat fertile land that's a great way  
**1:04:55-1:05:14:**  to go but on land that is low has a slope or is easy to erode i think those are places  where strategically we might think more about prioritizing alley cropping um one of the  pieces of work we did on this book was looking at how far apart rows should be where people  
**1:05:14-1:05:34:**  are farming on slopes which i don't see a lot of in france i mostly see people farming  on beautiful flat land but in a lot of the world people are farming on slopes um how  far apart should uh should those um rows of trees be in order to prevent erosion and at  
**1:05:34-1:05:55:**  what point do they need to be so close together for erosion control that you can't really  alley crop anymore or you should switch to a shrub crop instead of a tree crop in order  to make that work and the answer really depends on soil types some uh we spent uncounted hours  
**1:05:55-1:06:20:**  doing interviews about this and reading about this with different um soil uh experts um  it depends on this on the on the soil type a lot the erodibility of a soil type but um  there are many cases where it's possible to have um a 45 meter spacing between uh rows  
**1:06:20-1:06:38:**  of trees um on a slope and that's certainly plenty of space to grow uh very fine crops  in between companion crops in between those rows of trees but as the slope gets steeper  those rows have to get closer together and in more erodible soils they need to be very  
**1:06:38-1:07:02:**  close so it depends on um uh on those things quite a bit um um but we've we've actually  gotten some answers on that and been able to put some calculations in that people can  do based on um um some kinds of information that are pretty easy to get about your um  
**1:07:02-1:07:18:**  about the erodibility of your of your soils so um that's exciting that's really exciting  that's sort of a i feel like a little bit of a new contribution we've been able to make  for this book is to get to the bottom of those questions and um again i i haven't seen that  
**1:07:18-1:07:36:**  kind of practice coming out of france very much because you do have a lot of flat beautiful  farmland and it looks like most agro most alley cropping there is happening in relatively  flat land but um a lot of the farmland in the united states is is pretty steep um five  
**1:07:36-1:07:54:**  percent eight percent twelve percent slopes um and uh those are places where erosion is  happening and uh and where it will get worse with climate change so um that's uh to me  is a real kind of priority place for uh for thinking about alley cropping again the the  
**1:07:54-1:08:15:**  last place we maybe need to worry about it is beautiful flat prime land unless you want  to do it there which is great um um or i look at um some of the work that's happening in  north korea which is the climate um almost scandinavian really in terms of um uh cold  
**1:08:15-1:08:37:**  um and um their people are farming on very steep very steep hillsides growing corn on  very steep hillsides with terrible erosion because there's a real food security situation  um and uh that's a place where um contour rows of shrubs have proven very effective  
**1:08:37-1:08:53:**  uh they especially like aronia which is one of our native shrub crops from here um but  they're trying all kinds of different things um so that would be you know the most steep  and most degraded kind of land would be the first priority area to perennialize as well  
**1:08:53-1:09:15:**  as possible um and until we have perennial corn which is going to be a long time 30 or  40 years if we're lucky um we need the best ways to grow corn where where people want  corn and they want corn that's what they want so we sort of in a way you know in the world  
**1:09:15-1:09:33:**  of food sovereignty they say um that people have the right to culturally appropriate food  so i think rather than try to get everyone to eat breadfruit and chestnuts even though  everyone should eat more breadfruit and chestnuts um you know we try and get them to grow what  
**1:09:33-1:09:49:**  they like as much as possible and then the maybe their processed foods are made out of  chestnut and breadfruit and and so on right um pasta might be made out of those things  or more of those things might be mixed in and it's possible to add a lot of these things  
**1:09:49-1:10:14:**  to um to uh to breads and pasta and things like that without interfering with the flavor  but 100 percent chestnut does not make good bread at all but 10 percent is very nice 20  percent is very nice um so uh you know i'm not admit i'm not envisioning 100 perennial  
**1:10:14-1:10:32:**  anywhere in the world probably on maybe on an individual farm but not in any individual  valley or mountainside or anything i think we just want to go as far as we can we want  to push as far as we can sure and uh because it seems you have quite a overview and you've  
**1:10:32-1:10:50:**  been doing research and interviews um could you give us a few examples of you know the  main motives for uh farmers turning to agroforestry uh erosion control definitely seems to be  the one coming back in the examples you're quoting are there any other kind of strong  
**1:10:50-1:11:11:**  motives sure i mean um uh diversification is big just more crops especially for um some  of the more direct market oriented farms that are maybe already doing vegetables and want  to be able to add small fruits and tree fruits it's kind of very natural thing for them to  
**1:11:11-1:11:38:**  add um uh in in a lot of cases i'm seeing it uh that people really farmers really care  about soil health and they can see that perennials have a very powerful uh ability to improve  soil health so what is that uh how can then they ask the question how can i incorporate  
**1:11:38-1:12:00:**  perennials into my existing operation and i just need to find one that fits into my  existing markets um so that i think is pretty big and also in some cases we're seeing water  quality where cities are finding that their their drinking water is contaminated with  
**1:12:00-1:12:22:**  fertilizer um and uh they look all up the watershed to say what can we do to improve  water quality from farms to reduce runoff and to reduce nutrient leaching from farms  all the way up to the very end of the tiny stream that our river comes from um and that's  
**1:12:22-1:12:39:**  uh that is definitely um supporting some of these kinds of practices being implemented  as well so um i think that uh there's a whole range of things but those are the ones that  i'm mostly mostly seeing i don't interact with as many farmers as some of the other  
**1:12:39-1:12:58:**  people i work with but i hear stories from them anyway and in terms of the limiting factors  uh do you think today what's kind of holding back um into cropping on what level is it  is it cultural is it linked to commercializing these additional crops is it even technical  
**1:12:58-1:13:18:**  in terms of the knowledge and developing these innovative ways of farming i i know that some  of it is just farmers need to go see it on another farm somewhere they need to see what  it looks like and they need to ask questions of another farmer and to some degree we still  
**1:13:18-1:13:35:**  don't have enough farms for people to be able to do that here in the united states at least  right i i would love to raise some money to send a bunch of us farmers to montpellier  to go and see see what this looks like or send them to columbia or send them to china  
**1:13:35-1:13:53:**  to go and see what these things look like um because i think that's really important  to to see how a farmer does does it and to ask them those questions is so important um  and i think to some degree there's still some questions about which trees and which crops  
**1:13:53-1:14:15:**  and what spacing and what management system there are some sort of technical research  kind of questions there to be answered for sure um but i have found here for example  with our um uh department of of agriculture does provide payment for environmental services  
**1:14:15-1:14:39:**  for alley cropping for example but almost no states have decided to use that option  and almost no one in that agency actually even knows that that's a practice or how to  use it or how to implement it so um i think it's still very far away from what people  
**1:14:39-1:14:56:**  think is agriculture in in sort of as a cultural barrier i think you're not supposed to plant  trees in your fields you're supposed to get rid of all the trees out of your fields and  i think that's still pretty people think it means that you'll have less that you'll have  
**1:14:56-1:15:15:**  less yields that you'll have less profit um and then there's all the question of learning  a whole new kind of product how to care for it how do you do pest control on your trees  how to market your wood or your fruit or your nuts or whatever it is um that's asking a  
**1:15:15-1:15:33:**  lot of a farmer to to do that and i think we're still mostly seeing the farmers who  are really driven to innovate are the ones who are doing it it's not the it's not the  people who are only adopting cover crops now after people have been you know 30 years after  
**1:15:33-1:15:52:**  the push for cover crops started it's the people who would have been adopting cover  crops 30 years ago who are now adopting alley cropping without assistance mostly from their  governments without markets without consumer interest in their product particularly uh  
**1:15:52-1:16:14:**  and i'm very um very impressed by and i have a lot of respect for those farmers and we  are seeing uh at least here um in the us and canada a real a very noticeable movement of  farmers picking up this practice which you would didn't even see 10 years ago so there  
**1:16:14-1:16:33:**  is something happening there is some movement building which really wasn't i didn't see  10 years ago so that's very exciting and i do think that carbon and soil health are big  motivators for that um i think there's there's still a a lot to be done because it seems  
**1:16:33-1:16:51:**  that it's a lot to ask from a farmer who's you know working 70 hours a week who's also  financially stressed to have that extra will to complexify even more his operation you  know because uh when you talk with farmers if they can already make it work with the  
**1:16:51-1:17:05:**  current um well i'm making a generalization but let's say based on some conversations  uh i think you know a lot of people would be happy if they can just make it work with  their current system and maybe optimize that and innovate through that and i think that  
**1:17:05-1:17:24:**  applies to regenerative farmers as well where you know if you're um if you're a broad acre  uh farmer you might be very interested in testing out a lot of innovative things with  cover crops if you're a livestock farmer you might just be excited about getting into intensive  
**1:17:24-1:17:43:**  rotational grazing but then adding trees at this moment where there's so much innovation  to be done in each branch is is really uh yeah you need um yeah it's a lot i i sort  of think that trees in the field like alley cropping and silvopasture are more likely  
**1:17:43-1:17:58:**  to come in this second wave 10 to 15 years from now not that we don't have very innovative  farmers doing it and not that we shouldn't be doing everything we can to support that  but i think for most farmers right now it's still cover crops and trees around the edge  
**1:17:58-1:18:17:**  of the field is probably the right next step for most of those people and once you're doing  that or once you are doing some innovative grazing and you figure that out maybe trees  are the next step after that i'm not sure that it's the first step for a conventional  
**1:18:17-1:18:35:**  farmer um it's it's asking a lot it's asking a lot and without payment for environmental  services or whatever without a sort of supportive environment in the various ways that that  looks i don't see a lot of people doing that yet i don't see a lot of conventional farmers  
**1:18:35-1:18:54:**  doing that um and they shouldn't it would be unwise for them to do that i think but  we but when they can see a farm like that near them and talk to that farmer and hear  what they're doing and see that it's working when they can get actual help from their government  
**1:18:54-1:19:09:**  and university to help them learn how to make this work when they can see that it makes  good sense for them to do that when they can get a good loan or some other way to help  them with the financing of it that's when when all those pieces are in place that's  
**1:19:09-1:19:29:**  when i think it could really take off um one one last question on alley cropping although  we could be going on for a long time um because you have a bit of this overview you know two  of the two of the main options that people have and that we see for planting perennial  
**1:19:29-1:19:45:**  crops and intercropping systems are either going to nut trees or timber do you have some  general points of comparison of course bearing in mind that this will depend on you know  local context and can vary but are there some trends that you were able to to take out and  
**1:19:45-1:20:05:**  on these two options it's interesting reading how much uh how important timber is in european  alley cropping uh and i think the first wave of alley cropping here in the united states  was looking a lot at timber as well but almost all the new producers we're talking to here  
**1:20:05-1:20:27:**  uh want fruit and nut trees and not timber trees they don't want to wait 60 years to  get their investment back um which i certainly understand why someone would be concerned  about that um the advantage with nuts uh is that they start to bring in money much much  
**1:20:27-1:20:50:**  sooner and they provide it every year or every other year for for many decades which is certainly  in terms of the cash flow much more desirable than waiting for for timber um the value of  timber can be extremely high and if you have the kind of patience to be able to wait and  
**1:20:50-1:21:09:**  do that and have the right markets and can you know do what you need to do in order to  to get a high price for it um it seems like a very very desirable um market and of course  the carbon benefits are great if that timber is not maybe so much for pulp wood or biomass  
**1:21:09-1:21:31:**  energy but if it's going into buildings or whatever that's a beautiful way to to hold  that carbon um and there aren't that many cases where trees are good for both nuts and  timber it's very unfortunate it really seems like walnuts can really be good for both black  
**1:21:31-1:21:52:**  walnuts and european walnuts um but chestnuts at least the chestnuts we can grow here don't  have a good tree form you know don't have a good straight form um almonds aren't almonds  would be more like a fruit wood i guess hazelnuts would be no no help in that department either  
**1:21:52-1:22:13:**  maybe some of the turkish types that grow as a tree form you know um that uh what is  that corallis kalurna the turkish tree hazel um but uh you you mostly you sort of have  to pecan is not terribly good wood um so you kind of have to choose one or the other mostly  
**1:22:13-1:22:27:**  with some exceptions like the walnuts and and then the fruit woods as well but even  then you're looking at a different pruning style than the than a fruit tree is normally  grown with you're looking at a single leader straight trunk with a high pruning um which  
**1:22:27-1:22:49:**  is a different management system than fruit growers are usually used to so um it's uh  that's a challenge uh for sure we have been looking at the what are the um timber trees  that provide a return in a shorter period of time you know you could do pulp wood with  
**1:22:49-1:23:13:**  hybrid poplar in a very short period but the value is very low um some people here are  doing um i think you all say false acacia right for robinia um or robinier maybe you  say um yeah that is uh people will grow it here on a short rotation for fence posts so  
**1:23:13-1:23:32:**  in a relatively short time you have some money turning around and you get some nitrogen fixation  in the in the meantime um uh and we have an alder species alnus rubra in the west here  which is very fast growing um and pretty good quality hardwood um otherwise we're really  
**1:23:32-1:23:53:**  looking at that 50 or 60 years or 100 or 120 years which um uh in the current economic  situation is hard to get farmers excited about i do think a world in which there's an incentive  to plant a tree that will grow for 120 years would be a wonderful world but i don't mostly  
**1:23:53-1:24:15:**  see that being um um that workable for most farmers at this point compared to the nuts  or or or the fruits um i think uh one one big area of uncertainty um in intercropping  but i mean in any project to shift to perennial crops is the huge uncertainty linked to climate  
**1:24:15-1:24:32:**  change i'll give a very practical example i'm in a region in aardesh i'm on the altitude  plateaus and i'm going to get into livestock farming but there's a potential here for taking  over a lot of chestnuts old chestnut plantations and it's a one of the key uh productions of  
**1:24:32-1:24:49:**  our dish is chestnuts the issue is with climate change increasing amounts of droughts and  the diseases that go with it and i made the calculation thinking it's extremely risky  for me to get into that business where the old trees aren't necessarily adapted if i'm  
**1:24:49-1:25:08:**  planting new trees in i have to wait 10 to 15 years for a decent production what will  what will the climate look like in 10-15 years i'm not even that sure um so i guess my question  is in in this world of uncertainty what place and what strategies for perennial crops you  
**1:25:08-1:25:29:**  want to get the most detailed uh climate projections for your region that you can so we have the  ipcc provides this nice kind of general global tool which has some regional specificity and  it does look at things like how many cold nights are you going to lose which is very  
**1:25:29-1:25:49:**  important for certain fruits and nuts and so on the heat days and precipitation and  the length of dry periods and all these things amount of snowfall that changes terrain um  it's really important to look if you're thinking about a crop that's going to live 40 or 50  
**1:25:49-1:26:12:**  or 100 or 200 years uh can it live there now and can it live in all the foreseeable futures  um so i think that sort of makes us look a little more to crops that have a um a broad  amplitude of climates they're suitable to rather than a very narrow range um and also  
**1:26:12-1:26:32:**  for those of us in the northern hemisphere probably to look to things from farther south  or uh lower in elevation than where we are now um uh or at least where we're not on the  extreme southern end of their range you know um if it also extends quite a bit to the south  
**1:26:32-1:26:55:**  or or lower in elevation than you then you're probably okay uh in terms of cold and heat  but then there's the the precipitation questions and it may be that um uh places that do not  require irrigation now will require them um looking at projections for uh eastern europe  
**1:26:55-1:27:16:**  for example um in a four degrees of warming world the sahara desert moves up into hungary  so um that would be a very extreme change to hungarian agriculture very very extreme  um and actually a lot of the mediterranean region sort of goes sahara in those in those  
**1:27:16-1:27:36:**  scenarios so um thinking about uh uh irrigation if you want to keep growing the same crops  would be the very least you would want to do um uh in that kind of a scenario and thinking  about really changing crops all together the question is what can you plant now that will  
**1:27:36-1:27:52:**  still work great maybe you can grow olives in 80 years but you can't grow olives now  don't plant olives yet but but maybe pomegranates are a good mix right maybe they are suitable  now and into the future so it's just another layer to add is not only what grows where  
**1:27:52-1:28:16:**  i live but what what grows in these three different possible futures here it makes it  harder um and certain crops like um mulberries and and uh like our our native black walnut  here that have a very wide range of of climates that they can handle are may be a wiser investment  
**1:28:16-1:28:36:**  i think um than very delicate things that are very particular about um about uh where  and how they grow so eric where can people find out about your work uh and every all  the projects you have been involved in great well i i have a couple of blogs going uh at  
**1:28:36-1:28:58:**  um perennial solutions and paradise lot and uh and uh my carbon farming site but the current  place is i have a patreon campaign patreon.com slash eric tomesmeyer um where i'm um uh posting  all kinds of things about what i'm working on and for those who who subscribe there i  
**1:28:58-1:29:17:**  post uh excerpts and things that early versions of things that they can take a look at and  things like that well thank you very much and uh until next time then yes thank you  thanks very much thank you for listening and making it till the end as usual all the relevant  
**1:29:17-1:29:43:**  links are uh under the episodes and really feel free to reach out to us through our social  media or our website to let us know if you have any questions or a guest that you would  like to suggest  