---
title: #34 Building relationships to scale agroforestry with Kaitie Adams
---

### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2022-01-31)  

**0:00:00-0:00:16:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:23-0:00:27:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  these challenges.  
**0:00:33-0:00:38:**  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Hi and welcome to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:00:50-0:00:54:**  Those of you who tuned in to episode 33 will be familiar with the Savannah Institute by  now.  Well, today I talk with Katie Adams, she leads their Illinois Demonstration Farm program  
**0:01:00-0:01:05:**  and helps build community through agroforestry education across the state and beyond.  As we have progressed in the podcast series and in our own personal experiences, Dimitri  and I have come to realize how important the human relationships and cultural perceptions  
**0:01:16-0:01:19:**  were to successful agroforestry projects.  Sometimes even more so than technical or economic constraints that we have often exposed here.  This is why I'm so thrilled that Katie and I explored together how the Savannah Institute  
**0:01:30-0:01:35:**  builds relationships with different stakeholders to make agroforestry projects become a reality  in the Midwest.  We engage with themes such as culture in relation to agroforestry and the multiple ways the  
**0:01:41-0:01:44:**  Savannah Institute is leveraging change.  We also took the time to discuss their demonstration sites, their design methodology working with  local farmers, as well as debriefing on certain of their mistakes and lessons learned.  
**0:01:54-0:01:55:**  Enjoy the episode.  Hi, Katie, and welcome to the podcast.  Hello, thank you so much for having me.  
**0:02:02-0:02:04:**  I'm so excited to be here.  Maybe we could start by you telling us a bit about how you got involved with agroforestry.  Sure.  
**0:02:11-0:02:13:**  It's kind of a long story.  I feel like my trajectory is an anthropologist turned no-till veggie farmer turned agroforester.  So these things don't seem to be related, but there's actually quite a few of us, at  
**0:02:25-0:02:33:**  least in the United States, that have kind of wandered our way to trees and agroforestry.  But my background in training is really in relationship building through my work in agroforestry.  So my master's degree focused on the ways that small-scale farmers build relationships  
**0:02:46-0:02:53:**  through seed saving and the exchange of mushroom cultures and start to build kind of regionally  adapted varieties such as garlic or ginger and start to share knowledges to prop up kind  of entire farming systems.  
**0:03:02-0:03:08:**  And so my career in farming kind of started through doing that work where I realized that  I enjoyed the actual work of agriculture way more than I enjoyed the writing and thinking  about agriculture, although I still do that today.  
**0:03:19-0:03:25:**  And then I became a no-till veggie farmer and did that for close to four years.  And my body was really tired.  And I became increasingly interested in the trees that were growing as part of the no-till  
**0:03:35-0:03:40:**  veggie system that I was working in at a farm and nonprofit called Earth Dance Organic Farm  School.  And I had pretty intensive vegetable fruit alley cropping happening, although I had no  
**0:03:46-0:03:49:**  idea it was called alley cropping.  We kind of called it permaculture and inner cropping and things like that.  And when I decided to move on from that job, I was looking for work within the more perennial  
**0:04:01-0:04:08:**  realm and trying to look for things that were kind of outside of the vegetable farming background.  And I came to find a job with Kevin Wohl, who's the co-executive director of the Savannah  Institute.  
**0:04:15-0:04:21:**  And that job really introduced me to what agroforestry was, because I honestly had never  heard that term until about four years ago when I found that job.  So kind of a winding path.  
**0:04:29-0:04:30:**  Yeah.  Yeah.  But it's amazing to see all the different ways people interact with agroforestry as  
**0:04:35-0:04:36:**  well.  And also that's why we wanted to talk with you today and also explore a bit about that  more social side to agroforestry and farming and creating relationships and creating change  
**0:04:46-0:04:48:**  through relationships.  But before we go to that, why don't you tell us a bit more about the Savannah Institute  and how it operates?  
**0:04:54-0:05:00:**  So the Savannah Institute is a nonprofit organization that's based in the Midwestern United States.  And we're really focused on the catalyzation of widespread agroforestry in the Midwestern  U.S. and beyond.  
**0:05:08-0:05:11:**  So we do this in a couple different ways.  We kind of focus on three different areas.  The first is research.  
**0:05:18-0:05:24:**  So we have folks on staff that are really looking at what are the productive, resilient  tree crops for fruit and fodder for agroforestry systems that would work here in the Midwest  specifically.  
**0:05:32-0:05:36:**  And then also looking at building robust supply chains.  So what are all the other structures that are needed to make agroforestry not only possible  but profitable here in the Midwest but also the greater United States as well?  
**0:05:48-0:05:53:**  And then we have a research team that's also looking at different things like water quality  and carbon sequestration and research around the practices that we employ on the landscape.  And then the second big arm of what we do can kind of be classified as generally the  
**0:06:06-0:06:10:**  farming systems that create agroforestry.  So looking at the different ways that these practices create economic and ecological resilience.  And this is kind of where our demonstration farm program ties in.  
**0:06:21-0:06:27:**  So the Savannah Institute operates a network of demonstration farms to show what agroforestry  looks like in different places and all the possibilities.  And then we also have an apprenticeship program which pairs folks that are interested in learning  
**0:06:38-0:06:44:**  how to do agroforestry with mentor farmers that have been doing this work for an extended  amount of time and have an immense amount of knowledge and wisdom to share.  And then we also just offer a ton of online and in-person resources such as field days  
**0:06:53-0:07:01:**  and events and an annual perennial farm gathering as well as an online course that's currently  free right now to everyone.  So we've been building this online course to really make agroforestry education accessible.  
**0:07:10-0:07:17:**  And then I guess the third kind of arm of what we do is community development and relationship  building.  So humans are an integral part of our ecosystems and a major part of agroforestry.  
**0:07:24-0:07:31:**  So it's one of our focuses to help build communities around this work.  So bringing together farmers and researchers and investors and folks that are really interested  in making agroforestry a force on the landscape.  
**0:07:45-0:07:49:**  Given all these amazing things, what is your role specifically then?  Yeah, so my role is, I guess my title is community agroforestry.  And I do this work in the state of Illinois here in the Midwest, which is a major corn  
**0:07:59-0:08:01:**  and soy producing state.  Most of the agriculture that happens here is corn and soybean production with a little  bit of wheat, but mostly those two major crops.  
**0:08:11-0:08:19:**  And broadly, my role is to help farmers, landowners, organizations, and agencies see agroforestry  as possible on their landscapes.  So that's a lot of education.  
**0:08:25-0:08:30:**  It's a lot of outreach and just a lot of really long, deep conversations with folks to really  understand what's happening in their lives and in their farm landscapes.  How can agroforestry fit into that and be productive for the ecosystem, be productive  
**0:08:43-0:08:47:**  for their families and for the community at large?  Because we really need supportive systems that go all the way from the farm scale to  the legislature to make sure that we have the support and the funding and also the acceptance  
**0:09:02-0:09:06:**  that's needed for more trees to be on the farm landscape.  Well yeah, that's fascinating.  And it echoes with something I've realized recently in the process of planting trees  
**0:09:13-0:09:20:**  on the farm where I'm farming and I'm not owning the land, I'm renting it off and having  to convince the farmer that's leasing the land to me that it would be valuable to add  trees.  
**0:09:26-0:09:30:**  And many of the obstacles aren't economic because there's funding at the moment.  It's not even technical because it's simply putting hedges out.  We're not attempting to do something so complex, but it's definitely cultural.  
**0:09:37-0:09:43:**  And it's about his perception and understanding of what the landscape should be.  What was it before?  Where should it go?  
**0:09:46-0:09:47:**  What are the rules of trees?  And I find that fascinating because we often overemphasize more the economics and the technical  with Dimitri in the podcast.  
**0:09:54-0:09:57:**  And increasingly I'm realizing that a lot of the blockages are much more on a cultural  level.  So what's your opinion if that's something you experienced as well when you work in community  
**0:10:02-0:10:03:**  building?  Yeah, I mean the situation that you find yourself in is a situation that we find ourselves in  here in the Midwestern United States.  
**0:10:09-0:10:15:**  So it's something that's shared I think across a lot of different geographies and landscapes.  And I think your point of people thinking of what should a farm look like or how should  a farm function is a little bit at the heart of that because so many, as you said, so many  
**0:10:30-0:10:37:**  of those hard points are cultural and they're not economic or ecological because we have  good data, right?  We have the numbers to show that trees are sinking carbon, they're purifying water, they  
**0:10:46-0:10:55:**  increasingly can create more production and more profits per acre than say grain monocrops.  But it doesn't look right to folks.  And the time scale is completely different.  
**0:11:01-0:11:07:**  We're so used to an annual cropping cycle or even a two or three year cropping cycle  or rotations.  And when we bring trees into it, we're suddenly making a long-term investment.  
**0:11:14-0:11:19:**  I mean, these are things that are going to be on the landscape for a long time.  And folks, especially here in the United States, I think we have a pretty short memory and  a pretty short history.  
**0:11:26-0:11:31:**  So we think of things in one generation instead of in multiple generations.  And trees force us to confront that we're not going to be able to control something  or a farm or a landscape or a system for one lifetime.  
**0:11:43-0:11:49:**  Trees kind of force us to look beyond one singular lifetime and look more to the future.  And so those are really hard conversations to have with folks because ultimately they're  conversations around value and timelines and legacy and all of these things that annual  
**0:12:01-0:12:07:**  cropping systems just don't force us to look at.  And so once you've established that this is cultural, how do you actually proceed in trying  to take the conversation forward?  
**0:12:15-0:12:19:**  What kind of stories or what angles do you take in engaging that dialogue?  Yeah, this is something that I definitely don't have a for sure or clear answer on because  it's something that we're continually working on.  
**0:12:28-0:12:35:**  And every person we talk to is different and they come to agroforestry from all different  types of backgrounds and histories and passions and things that they value.  So oftentimes the conversation around agroforestry isn't one that we start right away, but it's  
**0:12:50-0:12:52:**  one that comes in a little bit later.  So for folks that come to us and want to do agroforestry, it's a little bit of a different  conversation.  
**0:12:58-0:13:05:**  For say farmers or landowners that we're looking to work with or specifically in situations  where the landowner is very interested in agroforestry, but the farmer that they work  with is not familiar or maybe very hesitant or skeptical, then it's often a conversation  
**0:13:16-0:13:24:**  around, well, I just want to know about you as a person, as a farmer, the types of things  that you're interested in.  Why do you do this work?  
**0:13:27-0:13:29:**  What motivates you to do it?  Is it because you're called to farm?  Is it something that's a family legacy?  
**0:13:38-0:13:44:**  Is it something where you feel like you're contributing to the greater good or feeding  folks in your community or oftentimes the United States, the line is we feed the world,  so farmers feed the world.  
**0:13:54-0:14:00:**  So having an understanding of how people view themselves within their farms and the larger  kind of farm landscape and ecosystem can then help us figure out how we can build bridges  within that.  
**0:14:07-0:14:14:**  So for example, I had a meeting with a farmer that I work with on Friday and we sat and  talked for an hour and a half and maybe only 15 minutes was actually about agroforestry,  where we were talking about plans for next year and what was going to be happening on  
**0:14:23-0:14:26:**  the landscape and the lease and those sort of things.  But it was only about 15 minutes and the whole hour and 15 was more generally around me asking  lots of questions about his year this year and asking clarifying questions about some  
**0:14:38-0:14:45:**  of his processes and some other work that he's engaged in off the landscape that we  work on together.  And then we also talked about our families.  
**0:14:49-0:14:54:**  I'm about to have my first child and so he was giving me some words of wisdom and talking  about his children and things like that.  And to me, that sort of deep relationship building is extremely important for this because  
**0:15:05-0:15:09:**  agroforestry is a long-term investment.  And when we make long-term investments in people, then we're able to make long-term  investments on the landscape too because we've come to a mutual trust with each other because  
**0:15:22-0:15:29:**  I value him as a person, I value him as a farmer and I value him as a partner.  So if we can trust each other to make good decisions and be transparent, then we have  a transformational relationship instead of one that's just transactional, where we're  
**0:15:41-0:15:48:**  each trying to get as much of what we can from the relationship or the landscape.  So I think this focus on transformational relationships is really key because that's  really what we're trying to do within perennial systems in agroforestry is make transformational  
**0:15:59-0:16:00:**  choices.  So things that are going to take a landscape or a growing system from one place to another  in a way that is regenerative and based on good relationships.  
**0:16:17-0:16:22:**  And just to understand how you work, because you were talking about long-term relationships.  So that means that when you work with farmers or a landowner, you really accompany them  in the long term.  
**0:16:29-0:16:35:**  You kind of help them design, but then also kind of stay present with them on the long  run.  So yeah, so within our demonstration farm program, we're always around and we're constantly  
**0:16:42-0:16:46:**  checking in with the landowners, with the farmers.  We're inviting them to present and be present at field days and educational events.  We pay them for their time as needed as well.  
**0:16:55-0:17:03:**  So the time to help design systems or to come see a practice that we're wanting to implement  on their farm landscape, like yeah, we know that you're taking time out of your life and  your job to come do this.  
**0:17:11-0:17:15:**  So we'd be happy to compensate you for that.  And so we want to be there for the long haul.  So when folks work with me and when folks are with Savannah Institute, we're invested  
**0:17:25-0:17:27:**  long-term in that.  And there's always going to be one or two people that you're always going to see or  talk to so that you have that constant thread of consistency.  
**0:17:36-0:17:43:**  And then within our technical service provider program, which pairs landowners and farmers  with someone at the Savannah Institute that can walk them through the process of planning  for agroforestry, applying for funding, doing design work, and then helping them find resources  
**0:17:54-0:18:02:**  to put that agroforestry design on the landscape, we pair the landowner, the farmer, with someone  in their state.  So there is a community agroforestry and a technical service provider in both the state  
**0:18:09-0:18:11:**  of Illinois and Wisconsin.  And so those pairs work with a farmer or landowner through the entire process of what I like  to call ideation to implementation, which is kind of a mouthful and not something that  
**0:18:25-0:18:29:**  I would probably use with farmers or landowners.  That's kind of the way we think about it is you're going to have a stable relationship  from just the idea of agroforestry to tree planting.  
**0:18:38-0:18:43:**  And then you'll have a resource within the Savannah Institute kind of beyond that too.  But ultimately what we hope will happen and what we're building towards is that once trees  are in the ground, folks can create a community of practice for themselves so that farmers  
**0:18:57-0:19:03:**  and landowners are regularly interacting and sharing ideas and resources amongst themselves  in ways that are more regionally located and adapted than someone at the Savannah Institute  who's just there.  
**0:19:12-0:19:16:**  Because all the knowledge base is being created on the ground.  And we have some of that through our demonstration farm program, but it's really the farmers  and landowners that are really pushing innovation, are really building these connected systems.  
**0:19:28-0:19:34:**  And at a certain point we want to step out of the way and let folks guide that ship.  That sounds amazing.  We always feel the need for being able to share experiences in a really localized manner.  
**0:19:41-0:19:45:**  And yeah, as more and more projects get out of the ground, definitely that will probably  happen on a much more local scale.  And that's very exciting.  
**0:19:50-0:19:55:**  I still wanted to understand, when going back to these perceptions of agroforestry and getting  back to understanding what people, how they think about themselves and about their farming  practices, in your experience, what has been like a driver for change and what's been the  
**0:20:08-0:20:14:**  elements of agroforestry that have been interesting farmers or landowners for that matter?  What kind of part of the story attracts people?  It's different for every person.  
**0:20:21-0:20:28:**  So for the most part, everyone that we've worked with comes to it from a different angle.  So some folks are really interested in agroforestry for climate resilience.  So their main motivation is tree planting and putting in agroforestry systems that will  
**0:20:43-0:20:52:**  directly sequester carbon and build soil health and do the work that the majority of farmers  in their area necessarily aren't doing on their farms yet.  And really wanting to be a leader within that climate resilience movement.  
**0:21:03-0:21:10:**  Some folks are really interested in creating strong legacies for their families.  So one farmer that we worked with here in Illinois, he was really interested in planting  chestnuts to keep his family engaged in the farm.  
**0:21:20-0:21:26:**  So he was, I think he was maybe the third or fourth generation on this farm landscape.  He wasn't currently farming and he was seeing his family become less and less engaged with  the family farm.  
**0:21:34-0:21:39:**  So they had a family meeting and discussed how chestnuts might work within that.  And then everyone agreed that chestnuts would be a great way for us all to stay engaged.  And then they planted acres of chestnuts where it was four generations that were doing the  
**0:21:51-0:21:55:**  planting and actively engaged in the business planning.  So now folks have reason to come back to the farm and to stay engaged on that land.  And then some folks are purely profit driven.  
**0:22:04-0:22:11:**  So they see the economic opportunities within that and have the capital resources to invest  the time and money to set up a longer term perennial system.  And then there's folks like my husband and I and many of our young farming friends that  
**0:22:23-0:22:26:**  don't see any other option.  But to include perennials within our farm business planning because we don't have options  for crop insurance.  
**0:22:35-0:22:40:**  We don't have options for subsidies through the government.  So it's up to us to build our own insurance into our farm businesses.  And we see perennials as part of that long term business planning and farm stability.  
**0:22:54-0:22:59:**  Well, and after hearing all this diversity of motives, probably there's not going to  be one answer either at all.  But I'm wondering, as you see things change as you engage with different people, what  
**0:23:07-0:23:10:**  do you see as the main obstacles that need to be dealt with in order to really shift  this agricultural culture and kind of change scale?  Because it feels at the moment like it's been a while now that there's a lot of initiatives  
**0:23:19-0:23:26:**  with agroforestry, but it's still quite unique projects and we're still needing to kind of  shift gears and really seeing it come up at a massive scale.  Yeah, I think in the US, I think there's a big barriers that we talked about earlier  
**0:23:37-0:23:41:**  are around cultural ideas about farming and productivity.  So what makes a farm and what makes a farm productive?  We specifically see this when it comes to quote unquote taking land out of production  
**0:23:53-0:23:57:**  for agroforestry, which is kind of an oxymoron, right?  Because we're taking land out of production to put it into longer term production, but  it's not seen as productive.  
**0:24:06-0:24:10:**  Because we think of productivity in the United States as yield.  And if we're not getting a certain bushel per acre of grain, then it's not a productive  acre.  
**0:24:18-0:24:22:**  And so that also ties into that's not just like an idea that comes out of nowhere.  It's really tied to the way that the US Department of Agriculture and other sort of government  and federal entities and funders look at what farming is.  
**0:24:34-0:24:42:**  So our commodity system that basically creates and maintains markets for particular crops  pretty much ensures that those are the only things that we see on our landscape at any  great scale because they have the commodity markets that are supported and commodity markets  
**0:24:53-0:24:59:**  that the government ensures will continue in production because there's an incredible  amount of land and resources that are tied into that.  And also our crop insurance system here in the US also ensures that only particular crops  
**0:25:07-0:25:12:**  stay on the landscape because there's only particular crops and particular systems that  can be insured.  So this is slowly changing, which is really exciting to see.  
**0:25:18-0:25:23:**  So now we're starting to see some like whole farm revenue insurance policies.  We're starting to see some more diversified smaller scale insurance options, but still  many of those are outside of what diversified civically farmers can afford because you constantly  
**0:25:36-0:25:40:**  have to balance the risk versus the cost.  And some folks, as I mentioned earlier, decided to put that cost into diversifying their systems  even more rather than taking out an insurance policy.  
**0:25:53-0:25:56:**  But all of that also comes down to access to capital.  So if you go to a traditional bank in a rural area like where I live and you say, I want  to put in a alley cropping system with perennial fruits and nuts, annual vegetable production,  
**0:26:10-0:26:14:**  and have livestock rotate throughout that, the bank is going to say, I've never seen  this before.  This is incredibly risky.  
**0:26:17-0:26:23:**  There is zero way that we're going to give you an operating loan to start up this business.  But there's also creative ways that folks are crowdfunding capital or working within  government or financial programs to finance one part of it and then incorporating a whole  
**0:26:37-0:26:44:**  second element into it that maybe they're not expressing or they're letting them know  that this is the second part of my farm business, but it's not going to impact the funding that  you're giving me at all.  
**0:26:53-0:27:02:**  And then I think one of the biggest ones for civically young beginning and returning farmers  is the land consolidation and land price in the US is distressing to say the very least  and makes systems and especially perennial systems seem impossible.  
**0:27:17-0:27:23:**  When you're on rented lands, number one, it can be incredibly expensive.  Number two, there's no guarantee unless you have an extremely long term lease that you're  going to be able to be on that land for a long period of time and planting perennials  
**0:27:35-0:27:41:**  becomes a hard thing to do when you don't know if your financial and time investment  will pay off on that rented land.  And here in Champaign County where I live in Illinois, land is routinely selling for  
**0:27:54-0:28:01:**  between like 17,000 and 20,000 US dollars an acre, which I wish I had the hectare and  Euro conversion to that.  I probably should have done that.  
**0:28:06-0:28:15:**  It basically ensures that if you don't have some sort of wealth base, you will not be  able to purchase land, which can be a horrific barrier.  But there's also, I think, an opportunity within that as well for us to really rethink  
**0:28:33-0:28:41:**  how we work on the landscape and how we view ownership of lands.  In the United States specifically, all land is native land and it was stolen land.  So the ownership of land is something personally for me that is something that I'm working  
**0:28:56-0:29:01:**  through and trying to square with.  Agroforestry is an indigenous farming system and land ownership is a colonial system.  So how do we figure out systems that work, that honor and not appropriate all the knowledge  
**0:29:17-0:29:25:**  and work that's been done by the native peoples here while creating new structures of ownership  and access that aren't reliant on single entity or single person ownership.  Do you have examples of maybe some initiatives or very localized projects where that's been  
**0:29:38-0:29:42:**  attempted and offers some interesting avenues to explore?  Sure.  I mean, here, I'll start with my work because that's the work that I know the best and then  
**0:29:47-0:29:52:**  can provide some examples that I've been really inspired by.  I'm really looking right now, my work for the past year and moving forward is really  focused on how can we utilize public agricultural lands for agroforestry.  
**0:30:03-0:30:08:**  So for example, here in the state of Illinois, we have 85,000 acres of agricultural land  that are currently rented out every year for the most part, grain agriculture.  So that's 85,000 acres that's owned by the state that currently has not many conservation  
**0:30:21-0:30:23:**  requirements in their leases.  It's mostly the same type of farming everywhere.  And they're often close to sensitive ecological areas such as waterways or protected wildlife  
**0:30:31-0:30:32:**  areas.  So agroforestry has an opportunity to really help protect those fragile ecosystems by also  providing a pathway for young beginning and returning farmers to utilize land that supposedly  
**0:30:49-0:30:54:**  belongs to us all if it's public lands.  So I'm talking, my work in the next year is going to be focused on how can we make that  possible here in Illinois.  
**0:31:02-0:31:06:**  And I've been really inspired by some work that's being done specifically in the city  of Chicago by the Chicago Food Policy Council.  And they've been working with how to utilize public and city lots for vegetable production  
**0:31:19-0:31:26:**  for folks and getting areas that are publicly owned by park systems or the city of Chicago  or other municipalities or utilities within the city that is just kind of sitting vacant.  So how can folks utilize these public lands that are serving no purpose except as land  
**0:31:40-0:31:43:**  holding to produce food?  And they've really convened a pretty amazing network of folks that control those lands  with farmers that are looking for land access and are creating some really phenomenal resources  
**0:31:55-0:31:57:**  around that.  I've also been really inspired by work that's happening forever in Mexico with communal  land holdings and the recognition of the Mexican government of folks to hold land in community  
**0:32:14-0:32:22:**  so that community level folks can make decisions of what happens on those landscapes.  One of the ways that colonialism has really destroyed Native communities here in the United  States is through allotment systems where treaties allocated large tracts of land to  
**0:32:34-0:32:39:**  Native communities that were communally held and then the United States government started  allotting those to particular people and families.  So they end up breaking apart landscapes that were once held by everyone.  
**0:32:49-0:32:56:**  So it's been digging into that history and trying to learn what other folks are doing  has been kind of key to figuring out how this might work in Illinois.  So those are just a couple of things that have been inspiring for me in this work.  
**0:33:08-0:33:13:**  And there's examples of this happening all around the world as well.  So these are just tiny snippets of lots of different work that's happening in places.  It's fascinating, but I guess what's even more difficult in your situation compared  
**0:33:24-0:33:29:**  to, for example, Chicago, where there was vacant land is that here there's different  uses of the land that are competing because then that land that's being already leased  to broadacre crops to farmers who...  
**0:33:39-0:33:43:**  And how do you include these people, if so, how do you do?  And it's quite a similar thing that we have in France where farms are getting bigger and  bigger because of the subsidy system and because of a lack of a younger generation and because  
**0:33:53-0:33:59:**  it's always more advantageous to sell to your neighbor at a high price than try and have  young people take over which don't have much capital.  So again, it's linked to this capital idea, but it's a really tricky question because  
**0:34:06-0:34:12:**  everything's intertwined, but between these more labor intensive systems, which have the  potential to bring back people on the landscapes and the way the land is being used currently,  there's quite a big gap and it's really not easy, isn't it, to mix everything and make  
**0:34:25-0:34:30:**  sure that no one's marginalized in the process because that would be counterproductive as  well probably.  Yeah, I mean, this is a really big thing because we don't want to...  
**0:34:39-0:34:48:**  It's really difficult because we don't want to displace anyone from their livelihoods.  So when we talk about agroforestry taking land on a production, that's really the conversation  we're having, is we're taking money from someone else that has their farm business based on  
**0:35:01-0:35:05:**  this landscape or as part of their farm business.  And I think one of the things that is so unique about agroforestry is that we can have multiple  farm businesses and multiple farming systems on one landscape.  
**0:35:17-0:35:28:**  And so this actually forces us to share in a way that we're not comfortable with doing,  but I think there's major opportunities to have both an older generation and a younger  generation operating on the farm landscape and doing two separate things that work together.  
**0:35:41-0:35:46:**  So alley cropping to me is a huge example of this.  And we've been working through different structures of how can alley cropping support two folks  or two businesses on one landscape?  
**0:35:59-0:36:00:**  What's the type of planning that's needed?  What are the type of lease structures that are needed to make sure that each party is  protected and supported and has opportunity to say on what happens on either side, but  
**0:36:15-0:36:20:**  also to ensure that people are working for mutual benefit.  And it also ensures that for young farmers and beginning farmers that they have acreage  that they can have the capacity to manage.  
**0:36:32-0:36:40:**  So oftentimes, green farmers have equipment that allows them to manage hundreds or thousands  of acres at a time, and those machines cost an immense amount of money, $500,000 to $1  million, something that I would never have access to.  
**0:36:52-0:36:58:**  But if we take 100, say 100 acre field, and we put 10 of those acres into alley cropping,  I could probably handle 10 acres and find the opportunity and figure out ways of management  to manage those 10 acres.  
**0:37:09-0:37:15:**  For some folks, that's more than enough land to do the type of farm business that they  would be interested in starting and running.  So I think there's major opportunities to really workshop and think through ways that  
**0:37:24-0:37:31:**  we can build multiple businesses, multiple generations, and multiple practices on one  landscape.  And I think one of the big goals within that also has to be a transition of that landscape.  
**0:37:38-0:37:45:**  So if we're taking it from conventional chemically managed grain production and then starting  to put trees in there, the practices have to change, even to accommodate the trees to  ensure that the trees and whatever crop is being grown is done in a safe manner that  
**0:37:57-0:38:01:**  isn't harming the crop that's coming off those perennial acres.  So it's already starting the conversation of transformation and saying that for this  to work for both of us, we both need to make some concessions.  
**0:38:10-0:38:16:**  And with alley cropping over time, the trees will start to impact, say, a summer grain  like corn or soybeans that are being grown.  So then there's an opportunity to transition to wheat, winter wheat or winter annuals.  
**0:38:25-0:38:32:**  And if the tree rows are close enough together, then even winter annuals become untenable  on that landscape.  So then, oh, now we have no choice but to bring animals back on the landscape.  
**0:38:37-0:38:43:**  So then we have a corn and soybean field that's been completely transformed into a kind of  multi-story silvopasture system.  That's the dream, right?  
**0:38:48-0:38:50:**  That's the ultimate goal.  So I think there's opportunities to really dream and figure out how we can make this  work for everyone because we are going to see a huge transition of land.  
**0:39:03-0:39:04:**  It's a beautiful dream.  Yeah, it's a beautiful dream, right?  Sorry.  
**0:39:07-0:39:10:**  No, but I mean, it's a beautiful dream in the sense that it makes so much sense and  it probably needs to happen that way if it is going to be successful.  But it just requires an incredible amount of flexibility from everyone involved.  
**0:39:19-0:39:25:**  And that's not always easy for someone who's been doing things in a certain way and has  a certain representation of what their farm is.  Going back to that, then being able to say, like, no, it doesn't matter, you know, just  
**0:39:33-0:39:36:**  change crops and then evolve and then bring in back animals.  Again, I don't think it's necessarily that it's technically impossible.  It's just that at the moment you have to find the right people willing to engage in that.  
**0:39:45-0:39:49:**  Yeah, and the right people is kind of the hard thing, right?  So there's the willing people and then there's the people that can be convinced to change  a little bit and then there's folks that won't be able to change at all.  
**0:40:03-0:40:09:**  And I think that one of the things that working with public lands provides an opportunity  for is if the land is public, then the government or an entity or agency related to the government  is the one that sets the lease standards, which means they have the power to change  
**0:40:23-0:40:27:**  the lease standards.  So you could say, well, what's easier, to change an individual or to change a government  entity?  
**0:40:34-0:40:38:**  I don't have the answer to that question.  But I think there's an argument to be made for public entities that agroforestry can  help achieve many of the goals that, for example, the state of Illinois has set for themselves  
**0:40:49-0:40:54:**  when it comes to nutrient loss reduction, where we're pouring, you know, nitrogen and  phosphorus into our waterways at extremely damaging and high rates.  Like agroforestry is proven to improve that water quality.  
**0:41:04-0:41:10:**  They have carbon sequestration and greenhouse gas emission caps that they have to meet.  You know, all of these things can show that agroforestry can be a tool to help reach the  goals of the state of Illinois.  
**0:41:19-0:41:27:**  So whether or not that's going to be a fruitful argument is kind of my work in the next year  to see what's possible.  Because you have to give up power for systems to transition.  
**0:41:34-0:41:39:**  Someone has to give up power, land, opportunity or capital for it to happen.  So we really need to look at what's the mechanisms that is going to force that transfer of power.  Because it doesn't seem like folks are willingly giving it up.  
**0:41:52-0:42:00:**  So what mechanisms can we utilize that kind of force those power structures to shift?  So a lot of your job actually in the coming months or years is going to be lobbying like  public bodies in a sense and trying to make that voice being heard.  
**0:42:11-0:42:16:**  I have no idea how easy it is to get access to that decision body because here in Europe,  we're on the European level and the European Union for all the decisions around the cap  policy.  
**0:42:23-0:42:29:**  And that's obviously at a level where an organization of the size of the Savannah Institute, even  on a national level, is quite hard to get to the bottom of it or to get any leverage  for change because it's so huge, you know, and there's so many interests.  
**0:42:39-0:42:45:**  So yeah, is the state level in the US like actually an approachable level of power?  I think it is.  It's yet to be seen, but I think this is where the power of community really comes in.  
**0:42:53-0:43:01:**  Because me as one person or us as the Savannah Institute only has a particular power and  a particular audience and a level of voice that we can utilize within state or federal  structures.  
**0:43:11-0:43:18:**  But when we work together with other organizations that are tapped into particular relationships  or networks or are really skilled at amplifying voices and making connections between the  folks that are writing the laws and the folks that are enforcing the laws, then we have  
**0:43:29-0:43:36:**  an opportunity for our message around trees and agroforestry to become tied in with greater  arguments and greater work around public well-being, environmental protection, carbon sequestration  in ways that we wouldn't if we were doing it alone.  
**0:43:48-0:43:53:**  So we're really looking to work rather than the Savannah Institute or me just as an individual  person kind of launching this work, we're really looking to partner with other organizations  that are doing like-minded work so that we can kind of create a connected and larger  
**0:44:08-0:44:13:**  powered block for action.  In the United States at least, the way our Constitution is constructed is states have  quite a bit of power within the structure of the United States.  
**0:44:26-0:44:35:**  I think for Illinois, we have a pretty progressive governor right now and within the whole United  States government, we have a little bit more of a progressive push.  And so the time is now to try to get some of these things moving and we'll see what  
**0:44:47-0:44:49:**  happens.  But I think that there is an opportunity and especially for young folks, it's now or never  on some of these things.  
**0:45:01-0:45:06:**  So we just have to keep trying things until we find something that sticks.  So we're going to fail a lot and we're going to go down a lot of dead ends but we just  got to keep going and a term we use kind of often at Savannah Institute is building the  
**0:45:17-0:45:19:**  ship while we sail it.  And that's kind of what we're doing here too is building the ship while we sail it.  So I have no answers and hope is the only thing keeping us going.  
**0:45:28-0:45:35:**  Well, I wish you a lot of luck in this endeavor and yeah, hopefully you'll be successful because  it is a very beautiful dream and I think it's good to have these visions that keep us going.  I wanted to hear a bit more about the demonstration sites but before we go there, one point that  
**0:45:47-0:45:51:**  you mentioned I find interesting is the access to capital.  And I'm wondering, does the Savannah Institute then help, like let's say you have people  that approach you and they're saying, okay, I'm a landowner and I want to have agroforestry  
**0:46:00-0:46:03:**  systems or I'm a farmer.  Do you also like put them in contact with capital?  Is it something that you fundraise in the name of Savannah Institute?  
**0:46:09-0:46:12:**  How does this kind of finance aspect work?  Yeah, it's something that we're doing a lot more work on now.  Savannah Institute's really grown in the past seven years and we've gone from mostly just  
**0:46:22-0:46:28:**  like an education and outreach kind of nonprofit to one that's more actively engaged in helping  farmers and landowners get agroforestry out.  And so one of the things that we're doing now through our technical service provider  
**0:46:36-0:46:43:**  program is specifically connecting farmers and landowners to federal funding through  the Natural Resource Conservation Service, which is a nationwide program that's administered  at the state level that cost shares and sometimes covers the full cost of certain agroforestry  
**0:46:57-0:46:59:**  practice installation.  So things like alley cropping, wind breaks, woody repairing and buffers, silva pasture  establishment, there's cost share funding opportunities where the NRCS will reimburse  
**0:47:15-0:47:22:**  you 30 to basically 100% of the cost of installation of these systems.  And so our TSPs work directly with NRCS to help people apply for that funding and get  their designs approved.  
**0:47:32-0:47:35:**  So that's one mechanism.  Another mechanism is through sort of partnership grant programs where we try to work with financial  institutions and other entities to kind of innovate different insurance strategies, capital  
**0:47:53-0:48:00:**  finance strategies, loan opportunities for agroforestry to one, provide those opportunities  to farmers and landowners, but also two, to push those institutions to open their structures  and their minds a little bit to the opportunity and the reality of risk when it comes to agroforestry  
**0:48:17-0:48:19:**  systems.  So I'd say there's a couple different angles and in the past year we've hired a business  analyst on staff, which has been absolutely amazing in showing what's possible and asking  
**0:48:33-0:48:39:**  really tough questions around like, well, how much does it actually cost to design an  install a complex, you know, alley cropping system?  And what are the actual financial projections and returns on those?  
**0:48:48-0:48:54:**  So one thing that we've been working on in partnership with some other entities is sort  of those actual ground truth cost projection models around different practices.  And so that's something that's in the works now, but it's also something that's really  
**0:49:05-0:49:11:**  needed for folks to make informed decisions on how they're going to incorporate these  things onto their landscapes.  Yeah, that would be amazing once that's released, like to get some, maybe do an episode with  
**0:49:19-0:49:25:**  you guys and get that information as well, because it's so hard to get like solid economic  data on such complex systems.  And that's definitely something I think that would be interesting to get an insight into  
**0:49:33-0:49:37:**  for all our listeners as well as for ourselves.  And just on this idea of community building, we've explored a lot like community in the  sense of, you know, connecting farmers and landowners and lobbying and the greater like  
**0:49:47-0:49:51:**  political or state level community in a sense.  But do you do also things on a more like localized levels with maybe schools or local communities  and building links with Agroforestry as well?  
**0:49:59-0:50:03:**  Yeah, that's something that we are working more towards in the next couple of years,  especially with our demonstration farms.  So we really see the demonstration farms as being hubs for that type of more localized  
**0:50:12-0:50:14:**  community building.  And so for the past two years and I should say two seasons, we've been really focusing  on just getting those systems off the ground and learning how they work and learning those  
**0:50:24-0:50:30:**  landscapes and making mistakes and recording those mistakes so that we can share with others.  And the long term goals of these sites are to become those locations of community building.  So working with K through 12 education, so really introducing young people to what Agroforestry  
**0:50:44-0:50:51:**  is and what might be possible for work within those systems or just kind of the internal  hope of trees on farm landscapes.  And also really working more closely with folks that are working within the processing  
**0:51:04-0:51:06:**  and market side of things as well.  So one personal project that I've been involved in is a local food processing co-op that's  getting off the ground here in central Illinois.  
**0:51:18-0:51:22:**  And to me it's things like that that will actually encourage folks to plant more tree  crops if there are processing facilities that are close to them that know how to process  and store product correctly and then can be used to market that pass there.  
**0:51:34-0:51:40:**  So we're hoping the demonstration farms, it's not hope, it's actual real planning that we're  doing.  So it's not just hope, it's actual work and planning to really make them those sorts of  
**0:51:49-0:51:51:**  local sites.  And that's why they're kind of spread, at least in Illinois and into Wisconsin, they're  in very specific geographic locations that are near sort of rural areas.  
**0:52:02-0:52:09:**  They're kind of interesting locations that are near universities, near some city centers,  but surrounded by larger scale agriculture farmlands so that there is still access to  markets, access to university research, access to populations that buy, but also large amounts  
**0:52:24-0:52:31:**  of farmland that can then support these types of systems being integrated.  Amazing.  And this, you know, it'd be great to understand a bit more about those demonstration sites  
**0:52:38-0:52:42:**  and what those actual designs look like in practice.  Could you give us a bit of an overview?  Sure.  
**0:52:45-0:52:48:**  I can definitely talk about the Illinois ones because those are the ones that I work with  the most closely.  So for the past two years, the main chunk of my work has been really focused on getting  
**0:52:57-0:53:01:**  three demonstration farms off the ground here in the state of Illinois.  So the first one is the Memorial 4-H Camp Demonstration Farm, and that's located in  Monticello, Illinois, and it's land that's owned by the University of Illinois.  
**0:53:13-0:53:19:**  So it's public lands held by what we call a land grant university here in the United  States.  And it's 35 acres of what was for the past 20 years corn and soybean production.  
**0:53:29-0:53:34:**  The site is really interesting because it was originally wooded land, then it was deforested  to become an airstrip, and then it was transitioned into row crop agriculture.  So unlike some lands in Illinois, there were trees on this site originally.  
**0:53:49-0:53:57:**  And it's a really great location because it's located next to an estate called Allerton  Park which is open to the public which includes hiking trails and formal gardens and a formal  mansion that attracts people to the site.  
**0:54:08-0:54:14:**  So they get about a thousand visitors a year, and this agricultural field is adjacent to  their main parking lot, which is great.  And it's located completely surrounded by corn and soybean land for the most part.  
**0:54:24-0:54:32:**  And so this site is an alley cropping demonstration where we have six what we call paddocks of  trees which is a confusing term but I don't know what other term to use.  And each paddock of trees is three rows.  
**0:54:40-0:54:45:**  So we have timber as well as native species growing in those three rows.  And then we have 200 foot alleys where there's corn and soybean production happening.  So it's a pretty large, as far as alley cropping goes, it's a pretty large length between each  
**0:54:59-0:55:02:**  paddock of trees.  But we did that to create a flexible system.  In working with the tenant farmer there, we wanted to create a system that would not change  
**0:55:12-0:55:16:**  the way that he moved through his fields at all.  So the way we laid out the alley cropping design was to make sure that that farmer never  did a single extra pass to plant, harvest, or spray their crop.  
**0:55:31-0:55:36:**  And so that was one way we built trust of saying we want to learn how you farm and then  we'll fit our system within that.  So we designed our system around his production and his equipment, and then we left these  
**0:55:45-0:55:52:**  pretty large alleys so that over time we could add more rows of trees as our relationship  with that farmer grew and the trust grew and then we could work on that design together.  It also provided us some flexibility if he changed his equipment, we could then, we had  
**0:56:06-0:56:08:**  a lot of room to play with.  So we really tried to build something that worked for both of us.  Another interesting thing about this site is our lease on the site.  
**0:56:19-0:56:25:**  So we have a long term lease with the University of Illinois and then we sublease annually  to the row crop farmer.  So we set the terms of the farmer's lease because we're kind of the main holder of that  
**0:56:37-0:56:44:**  lease land, which has been really helpful for us because that means that we can ban  certain chemicals from being used in his farming.  So we obviously had a conversation about that before we wrote the lease with that farmer  
**0:56:54-0:56:57:**  and we have an annual review of that lease every year.  But to us that was pretty key to ensure, there's certain chemicals that are used in the United  States that can easily kill trees that are routinely used on corn and soybean crops.  
**0:57:09-0:57:17:**  So we needed that kind of decision making power within the lease to protect the trees  that we were planting.  But just to understand, this farmer wasn't farming that piece of land beforehand?  
**0:57:23-0:57:27:**  It's like you got the lease from University of Missouri and then you sourced the farmer  in a sense that wanted to farm within that?  Oh, thanks for bringing that up.  
**0:57:32-0:57:38:**  No, the farmer that had that lease had been farming that piece of land for the past 20  years or so.  So we worked with him to keep him on that land while we were working within the structure.  
**0:57:47-0:57:54:**  And he was very skeptical at first, but it's been great working with him.  So yeah, he's the farmer.  That's what we try to do is we keep the farmer on the property if possible.  
**0:58:04-0:58:06:**  That's the goal, right?  Because then we can build a relationship, then they ask questions, we build something  that works for them and hopefully will also work for their farming neighbors too.  
**0:58:17-0:58:19:**  And then they become advocates.  It's still quite tough for them because it means they do lose a certain amount of power  by even though the partnership is respectful and everything, you still have to make it  
**0:58:29-0:58:35:**  acceptable to them that now you're setting the terms and also modifying even if it's  slightly the way they work.  So I understand why it takes a lot of relationship building as you were mentioning because the  
**0:58:43-0:58:45:**  initial reaction must be a bit cautious from their end.  Oh, it's totally cautious.  It's a little mistrustful, it's totally cautious, it's incredibly skeptical.  
**0:58:52-0:58:59:**  And then it's also one of those things where for the most part, the farmers and landowners  are working with me, this young woman who's not the typical person that most farmers work  with.  
**0:59:12-0:59:18:**  We make it work, but I'm not a middle aged white guy.  So there's actually a little bit of the benefit of the doubt that comes with it being me who's  doing this instead of another white guy.  
**0:59:30-0:59:35:**  But there definitely is gender and power dynamics within those two.  Sure.  Coming back to these designs then, where do you get the inspiration and the technical  
**0:59:42-0:59:47:**  data to make those decisions on choice of crops, for example, and then spacings and  maybe projecting things in the long term as well?  Sure.  
**0:59:52-0:59:57:**  So we do design work as a group within the Savannah Institute.  So there might be one or two of us that are really driving the goal setting and things  like that.  
**1:00:08-1:00:13:**  But we design and we do goal setting within a group within the Savannah Institute.  So for example, for the demonstration farms, we have a team that works on design elements  and goal setting for those farms.  
**1:00:22-1:00:28:**  So we have folks that have PhDs in ecology.  We have folks that have been doing design work for a long time.  There's folks like me that are just anthropologist turned farmers that have no formal training  
**1:00:36-1:00:42:**  in agroforestry whatsoever.  And folks that work more routinely with farmers and landowners.  And so we kind of come together with ideas and then we look at the research and data.  
**1:00:52-1:00:58:**  So there's obviously a really great research that's come out of France and Europe, specifically  on alley cropping systems.  There's really great research that's been done at the University of Missouri here in  
**1:01:05-1:01:10:**  the United States, as well as some great Canadian research on alley cropping.  So we kind of look at the data that's already out there.  We look at different designs that have been on the landscape and how those have worked  
**1:01:19-1:01:22:**  for different farmers and landowners.  We make a lot of phone calls to people and say, is this a dumb idea?  Is this going to work?  
**1:01:31-1:01:39:**  And then we take into consideration what people might actually do in that area.  So the reason we chose timber as our kind of productive tree species for this site in  central Illinois is because, number one, we were working with a corn and soybean farmer.  
**1:01:52-1:01:56:**  And we have to make sure that whatever type of farming system they're doing, the alleys  is compatible with the trees that are in that paddock.  Because we wanted to kind of create a simple system that could start a transition, but  
**1:02:06-1:02:10:**  not force major transition right away.  And so when we were deciding what tree species to use for that timber, we went to the University  of Illinois Extension Forester and sat down and had a conversation with him about, this  
**1:02:22-1:02:29:**  is the soils, this is what we're planning to do within the system, what would you recommend  as the top timber species for this landscape?  So we got a series of recommendations from him, and we used that to really build out  
**1:02:39-1:02:40:**  the system.  And when it came to spacing, we were looking at, I already talked a little bit about the  farmer's equipment, so that was number one, the farmer's got to be able to move through  
**1:02:49-1:02:50:**  the field.  Number two, we looked at what equipment Savannah Institute had to manage those tree rows and  how we were going to move throughout the field and get in there to do what we needed to do.  
**1:03:03-1:03:09:**  As well as the equipment we were going to be able to rent or borrow to make those systems  happen if needed.  And then we kind of sat down and pulled it all together into a first draft and sent it  
**1:03:18-1:03:24:**  to the farmer to look at, and we made revisions based on what he, the kind of roadblocks he  was going to see with it.  We shared with other folks at SI who then had feedback on the design, and then we kind  
**1:03:33-1:03:36:**  of came to that design decision.  And because we work also with researchers, there's a research component to this farm  as well where we're looking at different ground management systems of what ground covers we're  
**1:03:47-1:03:51:**  using and how we manage those ground covers for the growth of the trees.  So we're constantly kind of balancing the demonstration aspect for different types of  farmers in that area, the research aspects so we can collect good data, and then just  
**1:04:05-1:04:12:**  like the ease of management of can we manage this system effectively.  And so far, at least for that site, it's worked out pretty well.  It's year two, so we have a lot more mistakes and a lot more work to do.  
**1:04:22-1:04:30:**  But all of that work that went into the design has paid off dividends and dividends because  we put the time in to do the research and the communication ahead of time.  And now we're just kind of tweaking systems as we go.  
**1:04:41-1:04:47:**  I have to say what I find very smart with your approach is the fact that you work with  farmers and other tenants that are in their reality and that you have to therefore compromise  and work with that reality.  
**1:04:53-1:04:58:**  Because if you were just 100% managing that land, it'd be so tempting to go for much more  complex systems because you have that freedom and then completely disconnect yourself from  your surroundings in terms of farming reality.  
**1:05:07-1:05:12:**  So I think that's really inspiring and really amazing that you get to have this dialogue  between maybe some very ambitious plans or ideas or things you've seen around and then  okay well let's make this work with the local context.  
**1:05:21-1:05:23:**  I think that's amazing.  And I was wondering when I was listening to you, so the deal with the farmer is he just  takes care of his crops and then you come in and do all the management of the trees  
**1:05:32-1:05:36:**  and then we'll also like sell the produce.  You have the kind of tree operation completely separate and that you're in charge with?  Yep, so the tree paddocks are completely managed, leased and profited through the Savannah Institute.  
**1:05:51-1:05:58:**  So this is one system we use for the demonstration farms is that if it's going to be a Savannah  Institute demonstration farm, Savannah Institute holds the overarching lease.  We make design decisions with input obviously, lots of community input and conversations  
**1:06:13-1:06:19:**  and we make the decisions on the ground for the lease sections that we hold and then we  manage and harvest and potentially profit from whatever's coming off of them.  So whether that be profit of research, profit of crop production, profit of education, that  
**1:06:36-1:06:41:**  sounds like a weird phrase to use.  But I'm assuming you're also really planning these systems as profitable economically because  if the plan is later for younger farmers to be able to replicate what the Savannah Institute  
**1:06:51-1:06:55:**  is doing today, it's quite important that you could earn a livelihood just from these  tree paddocks.  Yeah, 100%.  
**1:06:58-1:07:04:**  So that's one of the reasons that we have different systems on different demonstration  farms is to show the different economic possibilities from different practices.  So the alley cropping is kind of long term investment and profitability of timber.  
**1:07:19-1:07:26:**  So we have black locust, black walnut, swamp white oak and shagbark hickory as kind of  our timber species.  And then we're also adding a couple of rows this year of northern pecan, which is for  
**1:07:33-1:07:36:**  nut production but can also be used for timber as well.  And then on fields restored, which is another demonstration farm, we have an edible riparian  buffer.  
**1:07:45-1:07:50:**  So showcasing kind of the ways that we can use riparian buffers for water quality and  soil erosion prevention and soil health, but also creating harvestable profitable crops  that can come off of that riparian buffer.  
**1:08:03-1:08:08:**  And then there's also a silvopasture experiment happening there where we're looking at different  tree combinations in a silvopasture by addition, we're planting trees into pasture for fodder.  So with all of these things, we're taking labor numbers, we're taking establishment  
**1:08:22-1:08:30:**  cost numbers, and we're looking at labor hours so that we can actually provide really detailed  projections for folks around like all the work that was done, all the money that was  spent.  
**1:08:37-1:08:43:**  And here's the findings basically from these demonstration farms.  Have you found ways in the designs to ensure some like short term cash flow sometimes because  what's particularly difficult when you start a perennial system can be those first few  
**1:08:52-1:08:53:**  years of establishments.  And usually you can use sometimes the space between the trees to run chickens or have  animals or grow vegetables, anything that will kind of give you that short term income.  
**1:09:03-1:09:08:**  So if you don't have access to that in alley in a way, because you have like a system like  you're implementing with a farmer that's cultivating it, are you managing to do that  on the line then?  
**1:09:14-1:09:20:**  Yeah, so this has been a really kind of blind spot within the demonstration program here  in Illinois is that because of staffing and because we're managing multiple farm landscapes  at one time, we actually haven't been able to do any of that short term kind of annual  
**1:09:33-1:09:34:**  cash flowing.  That is really important for folks that need that transition help.  And like, obviously the situation that most young and small diversified farmers find themselves  
**1:09:45-1:09:49:**  in when they're wanting to add perennials to their landscape.  One thing that is going to help address that a little bit on the Savannah Institute side  is that the Savannah Institute now does own farmland in Spring Green, Wisconsin.  
**1:09:59-1:10:04:**  And so there's going to be farmers living on the property of that farm that's going  to allow livestock to come into the equation in a way that we haven't been able to do in  Illinois that is going to allow for annual production and more of these short term sort  
**1:10:15-1:10:22:**  of profit builders that allow for agroforestry transition that we're just not able to do  with the way that our staffing and network is set up here in Illinois.  So I mean, ultimately, you have to have both, right?  
**1:10:33-1:10:35:**  In order for it to work.  So we're just kind of demonstrating one model where it's more of this like grain sort of  grain transition model.  
**1:10:42-1:10:47:**  And in Wisconsin, they're going to be modeling completely different ways of doing that.  Amazing.  And in terms of the designs you've gone for, we kind of explored more like the timber system,  
**1:10:54-1:10:58:**  but then you also mentioned like edible riparian buffer.  Do you have then different levels of complexity that you go for, like some really simple ones  and some like more diversified and complex systems?  
**1:11:07-1:11:13:**  Yeah, so we've decided, you know, kind of the designs based on number one, the landscape.  So the landscape always comes first of, you know, what type of agroforestry can we do  to serve this landscape and this farm the best?  
**1:11:23-1:11:30:**  And then the second is looking outside of that farm to systems that we think folks would  want to see and could be operationalized on the surrounding landscapes.  And then the third thing is like, are we able to manage the systems that we design and create?  
**1:11:43-1:11:48:**  Because if we don't have the capacity, then we can't do it and we can't get good data  and we can't do it well.  But so we've gone with more simple systems than, I mean, there's complexity within every  
**1:11:56-1:12:03:**  system that we create, but we tend to go for the systems that are more easily managed in  terms of day to day or week to week or, you know, month to month management.  But we are bringing on a new demonstration farm in Champaign County where I'm located  
**1:12:15-1:12:20:**  and we have kind of our hub of personnel and equipment and things like that.  We're bringing out a farm that is going to be much more complex within its design and  management.  
**1:12:26-1:12:34:**  So for this farm, we're looking at fruit and nut alley cropping, which we haven't done  in other places and some kind of multi-story work within that.  We're looking at experimentation with different sized alleys within that alley cropping system.  
**1:12:42-1:12:48:**  So looking from 40 foot alleys to 120 foot alleys so we're able to see the differences  between those.  And we're also looking at elderberries and hazelnuts and things that, number one, come  
**1:12:55-1:13:01:**  into production a little, well, a lot sooner if we're talking about timber, but a little  sooner if we're talking about fruit and nut production and doing some variety trials and  some work around those so we can find, you know, what varieties are going to work really  
**1:13:11-1:13:14:**  well here in Illinois and the Midwest.  So those systems are going to take, they're going to be more complex in design.  They're going to be more complex in management.  
**1:13:22-1:13:27:**  But we're also going to only travel 10 minutes to manage those systems where the rest of  the demonstration farms in Illinois are spread out, sometimes an hour and a half between  each other, an hour and a half drive, which means we can't manage them daily.  
**1:13:38-1:13:42:**  So they're systems that we're managing weekly or monthly.  I think it will be really interesting to get the data out of that and see how it works  out because, you know, we had started with a very complex system when we were working  
**1:13:52-1:13:54:**  in Greece with Dimitri.  And although we saw how exciting it was on an ecological perspective, we also saw the  huge challenges coming in in terms of management and sometimes the additional costs linked  
**1:14:06-1:14:07:**  to complexity.  But, you know, we've already discussed that in previous episodes, but I'll be really interested  to see, you know, the same people measuring different things on different sites.  
**1:14:17-1:14:21:**  I think that would be fascinating data, really.  It's also been a stretch for me as someone that wants to dig really deep into one thing  and one place.  
**1:14:30-1:14:35:**  And this work across multiple landscapes has really forced me to change the ways that I  think about landscapes and places and work to accommodate sort of work that's spread out  a little bit instead of work that's more deep and localized.  
**1:14:47-1:14:49:**  And I would say there's trade-offs on both, obviously.  Like you were just saying, like complexity can lead to like deep ecological richness  that you wouldn't get from more simple systems.  
**1:14:57-1:15:02:**  But I think that the power within designing simple systems is you can build complexity  over time as you have time and capital and capacity, which is something that I've really  had to learn over these past couple years of working on the ground is where that balance  
**1:15:16-1:15:18:**  lies.  Because within farming, you're always going to...  Sometimes you feel like you're just putting out fires, right?  
**1:15:27-1:15:28:**  Instead of farming.  So how can you get to the point where you put out a fire once a week or once a month  instead of putting out fires daily?  
**1:15:35-1:15:36:**  Yeah.  Yeah, that's a good analogy.  And are you keeping timber in your designs?  
**1:15:44-1:15:50:**  For example, I was talking with Eric Tonesmeyer recently, and he's actually writing a little  booklet on alley cropping and that he'll be releasing.  And he was saying, because he obviously studied a lot of systems in Europe, especially in  
**1:15:59-1:16:00:**  France.  And then he was telling me a bit what was going on in the US.  And he was saying that in the US, people are moving away from timber and going more towards  
**1:16:07-1:16:11:**  nuts and fruits just for a question of like harvest cycles.  And people weren't willing to wait 40 years to get a return on their investments.  Is that something you're getting that vibe from the field as well and talking with farmers?  
**1:16:23-1:16:31:**  Yeah, I think it depends on the type of farmer and landowner and what they actually need.  I think that there's need for both kind of long term and short term.  If we are constantly going short term, then we're kind of selling ourselves short a little  
**1:16:41-1:16:42:**  bit.  And if we don't incorporate timber into these agroforestry systems, then we'll just continue  plantation lumber production.  
**1:16:50-1:16:53:**  So I think that there's room and opportunity for both.  But I want to recognize what Eric is saying there, because that shorter turnaround and  that higher profit margin is vital for letting folks actually engage in these types of practices  
**1:17:08-1:17:12:**  that are perennial and take a large amount of investment.  So I think that there's ways to do both.  But it depends on what scale and what location and who's engaged in the work.  
**1:17:23-1:17:31:**  So when it comes to cash flowing, that's really a question for each individual farmer and  landowner of fruit and nuts are probably meeting the goals that they're setting for themselves  in a much faster and different way than timber production is.  
**1:17:42-1:17:50:**  And for folks that have smaller land footprints, of course that would make way more sense.  But here in the Midwest, where we have large tracts of land that are sometimes owned by  one person or one entity, and then I think we have different possibilities and also kind  
**1:18:02-1:18:09:**  of creates long term transition that can happen on that landscape.  So I think that both are important.  But from the smaller landholding folks that we work with, fruit and nut is absolutely  
**1:18:20-1:18:26:**  what they're going for within their alley cropping and perennial systems.  I'm wondering, have you developed some ideas on the sales aspect, because that's obviously  a few years down the line.  
**1:18:35-1:18:40:**  But how are you planning to commercialize and also handle the logistics on all these  different sites?  Yeah, that's a really great question.  
**1:18:46-1:18:49:**  One of the things that we're looking at when it comes to sort of the marketing and logistics  of these is how can we incorporate our apprenticeship program into the demonstration farm program?  Are there folks that are coming out of the apprenticeship program that would be open,  
**1:19:02-1:19:08:**  willing and able to kind of take over the systems that we've put into place, where they  become the main managers, they become the profitors of those sites, and they sort of  put in the work to do that, either on a short term or a long term scale, so that we can  
**1:19:19-1:19:25:**  sort of provide land access and business opportunity to folks.  We recognize that that's not always appealing to folks, because oftentimes folks want to  set up their own systems and they want to kind of build their own businesses.  
**1:19:37-1:19:43:**  But it's an opportunity to learn as you're growing.  And for example, my husband and I rent an apple orchard.  And it's a yearly lease.  
**1:19:50-1:19:55:**  But we did this, number one, to keep an apple orchard in production from a couple that was  retiring, and two, so we could actually learn how to manage apples.  So we run a business on rented orchard land with this apple orchard, and it's been really  
**1:20:06-1:20:09:**  great for us to see what works and what doesn't work.  And it's provided us an opportunity that we would have never had if we were starting from  scratch with young trees.  
**1:20:16-1:20:21:**  So I think there's an opportunity for us to do that with the apprenticeship program and  to actually provide options for folks afterwards.  And if that ends up staying within the Savannah Institute, for timber, there's already markets  
**1:20:31-1:20:34:**  in Illinois for timber.  So being able to sell that, there's strong market channels where that would be easy to  move.  
**1:20:40-1:20:47:**  For things like fruit and nuts, we're helping build those systems of processing and aggregation  that we would just then support the systems that are already in place.  Or if we have an opportunity to be a host to a processing facility or things like that,  
**1:20:59-1:21:06:**  then that would also work within our mission and help support not only us, but other folks  in that region as well.  And what scale do you see the demonstration farms evolving to?  
**1:21:13-1:21:18:**  Because obviously it's like a huge amount, I hadn't realized that you kind of design,  manage and actually fully manage the whole perennial aspects of it.  So are you kind of reaching a steady level where you're just going to be following up  
**1:21:31-1:21:32:**  on what's been put into place?  Or are you going to, because I assume that the more time goes by, people are going to  come with you wanting, I'm a landowner, I have an opportunity, I want to put trees on.  
**1:21:41-1:21:45:**  But at some point you do have to kind of stay like, we can't do this anymore.  You'll end up having like a huge farming entity.  Yeah, our goal is not to farm like thousands and thousands and thousands of acres of land.  
**1:22:00-1:22:04:**  But this is a big question that, you know, Savannah Institute is going through a strategic  planning process right now.  And this is a big question that we have within the demonstration farm program that, you know,  
**1:22:11-1:22:17:**  we're really looking at, you know, what are these farms doing?  Why are they here on the landscape?  And what are the boundaries that we set for ourselves to ensure that we have robust management,  
**1:22:26-1:22:33:**  good oversight, and that we're utilizing the opportunities that come to us effectively?  So sometimes that means that we say no and suggest someone else.  And then, you know, allow those opportunities to go to other folks.  
**1:22:46-1:22:54:**  But you know, we created a decision matrix for deciding how we would bring on other farms.  And so part of that decision matrix is, are we able to showcase a practice here that we  can't showcase in the other place?  
**1:23:03-1:23:10:**  Is there genetic diversity on this landscape that we want to maintain and support?  Does this demonstration farm serve a community that we're not currently serving and has been  asked for or provided interest from that community?  
**1:23:22-1:23:27:**  Are we able to have a long-term lease here so that we can do the work that we need to  do and make sure that it serves Savannah Institute as well as the landscape?  So these are like the big questions that we're asking as folks are like, it would be great  
**1:23:36-1:23:42:**  to have a demonstration farm on my property or this property, but we have to be able to  manage it.  So you know, we have a hub of work in Champaign County, Illinois.  
**1:23:48-1:23:52:**  We're going to be having a hub of work in Spring Green, Wisconsin.  So it all comes down to that decision matrix, funding levels, and things like that.  But ultimately, our goal with like all of our programs is for us not to be ever constantly  
**1:24:04-1:24:11:**  expanding but for us to help hopefully build some strong models that can be replicated  for other organizations and other farmers and landowners so that we don't have to have  a demonstration farm everywhere.  
**1:24:18-1:24:25:**  So that there's actually other demonstration farms and demonstration sites that are managed  and run and ultimately serving people that just isn't the Savannah Institute.  And maybe as a final question, although maybe it should have been my first question, but  
**1:24:41-1:24:47:**  are there some really interesting mistakes or challenges that you encountered that you'd  like to share and that could inspire maybe other people experimenting with agroforestry  systems?  
**1:24:54-1:24:59:**  I'll say that I've made an incredible amount of mistakes and that I'm still pretty young  and new to agroforestry.  So I have at least 50 years of mistake making ahead of me.  
**1:25:09-1:25:16:**  But I feel like the biggest mistake that I've personally made and that we've made on our  demonstration farms is sometimes moving too fast.  So what I mean by that is having a really great idea, thinking we have all the data,  
**1:25:29-1:25:37:**  thinking we know what we're doing, and then moving forward without doing some deep observation.  So this is, I say this in terms of like, in my mind it's great to have at least a year  on a property before planting anything perennial so that you learn how humans and animals and  
**1:25:50-1:25:56:**  equipment and water and the sun move across the landscape.  And you look at a full season of pest cycles, you look at a full cycle of freezing and thawing  and depending on where you're at.  
**1:26:06-1:26:11:**  And then that might change where you will put certain things because when you plant  a tree, that tree is there for a long time.  And our goal is always right tree, right time, right place.  
**1:26:18-1:26:23:**  And so if you move too quickly, it's really easy to mess up one of those three things.  So I feel like a lot of mistakes, especially when it comes to weed pressure, establishing  ground cover, choosing the right species in the right soils, taking a year or at least  
**1:26:41-1:26:47:**  a couple seasons to make those deep observations can pay off dividends.  And I especially say this with weeds, with weed management and establishing ground cover.  If you get the timing and the right ground cover or management system right, you actually  
**1:27:03-1:27:06:**  don't spend that much time weeding.  If you don't get the timing and the ground cover right, you spend the majority of your  time weeding.  
**1:27:14-1:27:23:**  So I've done more weed whipping than I ever cared to do in my entire life.  So every design and system that I help with is always focused on how do we not weed whip  ever at this site because I am done with that type of management.  
**1:27:41-1:27:49:**  So I'm looking at how can we use landscape fabric, how can we use heavy mulching, what  are the different mechanisms that we can use for seeding, what are different ground cover  combinations or cover cropping schemes that we can get our weed seed banks down so that  
**1:28:02-1:28:05:**  we don't have to be weeding.  I feel like that's the biggest mistake that I've made and we've made.  And I would say also another one that I've kind of struggled with is timing.  
**1:28:22-1:28:31:**  So getting the timing right for things like planting, pruning, spraying, even weeding  to make sure that you're knocking things back before they set and drop seeds.  When you're managing multiple landscapes, if you miss a window, that might set you back  
**1:28:43-1:28:46:**  an entire year.  So when it comes to design, and this is one of the reasons that we're starting a little  more simple and more complex and then adding the complexity in later, is it can be really  
**1:28:57-1:29:02:**  difficult to get all the timing right across multiple landscapes.  And I didn't even mention this, but pest cycles.  You're not on the farm, maybe, and you'll miss the larva stage or the egg stage where  
**1:29:13-1:29:16:**  you can easily knock back a pest.  But you're not there to see it, and so you miss it completely.  So integrated pest management becomes really, really difficult across multiple landscapes.  
**1:29:27-1:29:34:**  So that's a big, big blind spot and mistake that we've made.  And then the third is making sure you have the right equipment for the job.  And sometimes that means waiting until you can afford the right piece of equipment or  
**1:29:46-1:29:51:**  not designing your system around the equipment you think is coming but you might not ever  get.  So just being really honest with the equipment that you have now, the time you have now to  
**1:30:00-1:30:07:**  do it, because the equipment thing is really, really, really hard.  Especially when you're borrowing equipment or things break down or things like that.  So we've been traveling around in a bus for the past two years, so the equipment that  
**1:30:20-1:30:22:**  we've been able to use has been limited.  And Sand Institute is getting some tractors and things that are going to make things a  little easier.  
**1:30:29-1:30:31:**  Yeah, for sure.  Yeah, thank you so much for sharing this so honestly.  And it's always more interesting to hear about what went wrong than what went well, isn't  
**1:30:40-1:30:41:**  it?  So all our listeners will be happy.  Yeah, check back with me next year.  
**1:30:45-1:30:48:**  I'll have more mistakes to add to it.  And successes, I'm sure.  Oh yeah.  
**1:30:51-1:30:54:**  But yeah, we will, with great pleasure.  It was really fascinating to talk with you today.  So thank you so much for coming on the podcast.  
**1:30:59-1:31:01:**  Yeah, thank you so much for having me.  This has been such a wonderful conversation and I just want to express some gratitude  to you and Dimitri for this podcast and all the wisdom and knowledge that's shared.  
**1:31:12-1:31:19:**  It's been really fascinating and hopeful and just so wonderful to be able to learn from  so many different people in one place.  So thank you so much.  
**1:31:25-1:31:26:**  Thank you for listening.  As usual, all links are below.  Feel free to reach out to us with some ideas of guests or questions that you would like  
**1:31:33-1:31:35:**  us to ask.  Also consider supporting the podcast to make this viable in the long run.  Thank you very much.  