### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2022-51-02)
**0:00:00-0:00:16:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  
**0:00:32-0:00:33:**  these challenges.  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Hello and welcome to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  I'm your host Dimitri and today we interviewed Fede Ricosan Bonifacio from Northern Italy.  
**0:00:56-0:01:02:**  Fede has a 30 hectare farm in the north of Italy that he inherited from his family and  inspired by the very barren monocrop fields around him, he started thinking about planting  trees and started thinking about an alternative land use for his farm.  So he now is certified organic, has planted hedges all over his fields and has also been  implementing five hectares of polycyclic forestry in collaboration with the research institute  
**0:01:28-0:01:29:**  that studies just this.  So maybe it's not familiar with many people and we'll hear more about it in the interview.  But it's again very interesting to see how a farmer, a small scale farmer is using forestry,  farm forestry and using trees, hedges to be able to meet their agroecological objectives.  So for us it was a fascinating interview and I hope you enjoy it as well.  
**0:01:53-0:01:55:**  Hi Fede and welcome on the podcast.  Hello, hello Ciao Dimitri.  Nice, so before we started I was looking at pictures from your farm when we visited and  I actually show these pictures to quite a lot of people and they never believe how quickly  your trees are growing.  
**0:02:13-0:02:14:**  Yeah, that's true.  They always tell me that's not true, it's not possible.  It's not possible to have a poplar this big in 10 years.  Me too, I'm still wonder by the speed of the tree.  They grow really fast in this area.  
**0:02:33-0:02:39:**  Yeah I'm going to share some of these pictures when we talk about our episode together on  our social media because I think people need to see these huge poplar trees and after they've  listened to the interview they'll know the story behind stuff.  I've got a nice picture with my hand on one of the poplar trees and it just looks massive.  But you know I'm curious because we didn't get to, as I said earlier, we didn't get to  
**0:02:58-0:03:04:**  talk about this when I came to visit so much because there were many people and etc.  I'd love to know a bit more about your story.  Yes, yes, yes.  I started farming in a family farm so actually I was really lucky because I had the chance  to start managing a farm and managing my family farm.  
**0:03:22-0:03:30:**  Me have three brothers and the farm is from my father.  I have a background in biology.  At the beginning I didn't, it was always in my mind but it never really focused on doing  my university studies.  I studied biology and then gradually it came into my mind that that was my work, my deal  
**0:03:53-0:03:59:**  to take care about this land that was originally, when I was young, was run as a conventional  farm.  It's about 30 hectares in the middle of the plain in the south of Verona in Italy.  And so that's how it started.  So with the intention of taking care about the land I had the chance to manage.  
**0:04:24-0:04:34:**  And during my studies I gradually discovered all the application of different disciplines  around ecology and of course, agroecology and the plantation of tree was one of the  first elements and steps to start.  Because you have to think my land when I took it was completely deforested of course because  it was a conventional farming.  
**0:04:55-0:05:05:**  Every piece of land was overexploited and of course using chemical and so on.  And so I had, and moreover it's a plain land.  So I had, you can imagine I had a blank sheet where I should draw, where I had to draw the  design of the farm.  And I had just a couple of rows within the middle of the land.  
**0:05:26-0:05:33:**  And so I started, and that's I think one of the best choice so far of the farm is the  plantation of trees.  And we decided to do it on the edge of the, on the marginal area of the farm that are  actually the farm is developed on 800 meters almost length and it's less wider.  So in the north side, north south direction this 800 meters.  
**0:06:00-0:06:02:**  So it's a strip you mean?  Yeah it's a big strip.  Yeah north south and I decided to use the north side and the south side for making the  forest.  Yeah a polycyclic forest replantation in both sides north and south.  
**0:06:24-0:06:34:**  And we decided to join this forest with some double edge lines of edge of edges of the  trees.  And so we have now about 12 lines of edges of trees and connecting these two forests  of about five hectares.  Okay so in total you said it's 30 hectares?  
**0:06:55-0:06:59:**  Totally the farm is 30 hectares.  Yeah and it's about five hectares of polycyclic forest replantation, five hectares of edges  and I have 15 hectares of arable land, of cropping land.  And then yeah the rest is grass, we have some, we've done two years ago a nice lake for environmental  purpose to recreate a regeneration spot for birds mainly and aquatic animals.  
**0:07:44-0:07:47:**  See this is the confirmation of the farm.  Yeah and actually this first step happened in 2012, so 10 years ago.  Okay nice so that was 10 years ago that you took over the management of the farm let's  say that you started being responsible for that?  Yeah few years before formally but then practically about when I always say when we start the  
**0:08:10-0:08:18:**  planting degrees that's when I start getting involved practically into farming activity.  And so I'm curious what I mean what made you like what were the influences that got you  to plant trees straight away?  Where did you get these ideas from?  Where did it come from?  
**0:08:29-0:08:39:**  Now first of all you know always often I have to say often solutions comes out of from problems  you know so we had the problem that we had a countryside landscape totally apart from  some very old popular trees on this main road we had apart from that the landscape were  really not a friendly environment, it was super sunny in winter, super cold and windy  in winter and no shade so the first so this is the one of the first reason the landscape  
**0:09:14-0:09:21:**  really is one of the first motivation of course is not one of the first motivation just the  landscape I knew also studying biology and ecology that the importance of the trees on  the insect colonizing trees and the soil and underneath and so of course I didn't I didn't  study agriculture but yeah just with some ecological background I knew that that was  one of the main most important steps to start cultivating in an organic way also.  
**0:09:50-0:09:58:**  I had to recreate a good environment where to start cultivating also good food so and  in a place where there were no good environment that's the best choice you can do.  I was also influenced by books about the agroecology, permaculture, regeneration of soil and so  also I had these influences.  That's amazing and so I mean from the farm visit I know that there's a lot of you do  
**0:10:25-0:10:30:**  a lot of different products and you I think we even ate the pasta that comes from your  own grain so could if you could tell us a bit about you know the wider context beyond  the trees what you produce on your on the farm what are your main products from the  farm?  Yeah, hello, as I told you the farm has 15 hectares of arable cultivated land so the  
**0:10:49-0:10:56:**  second step I always say was to look for the right seeds so after planting the trees I  had to wait until they grow and so I had time to focus on techniques of farming so with  the appropriate like machinery and so on because it's still a lot of land and you cannot think  about doing a synergic agriculture or not till I had to focus on that on the machine  and the mechanization of farming and as I told you the seeds so I got in touch with  
**0:11:31-0:11:40:**  a really cool association in Italy called the Ritet dei Semirurali that is an association  of associations in Italy, national association doing some also lobbying at European level  promoting the rights of farmers of small farmers especially and the rights of reproducing seeds  and so on so through this association I got in touch with many many super interesting  farmers in Italy the association is spread from north to south of Italy so really I had  
**0:12:14-0:12:23:**  the occasion to meet a lot of people and through that to that meetings I got some seeds of  ancient weeds, soft weeds, I started cultivating it's about seven years and now we are reproducing  it from seven years and so our main production I should say is the flower of soft weed, two  different kind, a mix of soft weed and a selected weed for making a more like white let's say  more like type one we say type one flower and then we have a very nice variety of corn  
**0:13:09-0:13:17:**  we make a nice polenta I guess in English is the same name polenta flower of corn we  used to boil into water it's very popular here in Benete region and this is the main  product then together with my girlfriend we started also some vegetable garden around  the houses of the farm and so we do produce some vegetables we do three thousand meters  of tomatoes for making tomato sauce, Julia she is a beekeeper so we do produce some honey  
**0:13:54-0:14:08:**  and then some vegetables mainly vegetable fruits also for private use in our mind there  is some project also on the vegetable garden specially because now we are doing the pruning  of the edges we are collecting so much wood and we really would like to start a proper  vegetable garden for selling through this.  That's definitely something we are going to talk about the hedge wood chips etc because  
**0:14:37-0:14:43:**  that's fascinating understanding that process but before that I'm curious how do you sell  all of your products directly to customers or is it more like wholesale stuff that goes  into properties?  No, no, no I have to say the percentage of the product I sell directly it's about 20  percent our goal is to reach the 100 percent but there is a big need of investment in terms  
**0:15:06-0:15:18:**  of stockage where to put the seeds, how to treat, to clean so it's already a big deal  with just two varieties of wheat and some corn and then we do also of course we do also  some other crops we sell directly like beans, dry beans or other like oats and that's all  the culture mainly.  The rest of the product goes directly to the big market there is a lot of requests of organic  
**0:16:00-0:16:12:**  seeds specially we have a company next to us producing milk from oats and so we do produce  a lot of that and soy also for them it's a really nice market I like also the vegetable  milk so that's important.  Why would you just out of curiosity looking a bit at your kind of your marketing strategy  why would you want to go with 100 percent directly sold?  
**0:16:37-0:16:38:**  Why?  I'm just curious because you've got the two models there you're selling some directly  and you're also selling to local I mean wholesale to local transformation businesses etc so  why are you trying to go more towards the direct selling?  Yeah in fact maybe I said it wrong maybe I mean originally my idea was to reach 100 percent  
**0:17:03-0:17:12:**  of direct selling but it's very big the farm and it's not necessary I mean I pointed it  because it was like an economic goal maybe because through direct selling you may gain  a little bit more but actually you're right I don't really need to reach that.  I had in mind also a project for baking bread and I think that with a good production of  bread I might use a lot of land let's say for direct selling the product so I guess  
**0:17:43-0:17:54:**  it won't be that difficult if I start also baking to reach 50-80 percent to change the  percentage you know to switch the percentage from 80 percent direct selling and 20 maybe  for leguminos or other product but still there is a lot of nice product and nice companies  you can collaborate with for example I have a friend doing fermentation of soy with the  cereals and doing miso so why not collaborating and producing all the food from yeah and sell  
**0:18:28-0:18:36:**  it directly or half or yeah with less passages.  Yeah because from our experience as well at Massey Farm you know there's a high cost to  direct selling often the cost of distributing at the beginning especially to find the customers  the labeling yeah yeah exactly so sometimes of course it's dependent on each context you  know each farm will be different but sometimes it seems like it would be a relief to just  
**0:19:02-0:19:08:**  be able to provide it to somebody that you know takes big bags of it and no or yeah yeah  but then again the price maybe doesn't just doesn't make it make the cut you know and  it's so it's an interesting case to look at because you have you know you have a farm  that's big but it's also not huge and so the quantities you could potentially manage with  high effort to direct sell you know 30 hectares of products but yeah 15 hectares.  
**0:19:31-0:19:38:**  15 exactly because but still yeah as you said there's also a lot of work on the yeah on  the farm in general then we have within from this year I guess we're gonna open a grituristic  activity so I guess there would be also a lot to do with gardening, hosting and welcoming  the guests so you're probably right I mean we won't reach the 100% with that part yeah  one of the chances we have is because I'm so happy about the forest we did that we might  
**0:20:09-0:20:18:**  plant some more so when we reach like 10, 5 hectares of cultivated land with crops so  then I've reached my goal initial goal.  It's interesting yeah also adapting little by little your land use to kind of your strategy  as things evolve and again I really want to talk about this why you're so happy with the  forestry that's something we're going to get into after I've got it on my notes here but  
**0:20:41-0:20:48:**  maybe we can start by talking a bit more about the hedges and I'd like to know a bit more  about what were your key or your specific objectives for planting hedges around your  land and if I understand correctly just to give a bit of paint a better picture to our  our listeners because I was there on the farm you've got your hedges and in between you've  got big parcels right you've got big land strips with where you cultivate the where  
**0:21:12-0:21:18:**  you cultivate the grains right so they're really it's like a it's like a matrix of hedges  in inside which you've got your crops.  Exactly that's the correct description of the farm it's not like because in a common  sense when I heard about talking about agroforestry I imagine lines of trees separating separated  by 20-30 meters of cultivated land in this case we have fields of 50 meters around 50-30  
**0:21:51-0:21:56:**  meters and 500 meters longer.  Yeah okay nice and so what were your key objectives then what was your...  For the hedges as I told you we were surrounded by industrial farming and so our the first  objective of the of the hedges was to create protection on the on the edge on the edge  of the farm so apart from the the forest itself that is already a protection and we we designed  
**0:22:30-0:22:39:**  some some edge edges I don't know how you say it like border edges edges border edges  okay yeah yeah the border edges made by mainly the main trees there are mulberry and and  lime tree tillia every eight meters we planted the lime tree and then mulberry and between  them I've planted six varieties of willow willow trees very nice and now we are also  collaborating with with a friend making baskets with these willows really nice but only in  
**0:23:16-0:23:23:**  a part of that because it's too many too many trees too handy yeah just a part of that this  is one of the main objective of the edges then then we in the in the in the edges within  the farm in the middle of the fields between the fields we we called that edges small fruit  side and the goal was to provide the fruits and nutrients to birds bees and and so on  all the animals that may live in the farm and so in the in these edges we we planted  
**0:23:57-0:24:12:**  many prunes different variety of prunes and and then it's the nuts the the hazelnuts and  then other varieties of like sambucus or other fruits cornea or cornews cornews see corn  or cherry yeah yeah in Latin and yeah so all these prunus cherazos avium male and all the  varieties of prunus and then and these are considered the low trees while has a proper  trees we planted the many quercus yeah and then some other varieties of yeah poplar and  
**0:24:55-0:25:04:**  some tilia also there for the bees and the almost so we we decided to create some some  diversification with it is within this inner edge so I'm curious why you you decided within  the inner edge why you decided to go with a simpler design and a simpler setup on the  outer hedges was it for speed of growth of the trees or see see see see was a no because  I thought that the the the willow the willow tree would have create a nice barrier better  
**0:25:37-0:25:45:**  barrier actually no I would do it a little bit different now with the experience again  in this in this years because there are also for example there are some always green trees  that might be more useful in the in the in the borders for some noise we have some roads  some industrial area in the east sides so I would have planted more of this especially  because I planted some in those edges and I have seen them growing very well even if  
**0:26:16-0:26:27:**  they were more trees adapted for for hilly altitudes or yeah or mountain like quercus  ilex some whole milk so the outer edges is more the carcass and the protection layer  also against pesticide drift and etc from the neighbour activities and then inside it's  more focusing on ecosystem yeah and productivity and and biodiversity etc exactly insects and  so on see see see but actually with this barrier of willow is it's working very well it's of  
**0:26:56-0:27:05:**  course in in in spring and summer time but then yeah in winter it's a bit naked yeah  yeah interesting and so I mean we're going to go into more of the details because there  was also this this this idea of plastic mulch that you had used and I really want some feedback  on that from your experience but before that how did how did you fund the the planting  was this something that you you know did you provide the investment for that or did you  
**0:27:25-0:27:30:**  get help from from yeah in fact how did that go yeah doing the the question you did you  made me before I did an answer about about this because actually one of the motivation  that pushed me to do it is that by the time by 2012 there was a very interesting program  mission funding like this kind of plantation I was really lucky because then it disappeared  for for 10 years this kind of subsidies for plantation mixed plantation of poplar together  
**0:27:59-0:28:10:**  with walnuts and other long-term trees so I had the chance to to meet these fundings  that was were very generous they used to found 80% for the forest of the plantation costs  I'm talking about plants preparation work of the soils and mulching and and and and  plantation as I told you and then yeah and then while for the edges there were 100% funding  because it has a more environmental purpose the edges instead the from the forest after  
**0:28:46-0:28:52:**  some years you start gaining some money you know so it was more founded and then there  were there are still found they are still funding me like the missing income they call  it they call it so they gave from the edges they calculate about 2,000 euro per actors  getting an edges like six meter wide and yeah and this it's a really big incentive that  I wouldn't I have to say I wouldn't have done that if there were no funding like that how  
**0:29:28-0:29:36:**  would you have done it if you didn't have this funding but let's say this kind of funding  is nobody never asked me that actually it's a good question I would I would have done  it but now with the experience I have I would have saved money on on the plants first of  all I wouldn't save money in the mulching because I have to say I can I can see there  were differences between mulched lines of tree and not mulched and this especially if  
**0:30:08-0:30:16:**  on not in the edges but especially in the in the in the polycyclic plantation I wouldn't  save money on mulching because because it's important you have to be productive and then  maybe I would invite a lot of friends to plant and so and so I would say some money because  you planted all of these five hectares of hedges in one go in one year in one winter  okay wow yeah so lots of a lot of work yeah a lot of work was a big investment see see  
**0:30:55-0:31:03:**  there was a big investment as of yeah especially people work like because of the plantation  itself had to be done manually of course maybe there are techniques you can plant not manually  but since we had so much variety different variety we had boxes you have to choose the  trees it's not like you're planting potatoes on the ground or so it's a bit more I understand  the problem we've experienced this problem many times and you always end up mixed up  
**0:31:31-0:31:38:**  where at the end you you've only got one kind of tree left like I don't know if you encountered  this in your plantation but that's how it usually goes yeah yeah yeah that's true that's  happened we had the four tools we had four tools for making the holes in the mulching  and so there were four people one of them was me making the holes in the in the ground  with this metal tools you push it with the foot and you go 20 30 centimeter down in the  
**0:32:06-0:32:16:**  earth okay and and then yeah people on the back so tell me about the the mulch that you  used and you know when we were there I was fascinated by the difference between the plastic  mulch the biodegradable mulch the no mulch maybe you can tell us a bit about this this  mulching experience and and you know how it and you know what are the results see the  result I mean I cannot say much about different like samples with no mulching and so I had  
**0:32:37-0:32:43:**  just one line of poplar with no mulching and I have to say they are very very small because  they're very small smaller than their friends in the next line because they suffered a very  dry summer during the first year and and the mulching in that case I can't say it helped  a lot saving water saving water for the for the roots I experienced both the biodegradable  mulching we had stripes one meter 20 wide of course we use a machinery to lay it down  
**0:33:26-0:33:36:**  on the ground and and I did this biodegradable mulching on the edges and I never so see and  after I say three four years totally disappeared then I know people says not chase not people  disappearing is just the fragmenting very very small pieces so I don't know how good  is for the soil for the insect and so on but it did his job because during the first two  years the plants were quite safe in terms of water retention and with the control and  
**0:34:10-0:34:19:**  and so not much difference with the talking about the facts not much difference with the  with the non biodegradable plastic mulching while that plastic mulching I use it in the  forest and after three years we removed it all completely we cut the with a knife and  we took it out so that's a lot of work that's also a lot of work you have to take into account  so yeah so that's interesting to look at the the difference so that it only lasted two  
**0:34:50-0:34:57:**  years the biodegradable mulch math three three by by the third fourth year I didn't see it  anymore okay okay but by then the trees had already taken off see see no problem already  from the second year the third year yeah yeah but even from the first year then we used  to keep very low the with the with the yeah cutting the weeds twice three times per year  next to the trees both in the during the first years both in the forest and in the edges  
**0:35:30-0:35:35:**  with what tool did you do that we have a tool on the back of the tractor it can move a little  bit on the on the right side so yeah yeah so you can go closer but not much and you  just don't do that anymore after like when now we do it because we yeah of course we  do it see see see see no but it's okay yeah of course yeah yeah we do it but it's less  important we don't go very close to the plant because there's already shade and there's  
**0:36:01-0:36:07:**  no need to go very closer but we do it for the yeah see and I'm curious about the detail  of planting because you put so first you lay out the plastic mulch then you come and what  happens first of all first of all it's a big ripper passing and signing where you're gonna  do the edges or also the plantation of the forest so the big ripper 80 centimeter depth  and then yeah and then we passed with the machinery at that time I had a very good farmer  
**0:36:40-0:36:46:**  tractor farmer who used to go very straight because you know you have a blank sheet and  he went very very straight and he did a great job and he designed straight lines of trees  we still have yeah and so and after that we had these tools we call it carrotatore in  italian so you make a like a carrot of trees of soil has a like a crown on the on the bottom  and you can push it with the food it's very simple we had the four of them we made it  
**0:37:21-0:37:30:**  with a with a with a local camper carpenter company here okay and so then you would just  make the hole through the plastic through the plastic pull out pull out the the soil  leave the soil maybe on the mulching so you can reuse it after that then we had plants  of course two years plants trees with within within a within a vase contained in a pot  in a pot they were potted plants potted in a multiple pot most of them were in multiple  
**0:38:02-0:38:10:**  pot not all of them we had also naked roots plants like the this is the main most of the  plant were in in multiple pots and five centimeter depth these pots for estal plants and so yeah  and so you took it from there you plant it within the hole simple and then you then have  weeds growing on the sides like weeds growing on the pot it see also also trees growing  at the end we have poplar growing everywhere now because we had already some poplar very  
**0:38:42-0:38:49:**  old then we planted poplar in the in the forest and they they spread very well so they're  growing they start growing within the holes already 10 years ago nine years ago so did  you have to weed by hand no i never did it no like the weeds or you just let it be we  let it be so far okay yeah okay so i'm curious about more like the long-term management you  said that nowadays you're you're you're mowing the the hedges right 10 years down the line  
**0:39:17-0:39:24:**  uh yeah what do you mean mowing the edges yeah i'm curious because you know i'm curious  how you manage the hedge 10 years 10 years later because you just you just let the hedge  grow for 10 years if i understand correctly just now you've started uh intervening there  so what what you do exactly and for what purpose hello yeah the actually we left next to the  edges we left three meters and three meters from the trees okay three meters on the right  
**0:39:49-0:39:57:**  and three meters on the left now the branches are invading the roads let's say so i had  to intervene and and moreover i'm going to give a nice shape to the plants creating like  an umbrella underneath the the the streets the roads and yeah and then containing keeping  the the edge and not invading the fields the other side because we have the double lines  of edges with a canal a little canal in the middle and and so we have a inner part inside  
**0:40:34-0:40:41:**  the the edges that is more it's going to be this is really interesting because it opens  up to to different possibility to use this space within within within this two line of  edges we we are now thinking about using it like a like a picnic area like we would like  to develop like some many spots along the edges where like people could come and doing  their picnic maybe doing their grill or eventually making um see create some yeah because it's  
**0:41:20-0:41:27:**  not very common really to have a nice piece of land with some trees grass some shade in  summer time even if we are in the middle of a countryside area there's no more anymore  around and so this is something really amazing we we now can appreciate and we can say it's  really nice and so we are going to do the pruning focusing also on this and the the  work it's like yeah with the with a little saw motor engine so yeah we do the main pruning  
**0:41:59-0:42:11:**  and then we had a chipper so we keep aside we do different like in a spot we put all  the small branches in another spot we put the big branches we're going to use for fire  and after that so you pass with the with with the pruning cutting and selecting sorting  the wood and then in another passage we do the chopping of the small branches and we  take out the the big one so that's what the tractor attached tool that you do the topping  
**0:42:36-0:42:43:**  right yeah exactly where you do it by you do it all by hand the the all by hands the  the pruning of the edges by hands the first pruning okay wow that's a lot that's a lot  of work right doing passing through the whole hedge individual tree it's about five kilometers  long so it's a lot of work yeah of course if i also this i should have done some pruning  before that would have saved some some times and money probably now but i wouldn't have  
**0:43:10-0:43:19:**  much also burning wood probably so wood to burn yeah yeah yeah so in england i've just  come back from the uk now they prune their hedges with with hedge cutters uh-huh you  know the head does they only just prune always at the same spot you know and so it's it creates  they let it grow for a year or two and then they prune it so you don't have a lot of biomass  production uh-huh you see what i guess it's always pruning small branches small branches  
**0:43:39-0:43:45:**  small branches to to make it like in a tidy hedge uh-huh it doesn't create shade for the  for the for the pasture for the pasture and it keeps everything clean that's that's their  strategy in the countryside there most of the time that's what that's what you see but  it's a cutting machine like it's a cutting blade like yeah like a flail mower usually  they use them in the roads as well yeah yeah yeah etc it's just a flail mower on an arm  
**0:44:07-0:44:12:**  that that moves and that can go to the vertical it can like reach out and go to the horizontal  to do the tops you know it's quite a flexible tool but but it doesn't allow you to have  that vibe that you know wouldn't you wouldn't use a chipper because yeah and then yeah the  the yeah of course you save money in that way but the other way you don't you don't  collect also all these materials because exactly with my chipper i collect it yeah yeah exactly  
**0:44:33-0:44:40:**  and so what are you planning on doing with so many with five kilometers of wood chips  actually has a also um as for the cutting of the of the forest also for because i have  some lines of wood to burn i didn't do all the chopping and the and the pruning in one  year i spread it in two or three years so i started last year and i did about two kilometers  and this year i still have to start i'm going to start march i think i'll do another two  
**0:45:10-0:45:15:**  kilo two kilometers and collecting it and putting next to the vegetable garden and then  we use it to make pathways and then probably also to try to use it for mulching the the  cultivated the land for vegetable garden some of that we use it also for because we have  two horses and three donkeys so we use some of that for for the the litter for the horses  yeah the litter yeah okay so this is really for personal use there's there's not a commercial  
**0:45:49-0:45:55:**  objective with this of trying to sell no of course investing no exactly let's say no no  commercially it's not interesting i've found or maybe so far maybe i will we will find  somebody who might be interested but like for example chip and wood from little branches  it not is not interesting because it makes a lot of the chain dust it's not much woody  because there's the the the external part of the branches that doesn't burn very well  
**0:46:25-0:46:34:**  so has not a good value in terms of burning for chipping but it might be maybe sold for  liters or other purpose or just as mulching pathways as we do because creates also a very  nice aesthetic effect so if you do you can sell it for gardening or so it could work  it could work but at the moment is a personal use and we are thinking about yeah improving  the vegetable garden with these materials for pathways and maybe activated with the  
**0:47:03-0:47:11:**  with the compost from from the horses okay very nice very interesting and i'm curious  about how you've seen the trees or the hedges interact with the with the grain crops in  between have you noticed that there is a certain competition going on between the two has it  reduced a bit the productivity of that of that area i'm curious about how the your grain  crops interact with the with the trees no actually at the moment i i cannot tell you  
**0:47:33-0:47:39:**  much about that because the the plant even in 10 years is a lot of time it's not much  for the trees and then yeah so they they don't have very impact on on the on the next fields  i can say there are some some some i can see some impacts next to the big trees where many  leaves fall down in winter and so you have a lot of a lot of organic structure made so  but this uh this is plants like 30 meters high we have four five that plants and i can  
**0:48:14-0:48:24:**  see difference there it's part of the edges but it's just some spots yeah okay okay another  interesting effect of these edges is that they are very really full of birds a lot of  birds coming and and insects also i i i interact with during my cutting of the weeds next to  it's really full and many different okay interesting and have you noticed differences in in in  the microclimate have you have you noticed a big change in in you know in the heat in  
**0:48:55-0:49:01:**  the cold in the wind how do you feel about about that has it met your expectations let's  say no i i cannot feel it no i mean i i i i don't live within i should live there with  a little tiny house in the within there and maybe i could tell you a bit more and maybe  i should have lived before without and then i would but i'm sure there are effects because  uh yeah you can imagine just imagine you with a tiny house in the middle of the countryside  
**0:49:27-0:49:36:**  with no trees around and the other side you in the middle of the edges of course there  is differences but i couldn't feel it on my skin like yeah no i'm i'm curious if there's  something that you know if there was some obvious results or if if you felt you know  in my farm for example in the places which are protected by trees because there's so  much wind we we feel a big difference you know and and you know it's a big difference  
**0:49:56-0:50:00:**  in the wind we see a big difference also in the cold in the winter it's quite dramatic  but also because it's dramatic conditions um see now here it's not windy region at all  it's not wind it's foggy during winter and uh see no wind nice i have to say though to  add a bit of information from a very experiential point of view and and you know anecdotal uh  let's say observation that when i arrived on the land all the landscape around is is  
**0:50:28-0:50:32:**  basically just corn and soy and some big big buildings and stuff it's you know it feels  very barren as you as you said uh whilst being on such productive land so i mean it's very  very bad and then you come into this place and you see as you said grass and you see  hedges and and you don't see what's happening around you know it closes off the view it's  it definitely has an impact you definitely feel like you're somewhere else yeah it's  
**0:50:50-0:50:58:**  quite uh but this is just a human's perspective i wonder what a bird's perspective is they're  happy for sure yeah like we are when we are there yeah for sure nice so maybe we can shift  to the the the polycyclic forestry that you've got because this is again a bit to set the  scene this is really interesting for for farmers because you know one thing is is a forester  or forestry enterprise that have you know hundreds or thousands of hectares of forest  
**0:51:23-0:51:28:**  and that manage it but another thing is is farmers that are using you know small pieces  of land like you are to plant for to have forestry projects and you know we're trying  to find out you know how does that work how do you how do we interviewed for example row  and reed that is very much you know he's got a relatively small farm for the area where  he is and he advocates a lot and works a lot with farmers who have other practices like  
**0:51:47-0:51:51:**  who have sheep or who have grains and he's integrating these high value timber trees  and so we're starting to enter this conversation with people so we're very excited to be able  to talk to you about this because you have you know feedback from 10 12 years and already  one harvest of poplars or at least some poplar harvested of small scale farm forestry and  you know a lot of our listeners are curious about that so you know I've got lots of questions  
**0:52:14-0:52:20:**  set up for you as you can expect and you know the first one is you know why did you decide  to to go with polycyclic forestry what why forestry and not just hedges and grains where  did this crazy idea come from of course because we we fell in love with trees and the needs  that we we felt also the needs of re-reforesting the lands and taking care if I if I wouldn't  I decided also to to to do to do farming also because I wanted to take care about the land  
**0:52:49-0:52:55:**  and and of course when I mean take care taking care about the land is one of the activities  we have to we have to do is planting trees especially in this area because I have experience  I've traveled around Italy and Europe there are region hilly region where there's less  needs of trees but this area like where we are in in the big plains in north of Italy  there's really a big needs for that so so that was the the main reason why we decided  
**0:53:23-0:53:29:**  to do that then of course the funding issue is a is an important element I mean without  that funding I don't know how when and I would have done it and then I had the chance to  meet another interesting association working on research and lobbying for pushing from  from monoculture of poplar to multiple polycyclic plantations and so I had the chance to meet  them and actually we are also giving them part of the founding we gain every year from  
**0:54:03-0:54:12:**  that that plantation we give six of the of that money to them to collect data and to  then share it share those data and to yeah to do research so our plantation is also very  well detected in some all information about the biomass of the of the plants the diameter  and then all is registered for every year and because it's yeah because it was a quite  innovative scheme of plantation maybe you could describe a bit what it is this polycyclic  
**0:54:48-0:54:51:**  forestry because I'm sure a lot of people are just thinking trying to imagine what it  looks like yeah exactly so starting from the first world polycyclic we have multiple many  many more than one cycle of production of this plantation of trees so let's start from  the the the we have to we can say we have long term cycle of trees in our case it's  about oak and tilia lime tree is it correct yeah and those trees are yes lime tree so  
**0:55:29-0:55:38:**  those trees is they are within the same line the line of the long term trees separated  by eight meters then the second cycle is the cycle of poplar this the first cycle sorry  is about is gonna last between 50 they say but I think it's gonna be more 20 to 30 years  then the second cycle the popular cycle it's gonna be 10 years and I just figured out last  year that I can do two cycle of this I'm gonna plant the poplar after cutting them this autumn  
**0:56:14-0:56:21:**  we're gonna cut them and replant it within the same row line and very interesting this  is the the poplar cycle and then the third cycle is the plane tree plane tree that is  a super short cycle it's gonna be can be between four to six year can last we decided because  we started to cut this tree already a few years ago and we decided to give different  timing for not doing all job in one year so we shipped the work from the fourth to the  
**0:56:59-0:57:08:**  sixth year okay okay interesting and the by plane tree you mean the platanus by the way  the plane tree platanus okay nice see it's so I can describe you a little bit more the  main we call it the yeah the long term cycle line is each tree of each main tree like an  oak alternate and and the tilia is separated by eight meters in in this within this eight  meters we planted alnus alnus trees untano yeah holders holders and aside sambucus okay  
**0:57:53-0:58:02:**  sambucus is the elderberry elderberry exactly so we're in the middle of this eight meters  between the main trees a long-term tree you have these trees that they just they are there  just to support the main trees to support with making a cycle of nutrients between the  leaves and to support the straight growing of the main trees so that's the role of sambucus  and alnus within the main row line yes right that's what they do yeah that's what they  
**0:58:35-0:58:44:**  do also I think alnus is a also alnus I think is a nitrogen fixer yeah yeah I think it is  yeah yeah and so this is a multiple role for the long-term cycle then so what are your  main products from your from the multi-cyclic actually what's the this is gonna be this  is gonna be timber wood wood for furniture because okay yeah no nuts tree and walnuts  yeah and tilia lime tree are really very used but this is more how do you say an incognito  
**0:59:23-0:59:30:**  I don't know exactly how much they're gonna gain from them because the market of that  kind of wood is very flexible and 10 years ago there was a very high valuable now it's  really low maybe in 10 years it's gonna be high again so I cannot do prediction on how  much we're gonna be it's gonna be but I can't just yeah but I can tell you that there is  a lot of market for popular for industry for making the plants the sheets there are many  
**1:00:00-1:00:09:**  beginners in the north of Italy asking for wood and I can tell you the the prices are  really good they pay even I can say bit more than one euro per centimeter of circumference  circumference okay yeah for a tree yeah see and I can tell you in a good environment talking  about not sandy soil but with a good percentage of clay or lime and yeah and with with water  not too much deep in the ground you know we in our plane we have water you can find it  
**1:00:48-1:00:55:**  even in summer at one meter 52 meters you already have wet yeah maybe in summer a bit  more but a plant can reach that very easy and especially if you do yeah working before  so so and I can tell you that that this plant this popular can grow about 10 centimeters  per year of two conferences of gyr okay yeah um see I did all the measurement because because  I've already sold the the popular to the industry they didn't cut it yet but I've made the agreement  
**1:01:31-1:01:38:**  okay and so they come then with their machines and they harvest it for you yeah yeah they  are visit for them actually because I've sold them yeah okay but you don't have to worry  about the harvest no no no no no no and they also collect all the branches because they  need to warm up the oven to dry the sheets they will produce with the yeah so they will  clean up just that for this kind of polycyclic forest plantation and the the the they just  
**1:02:08-1:02:15:**  have to be to pay attention to the row to the line next to to the popular actually to  not break the tilla and not break the high value trees exactly exactly and that's the  main issue I'm concerned about the next cutting and they already asked me to cut the line  of of of plane trees to to make the the operation easier yes because they're not used to these  polycyclic conditions right exactly so are they so they're not very happy about that  
**1:02:51-1:02:58:**  I imagine no no they're not very happy that's one of the reasons why they might regain on  the prices no you know no but this is more difficult and actually it is the more difficult  because of course if you have a monoculture of poplar wherever you start and then you  go on here you have to pay a bit more attention you don't go in with big machinery they I  think they will do it the the cutting they would do it by hand somewhere with the with  
**1:03:23-1:03:29:**  a person not with a big machine while normally usually they do it with big machines yeah  normally in monoculture popular day they come with the big machines that's an interesting  aspect to it see what do you do with the plantain so the plantain the plantain after six years  I've cut between four and six years I've cut it and I let it dry on the fields I do some  where I collect it in some spots within the forest lifting them from from the ground with  
**1:04:03-1:04:13:**  the with the weather and then within the same year I sell it or somehow after six eight  months they're already dry I can I can sell it and I used to prepare some big bags like  one meter eighty high and one meter per one meter of the base and yeah and we sell it  directly to local market people we put some signs in front of the gate of the farm and  our yeah our customer are growing actually from the first year we had few like 10 15  
**1:04:47-1:04:55:**  people now we have doubled we are still not much for what for firewood they see they use  it most for heating actually because what's especially this year we had a lot of requests  because of the rising of the prices of the gas and so on so a lot of people start heating  their houses with wood with the either very interesting and so they asked me to cut it  they asked me to cut it small pieces because the stove normally especially the kitchen  
**1:05:21-1:05:30:**  stove they they need the 30 centimeter long piece of wood and the platinum plant is not  the hardest and the highest quality but has a nice value for burning interesting very  interesting and I mean shifting back to the to the company that comes to harvest their  poplars your poplars but that you have signed off already I'm curious is five hectares of  forestry or five hectares of poplar is that worth it for them to come because I would  
**1:06:00-1:06:05:**  imagine they would also bargain with you and be like ah it's a small quantity it's not  is that also something they let's say let's say I would say it's a minimum amount especially  if you talk about polycyclic because yeah if you talk about monoculture maybe a couple  of vectors is enough because you have a density of in a monoculture you have a density of  I think 300 plants per hectare while here in our first we have 90 popular per hectare  
**1:06:33-1:06:39:**  okay interesting and so that's what I'm curious to know about why opt for more multi-cyclic  when you could be doing when you could be doing a monoculture you know if I was trying  to optimize optimize economic return or well maybe that's not I should I should go back  on myself here and maybe just ask the simple question you know why would a farmer go for  multi-cyclic instead of monoculture yeah that's another good question I mean if you see only  
**1:07:06-1:07:12:**  the economical reason there's not much need but just because there's a lot of uncertainty  in the in the in the long term cycle because I cannot tell you the nuts tree we're gonna  be paid a lot now I don't know it how it's gonna be in 10 years so I mean yeah because  the farmer should do it because he trusts in I mean in itself in in nature and I guess  I did it because I was confident because I love also woodworks so I said oh by 20 years  
**1:07:45-1:07:51:**  30 years I think I will find a way to give value to those trees you know that's what  what was my thought but I don't know yeah you're right most of the farmer wouldn't wouldn't  do it and especially if there's no funding for that because actually I did it also because  I was subsidized so what what what it's my missing income is is balanced by the founding  and this is something unfortunately important to to make it happen but I guess the work  
**1:08:21-1:08:27:**  we are doing would demonstrate that it could be done even without so far it's not gonna  it's it's interesting what we are taking out from these fields economically speaking economically  it's interesting because the poplar are really yeah did their job and and also from the wood  for burning it's easy to cut it's easy to the the scheme of the polycyclic make the  work quite easy to do you that there are good distances between the trees so the work is  
**1:09:00-1:09:07:**  quite easy and it's competitive I mean with the with the wood coming from the mountains  or other so if you're what you're saying is that if you knew what the price of the long-term  trees was if you knew if you could get a good deal on the price of these of the tilia and  the nuts nuts tree and the walnuts you would become you know it would be very it could  be very interesting economically yeah that's what that's what you're saying because now  
**1:09:30-1:09:37:**  the uncertainty is making you a bit hesitate yeah you know yeah that's okay and then I  don't know also some uncertainty about the second cycle of poplar and maybe a third cycle  I don't know how it's gonna be maybe talking about a third cycle is too much but for sure  a second cycle it's possible yeah interesting so the main the main advantage of of polycyclic  forestry is is ecological then right it's also if you have for example a riparian area  
**1:10:06-1:10:09:**  which is a very sensitive area where you don't necessarily want to put a monoculture you  would like to be then it could be it's a good way of rationalizing and ecological your ecological  objectives and you know and getting an income from them yeah you know that's kind of what  I perceive no you're right I gave it for granted I mean I was of course one of the main advantage  of this kind of plantation even even if you want to talk about the the most economical  
**1:10:37-1:10:44:**  valuable plants like the poplar from a popular productive perspective it's still very interesting  because I totally reduced the intervention for pesticides or or also for fertilization  this is fertilizers yeah fertilizers I didn't do anything from the first year totally anything  and the plants are really healthy so far I've seen around plantation of poplar monoculture  really destroyed by a fertilizer and they work the soil underneath and it's completely  
**1:11:21-1:11:28:**  crazy so of course one of the main advantages the most interesting part of this plantation  is the the ecological synergy that they create and they they they about you also talking  about pruning to reduce a lot the pruning activity especially after talking about poplar  and walnuts and tillia after this fifth six year the plant goes very alone totally alone  very well wow and during those interesting so see sorry no sorry Dimitri and during the  
**1:12:06-1:12:13:**  first year of course has any plantation you have to do some pruning and activities yeah  yeah naturally so the management costs are lower it seems yeah implementation costs are  high management costs through the life cycle are lower yeah that's the main point yeah  that's very interesting and as you said if we knew about the price of the of the timber  wood the walnuts and tillia and wood for furniture of course we could say and to the farmer yeah  
**1:12:44-1:12:52:**  it's more convenient we could be more sure about there's a lot of it's making me think  a lot because you know how can we make these ecological well a key question we're asking  ourselves on the podcast and in general that people talk about in agroecology is how can  we make you know more ecological practices profitable and here your experience with the  with the polycyclic forestry is exactly that you know you're really experiencing firsthand  
**1:13:15-1:13:20:**  and giving us this feedback of how a system that is more ecologically you know it's much  more ecologically let's say respectful is also you know it's got some other challenges  but also high potential in a way you know we're starting to understand where is their  potential with for example the reduced management also the long-term fertility of the land of  the soil you know not depleting the soil of its you know being able to do more cycles  
**1:13:39-1:13:43:**  being able to when you do the final harvest put it back into production you're maintaining  your soil capital thanks to the diversity and the organic matter production etc and  also the fact that you're using no herbicides and no fertilizers etc and then that's you  know it's also a long-term game right yeah it's a long-term vision as compared to a more  short term you know like just popular monoculture for example which can give you a short-term  
**1:14:07-1:14:13:**  return that can be quite high especially with these prices now you know but so yeah I'm  saying these things so that people understand where we're you know where we're thinking  how how things are evolving in our heads with Etienne as we kind of try to evolve through  this agroforestry landscape yeah another interesting opportunity I have seen but I didn't exploit  it properly but after the first cut of the of the plane trees the the lights came into  
**1:14:37-1:14:46:**  the forest and I didn't use the that light and that soil that here I weren't I was not  ready to do and but yeah there are also some little opportunities after cutting I guess  next year when I will cut the poplar it would be the same yeah it's gonna be a big empty  I can use for a couple of years empty space I can use I could use and then now we start  talking about these opportunities you get into the conditionalities of the foundings  
**1:15:16-1:15:21:**  because when I got these foundings they allowed you to do this but then they don't allow to  do that so for example they don't allow you to I guess plant cucumbers or watermelon within  the forest or they don't allow you to graze animals underneath okay interesting yeah this  is some yeah weak weaker elements that I guess we're gonna face it and I guess the European  Union might interact with these needs and maybe change the conditionality they are proposing  
**1:15:55-1:16:02:**  you know we are into a European project our farm together with many others in Benetton  in Europe called agro mix and they are I guess you know about them they are talking about  these opportunities yeah yeah for sure that's very interesting we're in communication with  them to develop to try and collaborate in order to in order to do interviews with their  farms really and so we're talking with them and we've yeah so we started engaging with  
**1:16:29-1:16:35:**  them as an agricultural community and cool a few a few months back yeah so that's cool  that's nice to see that you're also part of this of this scheme and etc. I wanted to I  wanted to ask you if you think that this multi-cyclic forestry could be scaled up you know how if  you had if you had 50 hectares to use in forestry and you did the you did the test on five is  it something that you think could be scaled up to 50 is it reasonable this or would you  
**1:16:57-1:17:06:**  need to as you grow you need to go more towards simplification you know yeah no I would say  it's totally scalable I would if I had the more land I would I would do it I would do  it definitely and even I wouldn't change much in the scheme we have I mean we could think  about some testing on different medium cycle plants like the platanos could be it's really  an interesting plant actually yeah but I would do some testing with others and then the yeah  
**1:17:44-1:17:51:**  I would I would do it it's I would say it's scalable actually at the moment I was just  thinking talking with a friend who was asking who's looking for some land they want to they  are farmer in Verona they're looking for a place to for some piece of land to invest  instead of putting the money in the banks they are looking for a piece of land and yeah  it has always been on my mind to to spread this model on the on the on the land on the  
**1:18:21-1:18:25:**  surrounding and to get involved people that they want to put their money in the bank and  instead of that put it in in such a project this is something really I would like to make  it happen in a way in our land especially if the return is higher than than the than  the bank interest rates for example or then the the difference yeah in yeah well maybe  in 20 years you can say in 20 years just with the popular you can say my you might get the  
**1:18:55-1:19:02:**  investment back in then yeah interesting and then there's the whole conversation on carbon  credits and these things because this is gonna it's gonna come also new with the new energy  I guess yeah interesting that could also be funding the plantation of these of these systems  but that's a whole other conversation about the carbon credits we're at the beginning  yes but not we'll see in the next few years how it evolves for farmers and how they benefit  
**1:19:23-1:19:31:**  from it yeah now but see as a nice question what you ask and I'm really happy also to  did this I did this job with the in collaboration with this association called Alsa because  yeah they really with with this data we can really yeah compare it and and and show it  to to other farmers and show the results also not to the farmer but also to the policy maker  that they are writing down the funding schemes very interesting I'm curious why you know  
**1:20:06-1:20:11:**  you decided to kind of separate the popular because I'm sure you had heard even 10 years  ago about you know intercropping where you have you know poplars and and grains you know  throughout the landscape why did you decide to concentrate or maybe you know you've gone  through the decision process but maybe you can just tell us like what what's your opinion  on concentrating forestry together and then having separate grain production as compared  
**1:20:34-1:20:40:**  to having poplars and you know forestry and grains more integrated into crop what do you  think about this no in my case I did it because I wanted also there to create a barrier because  on the back of this forest we have a company making compost and making a lot of not really  nice sound and smells yeah so I wanted to create a bigger thicker barrier from them  but this is one of the then of course yeah I knew about this different schemes of cultivation  
**1:21:09-1:21:16:**  and my opinion I would I would keep an eye on this kind of I will keep an eye on on these  opportunities I would develop it in a you know like instead of having a line of trees  I would do like a complex model like I did in that my in my forest multi-cycle forest  so I would put all these tree cycles I described before within within a multiple line and be  in between these multiple lines of forest it's gonna be a mix between forest and edges  
**1:21:48-1:21:55:**  I would go that's how I see my farm in five years I guess yeah yeah that's very interesting  yeah I see I I can envision it as well so we have like a very highly productive you  know thick hedge or thin forest exactly and and and going in big lines and then you know  with maybe four or five six even eight different trees of different you know polycyclic style  and then in between big spaces for cultivating weeds for making every 40 50 meter yeah interesting  
**1:22:21-1:22:25:**  yeah that's we have to do that that's very exciting we have to find somewhere we can  try it out yeah very cool maybe that's how you're gonna do it on your land because you're  thinking of growing your your your polycyclic cultivation area so maybe that's an interesting  yeah yeah no but it's something really I would still if there are funding no doubt I would  do it without the funding I have to be to find a way to do it and it's gonna be harder  
**1:22:52-1:22:57:**  of course what what do you need when you say you know without the funding I need to find  a way to do it if we're just looking at your your issue here of of making it work economically  what do you need to have the confidence to invest or what do you need to to be able to  create that project without Europe just you know dishing out money no I just need time  I need time to to do it at the moment I have my because I have too many I have a multiple  
**1:23:21-1:23:33:**  multi multi multi farm how to say so we had so many activities that some have no time  to focus on one project and the other yeah and of course the funding doesn't give me  time but time is money in a way so they will make it happen and the other way I should  reduce the activity of the farm focus find the tranquility the to do it in a way but  still so it's more about thinking right it's about working out solutions you mean not finding  
**1:24:03-1:24:12:**  time to sit down and to organize and then to decide to do it and the funding give you  like a kick and and they tell you oh you have to do it there's a deadline I have to do it  in two months you have to to apply and then by next year it's gonna be done and then I  would do it would it be an option to go see the bank for these kind of projects or to  go see an investor somebody that would give you a loan you know is that something that  
**1:24:35-1:24:40:**  you you think would be viable or you you you wouldn't take the risk no no no it could be  it could be silly you know from this this funding issue it's a it's a it's an issue  because in a way it's cool they give you they give you money to do even cool stuff you can  you can apply for you have to also yeah adapt it to to your needs but it's possible and  you can do cool stuff and the other way they they steer the market they steer your decision  
**1:25:07-1:25:24:**  they steer it's not really see so but but would this is I mean since for example there  is the opportunity oh I know that there could be the opportunity to gain two thousand euro  per actor for example for that kind of plantation I would wait until maybe next year is going  to be a out this funding opportunity so I wait one year more to and I see if there is  because otherwise if the net the the year after they come out with this opportunity  
**1:25:50-1:25:57:**  and I just did it with my own or doing a loan or so on it's gonna be stupid so after the  experience I had I would say let's wait or let's let's push the European Union and each  region of Europe to to make a proper call for making this funding for finding this multiple  polycyclic plantation not only multicultural plantation but it's important they they they  should introduce this it's interesting I've got one last question for you and that is  
**1:26:33-1:26:39:**  what would you have done differently in your multi cyclic or polycyclic forestry plantation  what are the top if I were to go and plant my own now what would you what things and  I was to you know inspire myself from your work and and your system what would you do  differently what would you tell me Laura if I have to talk about the edges I wouldn't  plant the prunus spinosa guys because it's full of spines interesting that's the one  
**1:27:10-1:27:18:**  I did it I thought how I'm gonna be no it's too much spines and talking about the the  polycyclic forestry plantation as I told you I wouldn't modify almost everything maybe  maybe some distances between platanos a little bit higher now they are at two meters maybe  two meters and a half but then really I like the the way it has been designed and so interesting  yeah I I did the in the 82 forest polycyclic for one in the south with the popular and  
**1:27:55-1:28:02:**  the one in the north without the popular and I found a much better the one with the popular  because the public gives much more space within work so what I suggest if I should have to  do it again I would do it all with it with the popular with this triple with the cycle  yeah popular medium long and very short cycle interesting very interesting listen Fede I'm  not gonna take more of your time because you've already been very generous and no it was fascinating  
**1:28:33-1:28:40:**  interview really interesting and for me it was really a pleasure to be here in super  cool podcast really interesting yeah thank you I really appreciate we really appreciate  that so let's I hope we get to visit the farm again soon as well and yeah you're always  welcome and I welcome all of you listener to visit us well that's it for us today thank  you so much for listening sorry for the the slight interruptions that Fede and I were  
**1:29:10-1:29:15:**  doing with each other there was a slight lag in the conversation due to internet problems  so sometimes it didn't flow as nicely as we would like but anyways thank you so much for  making it this far and we really look forward to releasing the next episode  