---
title: 36 Managing A Diverse Landscape For Healthy And Productive Animals With Fred Provenza
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2022-03-09)  

**0:00:00-0:00:16:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:23-0:00:27:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  these challenges.  
**0:00:33-0:00:38:**  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Hi and welcome back to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:00:47-0:00:49:**  I'm your host Etienne.  Today I have the pleasure of welcoming Fred Provenza.  He's a researcher in behavioral ecology who has carried out fascinating research on the  
**0:00:56-0:01:02:**  nutritional wisdom of animals on their ability to select their diets and learn.  We wanted to explore with him the importance of shrubs and trees and the nutrition of grazing  animals, but in reality the conversation went well beyond that into why and how to increase  
**0:01:12-0:01:15:**  diversity in the herd's diets.  This of course relates to agroforestry, but also goes beyond as we explore in-depth elements  of animal behavior.  
**0:01:21-0:01:23:**  I really hope you enjoy the episode.  Hi Fred and welcome to the podcast.  Hello, it's wonderful to be here with you.  
**0:01:28-0:01:34:**  Yeah, we're so excited about this interview and having you with us today.  To kick things off, maybe you could give us a bit of an overview of your background and  the path that led you to researching agriculture.  
**0:01:42-0:01:44:**  Sure, happy to do that.  I think from when I was a young child, I was absolutely fascinated with anything that was  alive, insects, birds, fishes, mammals, and lived in a small town in central Colorado  
**0:01:57-0:02:01:**  in the Rocky Mountains.  Just loved everything outdoors, kinds of things like that.  So that led naturally then to when it came time to go to college to a program in wildlife  
**0:02:13-0:02:14:**  biology.  And I absolutely loved everything I was learning about plants, about animals, about ecology.  But at the same time, I kind of by coincidence ended up working on a ranch.  
**0:02:27-0:02:32:**  I had a friend who asked me if I wanted to earn some extra money during my senior year  in high school.  And I said, sure.  
**0:02:34-0:02:40:**  He said, we can haul hay, bales of hay out at Henry DeLuca's ranch in the evenings and  on the weekends.  And I said, okay, I was working at a greenhouse during my years in high school.  
**0:02:46-0:02:48:**  I said, that sounds great.  And I absolutely loved it.  Loved everything about being out there on the ranch.  
**0:02:53-0:02:54:**  I didn't know anything about it.  Was no ranch experience, but it was just the right thing for me.  It was clear.  
**0:02:59-0:03:00:**  I loved that.  And that combination of what I was learning hands on working with animals, goats and sheep  and cows and pigs and chickens and everything and growing crops out on the ranch really  
**0:03:13-0:03:20:**  complemented what I was learning in wildlife biology, even though that might seem like  it wouldn't.  It did perfectly, the ecology and plants.  
**0:03:23-0:03:27:**  And so, yeah, so that led me then.  You know, when I finished my schooling at Colorado State University, and as I say, I  loved that, I thought, oh, I've had enough schooling for one lifetime.  
**0:03:38-0:03:42:**  Not enough learning, but enough.  And so I didn't know what I wanted to do, though.  I knew I wouldn't be in wildlife biology.  
**0:03:46-0:03:47:**  Don't know how.  I just knew that I wouldn't be in that.  So I thought, well, I'll go back to the ranch.  
**0:03:52-0:03:54:**  Henry needs somebody to run the place.  He wants somebody to run it full time.  So I thought, I'll go back there.  
**0:03:58-0:04:03:**  Something will occur to me somewhere along the line.  So I was out there running the place.  Somehow, I don't know why, I thought research might be interesting.  
**0:04:09-0:04:15:**  I also was, I realized how much I loved learning about things.  And I was missing that, actually.  Just that kind of stimulation you get from the classes, I was really missing that.  
**0:04:25-0:04:29:**  And I think that was in part got me thinking, well, if you want to go back to school, which  you said you'd never do, maybe research would be interesting.  So I started applying to different places and ended up going back to graduate school,  
**0:04:40-0:04:41:**  actually at a place.  I didn't get into graduate school so easily.  I didn't have the best grades in the world.  
**0:04:48-0:04:53:**  They weren't bad, but they weren't the best.  But I ended up at a place, and I'll save the stories on that, though they're interesting,  that makes you reflect back on how events you don't even pay attention to at the time  
**0:05:05-0:05:11:**  end up being key factors in the composition of kind of a consistent plot of your life.  When you look back, then you think, oh, wow, that was amazing.  But anyway, I ended up at a place where the researchers were thinking about how can we  
**0:05:20-0:05:25:**  use domestic animals to improve habitat for wildlife.  And I thought that's perfect for me because there was always this controversy.  Wildlife people didn't like domestic livestock so much because they saw them as degrading  
**0:05:35-0:05:36:**  landscapes.  And here in this country, in the early part of the last century, there was a lot of overgrazing  that occurred that degraded the landscapes.  
**0:05:47-0:05:55:**  And so wildlife people saw livestock as absolutely negative influences.  And yet here's this program that for many years, for 50 years or so, had been showing  how we can use domestic animals to improve habitat through grazing for wildlife species.  
**0:06:07-0:06:13:**  So I thought that works really well for me, and I was fortunate to get in.  You sometimes think that it's not chance-like at all as you go through life.  There's kind of a path for you.  
**0:06:20-0:06:25:**  If you follow your heart, then you get on that path, it's kind of like it was always  there in a way.  Anyway, so that's long-winded.  
**0:06:28-0:06:31:**  That's some background, though.  And then I got there to Utah State University.  My wife and I thought, well, we'll go there for two years.  
**0:06:38-0:06:41:**  You can get your master's degree, then we go somewhere else.  Well, I found I absolutely loved research.  Just couldn't.  
**0:06:48-0:06:50:**  It was amazing.  And so ended up going on for a PhD.  And then during that whole process, I was working with goats and just watching what  
**0:06:59-0:07:05:**  they were doing like I'd done on the ranch and just amazed by their behaviors, doing  things that you think, why are they...  You know, we were using goats to manipulate this landscape dominated by a shrub.  
**0:07:14-0:07:19:**  We're going to talk about shrubs and trees, dominated by a shrub called black brush.  And the idea was we'll have the goats browse that shrub during the winter and that stimulates  all this new growth on the shrubs.  
**0:07:29-0:07:36:**  That would be better food for wildlife species like mule deer and bighorn sheep, as well  as for cattle during the winter.  So we're using them to improve this landscape.  
**0:07:42-0:07:46:**  But come to find out the goats didn't want to eat the new growth in the black brush,  even though we know on shrubs and trees, new twigs are more nutritious.  They're higher in energy and protein, in minerals and so forth.  
**0:07:55-0:07:57:**  The goats didn't want to eat it.  So these kind of things were and other things were happening.  It just was like fascinating.  
**0:08:06-0:08:09:**  To think about that and then to study it.  And so that led to 40, 35, 40 years of research.  And now we're talking, I'm retired for 13 years and it went quickly.  
**0:08:20-0:08:22:**  It went quickly.  And you know, you've had a long career, you've written several books and many papers.  And what were like the key themes or findings that you focused on throughout your academic  
**0:08:34-0:08:36:**  career?  I'd say there are three broad areas that we focused on.  One was, and they all related in a sense to the nutritional wisdom of the body of creatures,  
**0:08:48-0:08:56:**  that there's this wisdom that's in all creatures, including humans, that knows what your body  needs.  The cells and organ systems, including the microbiome, know what we need if we allow  
**0:09:02-0:09:04:**  that to take place.  So there's three facets to that.  One is getting some help early in life from mother.  
**0:09:13-0:09:21:**  So we did a lot of studies of how what mother's eating and where she's going, how that influences  food and habitat selection behaviors by her offspring.  To me, that was so interesting to look at that, how that starts even in the womb.  
**0:09:31-0:09:37:**  A fetus is already starting to learn about the foods mother's eating from the flavors  of her foods that get into the amniotic fluid after birth.  Then flavors in mother's milk are cues to what she's eating.  
**0:09:47-0:09:51:**  And then mother as a model, what and what not to eat, where and where not to go, what's  a predator, what's not a predator.  So that was one huge area that was so amazing just to see that learning that takes place.  
**0:10:02-0:10:09:**  And then to follow that with work that we did with bison, looking at how many, many  species including livestock, if you let them to their own devices, they end up in families.  They live in extended families, which is amazing too.  
**0:10:20-0:10:24:**  We were very much that way historically.  Indigenous peoples lived in extended families and clans and tribes.  So they are a model in that sense.  
**0:10:31-0:10:33:**  So that was one area.  Another area that was totally shocking to me are these, you know, if I were to ask you  why you like a particular food, you would tell me because it tastes good.  
**0:10:45-0:10:49:**  If I like you, I don't like one because it tastes bad to me.  And that's certainly our experience.  But what we learned was that cells and organ systems, including the microbiome, are changing  
**0:10:58-0:11:02:**  our liking for the flavor of food as a function of their needs.  So this whole area of what we call metabolically mediated feedback relationships, big bunch  of words there.  
**0:11:08-0:11:14:**  How many, this idea that feedback is what's altering our liking for the flavor of food.  But we did so much work and it's so familiar to me now that I don't, I forget.  But I'm corresponding with a lady in China who read this book that I wrote, Nourishment.  
**0:11:31-0:11:36:**  And she always had issues with diet and eating.  And until she said the book really helped her so much.  And she said, there was a, I asked her, well, what about it?  
**0:11:45-0:11:47:**  What really caught your attention?  And she put a quote in there and it had to do with these feedbacks.  And I was saying, when we did the first experiments of that, it absolutely stopped me in my tracks  
**0:11:58-0:12:02:**  to think that we could feed something to an animal.  And then we infuse something directly into their guts, into their stomach or into their  bloodstream.  
**0:12:08-0:12:11:**  And it totally changes their liking for the flavor of the food.  It's like, wow, that's, cause then it gets you thinking, well, palatability is more than  a matter of taste.  
**0:12:19-0:12:25:**  It involves these feedbacks and these feedbacks are coming from cells and organ systems of  the body, each with their own needs.  You know, nowadays people are very much focused on the microbiome and for good reason, the  
**0:12:33-0:12:39:**  microbiome has an influence on what we want to eat, that they need to meet their needs.  Right?  And so, but you have to then realize that same for the lungs, same for the heart, same  
**0:12:45-0:12:49:**  for the liver, same for the brain, they each have needs.  And it's a democracy in a sense.  All these cells and organ systems are sending signals to our palette that are changing our  
**0:12:57-0:12:59:**  liking for the flavor of food.  That's not very scientifically said.  And there's a huge amount of research that looks at hormones, neurotransmitters, peptides,  
**0:13:07-0:13:18:**  all these are the signals that cells and organs give to change our liking as a function of  their need.  I'm thinking now of a book, A Change of Heart, it's called by Claire Sylvia.  
**0:13:26-0:13:32:**  And she's talking in there about what happened after she got heart and lung transplant.  And it's really an amazing story about everything that happened to her.  Here's this 40 year old woman that gets the heart and lungs as she came to find out of  
**0:13:40-0:13:44:**  this young man, this young guy in his twenties.  And you think, like the medical people thought at the time, the heart is just a pump, the  lungs are just machines for getting oxygen, right?  
**0:13:52-0:13:54:**  No, they're not.  You bring all this, all this quote baggage of this young male into your body.  And it was amazing the things that she experienced.  
**0:14:03-0:14:12:**  You know, you don't realize that there makes you think what is this person I call me.  But as relates to our topic, what she found was that her food preferences changed.  They broadened out.  
**0:14:20-0:14:26:**  She still kept her quote her own preferences, but she started to like all these things that  Tim, her donor, liked that she never liked before.  You know, so anyway, so that was the second huge area, this whole metabolically mediated  
**0:14:35-0:14:40:**  feedbacks and how they alter liking as a function of need.  The third part was simply to look at the availability of alternative foods and to realize the fundamental  importance of biodiversity.  
**0:14:52-0:14:59:**  You know, as a young student, an undergraduate student, ecology was a fairly young discipline  in those days.  But even then, they were talking about the importance of biodiversity.  
**0:15:03-0:15:08:**  And it leads us to your topic too, or a topic we want to talk about, the importance of shrubs  and trees and systems.  Well, that diversity is fundamentally important.  
**0:15:14-0:15:20:**  You know, you can have a great mother, you can have all these metabolic feedbacks, but  if you don't have any decent alternatives, the body isn't going to be able to meet its  needs.  
**0:15:25-0:15:31:**  So this whole notion of biodiversity and the importance of biodiversity and plant diversity  and became a third part of this work.  And I'm still actually involved, not hands on now.  
**0:15:41-0:15:48:**  I do it as a cheerleader through other young people, but studying the linkages of how plant  diversity influences the health of soils, influences the health of plants themselves,  influences the health of livestock by allowing them not only to meet their needs for nutrients,  
**0:16:01-0:16:04:**  but also to self-medicate when they need that.  And then how when animals have the ability to select from a nice variety of foods, the  vital chemical and biochemical and health promoting characteristics of their meat and  
**0:16:21-0:16:25:**  milk and cheese is greatly enhanced for humans.  So those are the three areas I would say that was wonderful to explore during the time here  on this planet doing research.  
**0:16:38-0:16:44:**  And now it's still wonderful to be a cheerleader and supporter for young people who are launching  into their careers.  And over the years, you make contacts with lots of people that you can facilitate them  
**0:16:51-0:16:56:**  getting grants, getting research going on so forth.  Yeah, that's amazing.  And it's such vast topics.  
**0:17:01-0:17:07:**  But I think maybe we discussed this earlier and you mentioned you had done some work with  some farmers to try and bring these insights into some practice and something practical  and useful for farmers.  
**0:17:15-0:17:20:**  Maybe you could give us a few examples of this so our listeners really make the bridge  and grasp how everything you talked about before really translates into practice.  Well let's start one example that comes to my mind right now of when we were working  
**0:17:32-0:17:37:**  with farmers and ranchers and doing research as a part of that.  You know in the intermountain West, this region in the western United States, there back in  the day, people planted on the rangelands there planted a grass species called crested  
**0:17:56-0:17:57:**  wheatgrass.  It's native to Eurasia.  And the reason they did that, it provided great forage during the springtime for livestock  
**0:18:05-0:18:07:**  basically and for wildlife as well.  It greens up early in the spring.  It produces lots of forage, highly nutritious.  
**0:18:14-0:18:24:**  And so many of the rangelands were simply seeded to monocultures of crested wheatgrass.  So it did provide forage but in terms of diversity of forage and diversity of forage seasonally  it wasn't the best.  
**0:18:31-0:18:37:**  So one of the projects we were involved with was thinking about can we interseed crested  wheatgrass with different species of shrubs.  Takes us to the woody plants, shrubs and trees.  
**0:18:44-0:18:50:**  So we were involved in this study and working with livestock producers that knew the importance  so why shrubs?  So during the wintertime, crested wheatgrass matures and it has a lot of standing dead  
**0:18:59-0:19:05:**  material that's a great source of energy but it's not a great source of protein.  And we knew that if we were to interseed shrubs into those crested wheatgrass stands we could  provide a source of protein for wild and domestic animals.  
**0:19:16-0:19:23:**  In addition, when it snows, we used to get lots of good snows in those areas, the shrubs  are available above the snow line.  And so we did work with people along those lines and just showing the importance of shrubs  
**0:19:34-0:19:45:**  and lots of practical work was done simply to realize the importance of plant diversity  and then to interseed stands of crested wheatgrass with different shrub species.  It was very interesting some of the work that we did where in the early studies we had I  
**0:19:57-0:20:01:**  think like eight different species of shrubs that we'd interseeded.  Palatable good nutritious species they varied in their chemistries, they all were great  sources of protein and minerals and so forth.  
**0:20:12-0:20:17:**  But you know the secondary chemistries of those varied some might be high in terpenes  plants like sagebrush for instance over here and you'll have sagebrushes in your part of  the world too.  
**0:20:24-0:20:28:**  Others might be high in tannins like mountain mahogany and so forth.  I'm giving specific ones but the idea is different shrubs have different chemistries and those  chemistries are important for animals.  
**0:20:38-0:20:45:**  What was amazing to us was to watch the we were working with sheep in one set of studies  and we turned them out in the morning and they had patterns that they would eat.  For breakfast they wanted sagebrush.  
**0:20:53-0:21:00:**  You know and sagebrush a lot of people here in our part of the country think of as not  such a great forage.  Over the years we've tried to get rid of sagebrush.  
**0:21:09-0:21:16:**  It was our grazing management practices that led landscapes to be dominated by sagebrush.  Sagebrush the chemistry of the the terpene concentrations in sagebrush vary throughout  the year as you go into the spring and summer and fall very high concentrations of terpenes  
**0:21:27-0:21:32:**  in sagebrush to the to the point where animals don't want to eat it much.  And so a lot of times we would have lots of animals on landscapes during the spring and  early summer and they would over graze the grasses and forage which led to domination  
**0:21:43-0:21:45:**  by sagebrush across the landscape.  So now people are in a battle with sagebrush we want to get rid of it.  But during the late fall and winter terpene concentrations drop in sagebrush becomes really  
**0:21:55-0:21:56:**  wonderful forage.  So here are these sheep we turn them out first thing in the morning eight different shrubs  that they could select from they want sagebrush so they go and they eat sagebrush first thing  
**0:22:06-0:22:08:**  in the morning it was amazing.  And then during the day they would forage on different shrubs and in the evening they  always wanted to to eat this this shrub called four-wing saltbrush.  
**0:22:19-0:22:26:**  And so all that was was showing us that they the animals very much appreciated the shrubs  but they they appreciated them in different ways at different times of the day.  It was a whole eye-opener to me back back 45 years ago to watch just watch the animals  
**0:22:36-0:22:37:**  do that.  And then they would also dig through the snow to eat some of the the crested wheatgrass  that was there.  
**0:22:45-0:22:51:**  And so it was practical you know those became very practical kinds of things that were linking  the importance of biodiversity, plant diversity, diversity of different chemistry of species,  these feedbacks these metabolically mediated feedbacks.  
**0:23:01-0:23:08:**  And then you know as part of a broader system mother and mother teaching her offspring and  so forth.  So yeah we did many many many many studies with with with shrubs and the value of shrubs  
**0:23:19-0:23:26:**  as as forages for animals in this case during the winter time no question about it but but  year-round the shrubs are are valuable.  And then one can think too not only for animals above ground but also that diversity of plants  
**0:23:35-0:23:41:**  is incredibly important for the health of of life below ground.  That diversity is is enabling diversity of different species and the health of those  species below ground just like it's happening above ground as well.  
**0:23:52-0:23:59:**  Are there any specific elements and shrubs or trees that make them particularly interesting  or is it just that they contribute to biodiversity and to the wide like range of possible biochemicals  that an animal can ingest?  
**0:24:09-0:24:14:**  You know it's a really good question that you ask related to that and I think historically  what what we all would have said from from work that that classical nutrition work that  we were all involved in is that shrubs provide a great source of protein to to animals during  
**0:24:29-0:24:35:**  during the during the fall and winter time in our particular case here.  You know the microorganisms in the rumen need sources of not only energy which dormant grasses  and forbs would provide but they also need a source of protein to meet their needs in  
**0:24:48-0:24:53:**  order to keep their populations healthy and that's whether it's in the soil you know same  thing in the soil as it is in in the guts of the animals and so that would have been  the classical answer is that the shrubs provide a great source of protein to to provide that  
**0:25:09-0:25:15:**  nutrient for for rumen microorganisms and then when you have a grass shrub range you  have a wonderful mix of energy and protein complementarity there.  So historically and certainly today that that's every bit as true as it was back in the day  
**0:25:26-0:25:33:**  but I think now as we've gone on more and more and more to realize the tremendous complexity  of plant species when it comes to their chemistries that it's not only these primary compounds  like energy and protein and minerals and so forth but this diverse array of secondary  
**0:25:45-0:25:51:**  compounds that come under these broad classes like phenolics and terpenes and alkaloids  and then to appreciate that when an animal is eating a meal it's introducing tens of  thousands of these compounds into its body so it becomes incredibly complex to the point  
**0:26:01-0:26:08:**  where you know you can study parts of it facets of it and we did certainly but then I think  you reach a point and this is because I'm maybe getting old now I don't have the energy  to study but you also reach a point where you realize there's no way you're going to  
**0:26:18-0:26:24:**  study a hundred thousand compounds that an animal ate in an hour long meal you know it's  just you can't study that in the ways that we used to study but you come to appreciate  that the body knows the cells and organ systems of the body know how to work with all those  
**0:26:36-0:26:42:**  compounds and that it's when you have it enable animals to have a diverse array of different  species that then animals can pick and choose from different ones and then that exposes  at a cellular level you know if you think of cells as like a fish in a stream the cells  
**0:26:56-0:27:03:**  are foraging on what's in the capillaries and these compounds if there's a diverse array  of them in the capillaries then each cell can pick and choose and I think that's very  real that's not just just by analogy that that's real and so who knows what some cell  
**0:27:15-0:27:21:**  in your liver needs you know but if that cell has access to that then it promotes itself  to prevent cancer in humans and so forth we know all these these compounds have have anti-cancer  kind of of influence and so you know we did lots of studies of food selection just it  
**0:27:36-0:27:41:**  may sound funny but how interesting it was to follow animals around and see what they're  eating during the day and if you follow any one animal you find maybe three to five plants  are the bulk of the diet but it'll eat another 50-75 plants during the day a bite here a  
**0:27:54-0:28:02:**  bite there we never used to think at least me and I think most of my friends too we never  gave too much value to that 50 to 75 other plants that were nibbled on here and there  throughout the day because we figured the three to five are what are making up the bulk  
**0:28:14-0:28:21:**  of the diet which is contributing to the productivity of the animal but now I don't think that at  all I think it's all of those plants are mattering in terms of the health of the animal above  ground and then then one comes to realize as well that every one of those animals is  
**0:28:35-0:28:43:**  unique it's it's it's different one from the next we know for for we human beings we can  be identified by our fingerprint a bloodhound can track us by by our odors if we look inside  how our bodies are built the the form and how they function every one of us is absolutely  
**0:28:57-0:29:05:**  unique and so what we need is is different and that's the same for for those animals  as we showed in study after study after study and so it becomes amazingly complex to to  try to make a quote recommendation like we often do for people of what people should  
**0:29:18-0:29:24:**  be be eating when you come to appreciate that every individual is different then you come  to realize that's another reason why diversity diversity enables individuality right that  that becomes a key key part of that and so back again to one of the things that that  
**0:29:37-0:29:43:**  I know we want to explore what why have shrubs and trees in a system you know they they enhance  diversity for creatures below ground above ground and not only the livestock but all  the all the the different wildlife species that are on the on the planet yeah I think  
**0:29:56-0:30:01:**  that's fascinating and also like you've you've explored these themes in much more detail  in other in other talks so I encourage our listeners to also go and click on the links  I'll include underneath to to kind of get a further understanding of these of these  
**0:30:11-0:30:16:**  insights but you know I thought today we could take the conversation and try and take it  from where it usually ends which is okay well diversity is amazing and it can have this  huge potential for animal health and even for productivity but you know I'm a farmer  
**0:30:25-0:30:31:**  and I hear and I'm listening to you and what do I do with this information and so one first  one question that comes to mind is how do you promote that diversity through your practices  and how do you make sure kind of that the the right plants will show up or do you just  
**0:30:42-0:30:47:**  kind of have a hands-off approach and just promote general diversity and and and trust  your animals to go and discover those useful plants by themselves like what would be your  advice to to someone that wants to to follow the principles you've just exposed yes excellent  
**0:31:01-0:31:06:**  excellent question there's several things come to mind and and we can go back and forth  on this to to try to get after what you're thinking you know one related to diversity  how do you encourage diversity you know we were always doing that through grazing management  
**0:31:17-0:31:23:**  through thinking about time and timing of grazing you know when do we graze different  pastures for instance and what is it that we want to encourage and you know we we realized  for instance in some of the work that we were doing to improve habitat for wildlife that  
**0:31:36-0:31:42:**  if we graze during the spring of the year we could encourage the growth and productivity  of shrub species shrubs and tree species in that environment by grazing grasses and fords  during the spring puts little pressure on them we didn't want to get rid of them but  
**0:31:52-0:31:57:**  we would put a little pressure on them we could get more growth on shrub species by  time and timing of grazing if we wanted to decrease the abundance of shrubs a bit we  could graze during the fall and winter so you know I raised that as as a general thought  
**0:32:09-0:32:17:**  about how the way that we graze and thinking about when we graze and how we graze can influence  the biodiversity of the landscape so that's one thing that I that that we did a lot of  work on back in the day of how how our grazing management will influence the diversity of  
**0:32:29-0:32:38:**  landscapes in terms of one of another thing that came to mind as you were were talking  had to do with exposing animals to a variety of different foods and how do you get animals  to appreciate a variety of different foods and I think of in that sense of the work that  
**0:32:50-0:32:56:**  that we did with Michel Merie in France over the years and the shepherding practices and  not that everyone needs to be a shepherd but some of the the the ideas that that they developed  and and the practices not just not only the ideas but the practices of moving animals  
**0:33:11-0:33:16:**  throughout the day and moving them to different you know in their case to different habitat  types across the landscapes and and creating in a way appetizer courses main main part  of the meal booster stages desserts all these things that's you know only in France maybe  
**0:33:31-0:33:40:**  but again not not saying everyone should be should be be a shepherd but but what they're  able to do through their moving animals and exposing animals to different plant species  at different different parts of the meal is a way to to quote educate animals to expose  
**0:33:53-0:33:58:**  animals to different different plants and different species and to encourage them to  use those species they it's it's tremendous tremendous what they do and then to realize  too that they're constantly learning from the animals so it's a two-way street right  
**0:34:16-0:34:24:**  through learning from the animals can then train the animals but also by learning from  the yeah it's a two-way street it's a two-way street for for sure you know it makes me think  about something here I'm going to digress us into this that we got involved in years  
**0:34:35-0:34:43:**  ago so we were doing work training animals to eat certain plants but also training them  to avoid particular plant species and that training to avoid is based on feedback and  the idea that if an animal eats a food and it gets sick immediately after the meal it's  
**0:34:56-0:35:03:**  going to not want to eat that food anymore especially if it's never seen the food before  it's the first time they try a food think from your own standpoint you try a food you've  never eaten before you eat it and you get sick after that nausea you get nauseated and  
**0:35:13-0:35:19:**  we know the animals can experience this nausea and so we we did a lot of work training animals  in that way where we would give them a small dose of this compound lithium chloride used  to be used as a table salt substitute for table salt in humans and we just give them  
**0:35:30-0:35:35:**  a little bit of a high dose you know we weren't trying to harm them but we were we're trying  to learn about these feedbacks but anyway we learned that boy they they learn quickly  to avoid eating a particular food so a lot of people took that especially in vineyards  
**0:35:47-0:35:52:**  and there where they wanted animals to eat eat the understory but leave the trees alone  leave the shrubs leave the grapes alone so that they would train their animals with with  this lithium chloride well we were we got asked by a group in the northwest in washington  
**0:36:05-0:36:13:**  state they were using sheep to graze in these forest plantations the idea was to have them  uh graze the grasses and forbs but not graze the trees and uh and they they had flocks  of like a thousand sheep thousand two thousand sheep that they had trained it was a lot of  
**0:36:28-0:36:33:**  work but they trained them not to eat not to eat the shrubs and to eat the eat the trees  um and it worked it worked perfectly in fact i'm getting ahead of myself that when they  first started that they hadn't trained the animals at all and the first year they did  
**0:36:45-0:36:51:**  it they went in the ewes and the lambs ate the grasses and forbs they didn't touch all  these these conifer trees these young conifer trees that they were trying to get established  um so the first year was perfect the next year they did that um when they started the  
**0:37:02-0:37:09:**  trees started to put out some new new growth some new growth the lambs got interested in  that and the lambs started to eat that new growth and as the as the season went on the  lambs actually trained their mothers trained the mothers to eat so so it had gone the young  
**0:37:24-0:37:30:**  animals exploring the environment had trained trained the ewes the third year when they  came back now the ewes have this behavior they learned from the lambs they come in they  start to eat they train their lambs so i'm trying to say that so you know the learning  
**0:37:41-0:37:47:**  can occur in all different ways and the young animals are often a source of new information  into into the group and then we can think of the shepherds as also benefiting from learning  and and this learning going in these different directions going back to the the forest plantation  
**0:37:59-0:38:04:**  story what happened there then was that they learned of the work that we were doing on  training animals to avoid eating plants and when the ewes started to eat these trees then  they called us and said you know is it possible for us to train these ewes with this lithium  
**0:38:16-0:38:21:**  chloride not to eat the trees and that's when we got it got involved and that that's a whole  other story but but it uh it ties in with what what we had wanted to talk about related  to to trees and grazing trees and so forth i'll just interrupt for a second because while  
**0:38:34-0:38:39:**  we're on the theme i think it would be interesting is is this use of lithium chloride something  that's uh feasible for farmers listening to us and thinking of maybe putting in trees  in their uh putting in animals into their orchards wanting to avoid uh their animals  
**0:38:49-0:38:53:**  eating certain plants is that something like feasible uh is that the way you'd recommend  to do it then you know there's a lot of nuance to be said to that back in the early days  when we were first doing doing the studies we we were so excited about that because like  
**0:39:05-0:39:12:**  wow we can and when you see this demonstrated when you actually do that do something like  that one day they eat this plant you simply take a capsule in a balling gun put it down  which is easy to do and the next day you expose them and they don't want to eat the plant  
**0:39:22-0:39:28:**  it gets your attention you're like amazed you know that this can happen and then so  we worked out protocols over three to five days training protocols and it was done for  poisonous plants to help cattle and sheep uh mainly is what we were horses horses as  
**0:39:40-0:39:47:**  well so so it it can work it can definitely work but there's a lot of a lot of like everything  in life no silver bullets no silver bullets so we we and some of our colleagues showed  that that you can do this and it'll last up to three years as long as we ran those studies  
**0:40:01-0:40:06:**  the animals would still avoid but to do that there are several there are several things  that are really important it works best if the if the food is unfamiliar to the animal  you know if they've been eating that food for for months and years it's much harder  
**0:40:16-0:40:21:**  to train them to avoid eating it it's like with us if the food's always been good one  time we get sick it's like well that's a one-off thing i'm going to try it again and so forth  so there gets a lot of things like that that that are involved in in the training part  
**0:40:31-0:40:40:**  of this um having a variety of alternatives available to the animal also becomes very  important if if you for if there's not much else available odds are the aversion is going  to break down because if it's eat or starve then they'll try it and what's amazing to  
**0:40:52-0:40:58:**  me is how clever animals are at being in touch with their body and sampling things and and  those feedbacks of constantly constantly being in tune with that um you know if if you train  an animal to avoid something and for whatever combination of reasons it starts it samples  
**0:41:11-0:41:16:**  that food again and it might be that a neighbor one of their buddies sample that you know  that's it oh boy i better try that too we we did studies like that too if you had trained  and untrained animals and unfortunately it's the it's the animals that are eating the food  
**0:41:27-0:41:32:**  that draw the draw the animals that have been trained not the other way around and so but  if they sample at the you know two bites two days ten bites tomorrow's 50 bites the next  day and they're on it again and so it's um there's there's a lot to it it's something  
**0:41:45-0:41:52:**  that certainly can be done if a person wants to enter into that i i coached and worked  with many many people and many people remotely too in including in spain and france and california  the people who got most interested in this were people who had vineyards that because  
**0:42:05-0:42:11:**  they wanted to be able to allow animals to graze out in those vineyards you have a natural  source of manure then that's get that can fertilize the the vineyards and so forth and  you don't want them to eat the eat the the vines though and so i got involved a lot in  
**0:42:21-0:42:26:**  and received lots of nice bottles of wine from people actually because i said i didn't  want any money to you know to to be to be to be talking with people and so forth but  yes it can be done and you know this whole business of bark chewing bark chewing in animals  
**0:42:39-0:42:45:**  and girdling of trees that that can be a big issue right then obviously can kill kill the  trees one can think you know well why on earth do they eat the bark huh why why why why are  they so destructive right why do they want to be so destructive well you know there are  
**0:42:59-0:43:05:**  compounds in bark that really can can have health benefits to animals and i think tannins  especially bark is loaded with tannins and tannins can can have a lot of benefits to  animals not only from a medicinal standpoint but they also tannins can bind to protein  
**0:43:22-0:43:28:**  proteins in food and you think well why would that be good well it can help it gets a little  bit technical but it can get the by binding to protein in the in the rumen it protects  that protein that plant protein from being broken down by microbes in the rumen but when  
**0:43:40-0:43:46:**  it gets to the lower gi tract the tannin protein complexes dissociate so that protein gets  available at the lower gi tract it's what ruminants nutritionists call bypass protein  and it has really good health benefits so that's a little bit technical maybe but but  
**0:43:58-0:44:04:**  tannins can can do those sorts of things tannins can also help animals tannins in plants can  also help animals to eat other kinds of foods that they not might not be able to eat when  i was in hawaii several years ago we were talking with with working with with big producers  
**0:44:17-0:44:24:**  there and we were looking at at plants that goats and sheep were able to eat that cattle  couldn't eat and we were thinking well why is that the case and part can be just simply  how goats and sheep are built and how they function they're different from cows right  
**0:44:35-0:44:41:**  but another thing that we were talking about is the tremendous amount of girdling of barking  that goats and sheep do and that can enable them to eat plants that cattle can't eat simply  by getting that tannin in their diet so so the barking has a very important function  
**0:44:54-0:45:00:**  and one can see too for instance here where we are during the winter a lot of the small  small mammals will will bark they'll bark they eat the bark they eat a lot of the bark  it's for it's for those kind of reasons so that might be another opportunity to to offer  
**0:45:11-0:45:18:**  animals a little bit of bark and then follow that with a with a capsule of lithium chloride  and train them not to eat bark yeah just kind of summing up everything that you've been  talking about because it's really interesting it also means that yes you can train them  
**0:45:29-0:45:36:**  uh by providing a negative feedback but also then you should be probably providing an alternative  uh source of tannins for example because they'll be searching to like balance their diet so  it's a kind of two-way thing work on the negative but also provide that alternative uh one way  
**0:45:46-0:45:51:**  or the other to prevent the the draw towards it absolutely the perfect kind of summary  of that and i love the way you're thinking about that because it's like that completes  the story right that's the that's the whole they want this for a particular reason right  
**0:46:03-0:46:08:**  there's there's you said it so nicely i'll just reinforce what you said you know they're  they want this for a particular reason it's not just because they want to destroy your  your forest plantation or your trees right so they're trying to think about what is it  
**0:46:17-0:46:22:**  that they're getting out of that is there a way that we could provide that provide that  to them and uh you know that's where i think i think of the uh i think of the shrubs that  we were involved with and many many of the shrub species woody species are high in tannins  
**0:46:34-0:46:42:**  and so if if there were a person could in our case by providing those shrubs that provides  a source of of of tannins in the diet and so they they don't need to bark the trees  which which that takes time and energy to do that right that's not easy an easy thing  
**0:46:54-0:47:00:**  to bark they have to really want that to do it so so it's a good good source i'm thinking  too and i'm jumping around on you a little bit here but i had a good friend i have a  good friend that i used to work with a ruminant nutritionist and when he retired he moved  
**0:47:11-0:47:18:**  to uh the state of missouri and in missouri they have a grass there that grows in monoculture  it's called endophyte infected tall fescue it's it's by all rights a toxic plant but  but it so has come to dominate landscapes that people have tried to learn how to live  
**0:47:32-0:47:38:**  with that plant it can take over and end up in monoculture it's very high in alkaloids  and he randy was involved with us in some of the research like i'm talking about and  what he was observing his cattle do there because there were trees available and tannin  
**0:47:50-0:47:57:**  containing forage he said i noticed that those animals will use that as an appetizer they'll  eat those tree species and he said i'm virtually certain they're getting tannin out of those  trees and that's enabling them as we were showing in our studies to utilize this plant  
**0:48:08-0:48:14:**  that's high in alkaloids a certified infected tall fescue and that takes us into a little  of the particulars but the tannins have a very high affinity for binding to a lot of  compounds i stated that earlier when i said tannins bind to proteins and they can create  
**0:48:26-0:48:32:**  a bypass protein effect for animals well the same thing happens with tannins and their  relationship with terpenes and plants like sagebrush they'll bind to that so an appetizer  of a food high in tannin enables animals to eat more of a food high in terpene the same  
**0:48:46-0:48:52:**  with alkaloids so in our particular environment and it's why it does get important to try  to know your species and know what kind of compounds that they contain not that it can  happen naturally if a person first learns the different species of plants and then you  
**0:49:04-0:49:11:**  start to learn well this one for instance i would be thinking about now bitter brush  and sagebrush bitter brush is high in tannins sagebrush is high in terpenes an appetizer  of bitter brush helps animals to utilize sagebrush and there are landscapes where i used to work  
**0:49:25-0:49:32:**  where animals had access to both bitter brush and sagebrush and you could see that they  reduced the abundance of sagebrush and i'm sure it was because they had the bitter brush  as an appetizer to help them eat sagebrush and then there was there were areas where  
**0:49:44-0:49:49:**  this is wildlife species i'm thinking about now mule deer where the mule deer couldn't  go and there was a much much more um a mix uh an even mix of sagebrush and bitter brush  where the deer couldn't go where the deer could go they had reduced the abundance of  
**0:50:02-0:50:07:**  sagebrush and the bitter brush is that making sense the bitter brush is helping them to  do them the appetizer of bitter brush is helping them to use the sagebrush but but just a question  here okay let's take my example um i'll be in a farm i'm thinking of planting some trees  
**0:50:19-0:50:24:**  for example willow is high in tannins so i'd be smart to make sure i include some willow  and give access to my animals so that you know they can use those tannins and and hopefully  that will enable them to explore new diets by by combining uh with other molecules what  
**0:50:35-0:50:41:**  would that be an approach you'd recommend absolutely the case you're you're right on  thinking you know and we see here in in uh every place every place that i've worked here  uh the value of willows and how much animals like willows and it's for for all these reasons  
**0:50:55-0:50:59:**  that we're talking about yeah so absolutely a perfect example of that you know and the  value of of willows back in the day we were did a lot of work with natural products chemists  and we were looking at at different species of shrubs and uh it's clear that tannins aren't  
**0:51:12-0:51:18:**  tannins aren't tannins right and this isn't to confuse or make it more complicated but  it's simply to state a fact the tannins in bitterbrush are different from the tannins  in black brush are different from the tannins in mountain mahogany the structures are all  
**0:51:27-0:51:34:**  different so plants plants don't want to but having said that tannins do play general kinds  of roles like we're talking about and so i i wouldn't get so fussed on on on knowing  you know all the particulars of of the tannin structures and that sort of thing but simply  
**0:51:47-0:51:53:**  knowing that certain species have certain kinds of compounds willows have tannins they  also have salicylic acid which is basic ingredient in aspirin right so if the animals have a  headache maybe they can go down i'm teasing you a little bit but would you say that naturally  
**0:52:04-0:52:10:**  in ecosystems you tend to find uh enough diversity that you have all these important classes  represented so what i mean by that is that if i'm a farmer is it enough to just work  with what's already there and maybe allow certain things to develop or do you need to  
**0:52:20-0:52:25:**  be that bit more technical to really understand what's already there what functions they play  and maybe identify a gap or a lack of of a certain plants or important functions in the  nutrition another really important point that you're raising when you started to to ask  
**0:52:40-0:52:47:**  the question what came into my mind were many of the of the native systems that we worked  in and there was really nice diversity in those those systems and so in those cases  it was work as you said working just working with what what was there and uh and not not  
**0:53:03-0:53:11:**  necessarily needing to think about introducing anything when the thing that we would introduce  was simply management for appropriate grazing management was what we were thinking about  a lot and how to you know we we like this diversity we want to keep this diversity and  
**0:53:22-0:53:28:**  so how do we manage in ways that that keep that if we need to encourage certain species  how through the time that we graze the animals that we put out there um you know we used  to see so much i'm i'll digress here a little bit and think i'm thinking of some studies  
**0:53:42-0:53:50:**  that that were done in the southern part of utah on diverse kind of natural landscapes  and the question they wanted to ask is the the influence of sheep versus cattle versus  cattle and sheep together on these landscapes and so they were they had areas that they  
**0:54:02-0:54:08:**  grazed only with sheep um during the growing season spring summer and and into the fall  other areas they grazed only with cattle and then with cattle and sheep together and you  can change the diversity of plant species by the animal species that you put on those  
**0:54:18-0:54:31:**  landscapes the sheep really like to to utilize the the the forb species there and and some  of the shrubs and so they they would would really encourage movement toward domination  by some of the grass species whereas the cattle very much preferred the grass species at that  
**0:54:44-0:54:49:**  time of the year and so you would get a movement towards forbs and shrubs the combination of  cattle and sheep you'd maintain more of a balance so that's that's you know through  the species of animals and then the time that you graze what what struck me after 40 50  
**0:55:02-0:55:07:**  years of working in that is how much we can influence the relative abundance of different  species if we think about time and timing and animal species that we put on those and  I'm saying that in a positive sense it's that you know we we can really have an influence  
**0:55:18-0:55:27:**  on on what's what's out there in those landscapes so in that sense it becomes developing a relationship  with the landscapes we know in our personal life that the amount of interest that we have  and energy that we put into our relationships with one another it influences the the quality  
**0:55:39-0:55:45:**  of the relationship it's the same with the landscape too you know and I mean that's  not for everyone I think of the people I worked with over time and the people that that did  the best were the people that just naturally loved loved the relationship with the landscape  
**0:55:58-0:56:03:**  right they they were just fascinated they loved the animals they loved the plants they  loved thinking about that they loved being involved with it and they were able to do  things that a person that's maybe not so interested couldn't do and it was it was that they were  
**0:56:15-0:56:22:**  these nurturing relationship with the with the landscape it matters a lot it's like the  kind of the the loving energy we put into something and and it's not to say that's good  or bad we're all different right in terms of what what what is interesting to us but  
**0:56:34-0:56:38:**  if it's something that fascinates you it's like the sky's the limit on what what can  be done that's the first thing I think is is work with what try to work with the landscapes  that you have rather than try to bring things in but then you know a person can always the  
**0:56:52-0:56:58:**  example I gave of the the lady in Australia you know they had removed all the trees from  those landscapes so if you want trees back you're going to have to put trees in and so  that's what they did 50,000 trees over those years they'd they'd planted on those landscapes  
**0:57:08-0:57:13:**  and totally totally transformed them back much more to how they would have been when  they there were lots of eucalyptus trees growing on those landscapes.  There's a several other questions that you know I'm gonna have to take a few steps back  
**0:57:24-0:57:30:**  because we went quite far into this you know fascinating topic but you know I asked you  a bit earlier on on what could a farmer do what are his tools to affect the amount of  diversity one thing that comes to mind for me is also the amount of fertilization you're  
**0:57:41-0:57:46:**  going to put on and and the fertility of soils because for example the region where I am  has very diverse prairie ecosystems and it's essentially because the soils aren't that  rich and there's this relationship between you know very fertile lands will tend to have  
**0:57:56-0:58:04:**  maybe less diversity than more poor diverse soils am I correct in making that link?  Yes it's a very good point that you raise and certainly the case that resource availability  in the environment sunlight nutrients water have a huge influence on on diversity on what  
**0:58:16-0:58:24:**  plant species are there and so it it becomes a balancing act as you say of thinking about  that and thinking about you know certainly when when we introduce livestock into into  an area into a system they're going to alter fertility of those landscapes by their urine  
**0:58:39-0:58:46:**  and feces right and and as they they graze they're having an influence on those systems  and so you know and I want to let me make a point here too I am maybe too enthusiastic  in a way about diversity too I think I see lots of value and I love to see that but you  
**0:59:02-0:59:09:**  know I have a friend Pablo Gregorini who's originally from Argentina he lives he and  his family live in New Zealand now and he's doing lots of work along the lines that we've  been talking about and they're showing that as you move from from even one or two species  
**0:59:20-0:59:26:**  to say a handful four to six species depending what those species are can have tremendous  influence in terms of the health of the animals and the system so so I just add that as a  caveat that you know a person doesn't have to to have maybe 100 200 species or like one  
**0:59:40-0:59:46:**  of my friends here on the the native range where they graze he tells me there's 400 species  you know maybe thinking even four to six species and if it's highly productive can can be highly  highly nutritious and valuable for for animal species as well so that's good maybe to make  
**1:00:00-1:00:07:**  that point too that you know it's it doesn't have to be hundreds of species to to be diverse  and to be functionally and meaningfully diverse as well but you know you can also see the  other way is that I'm farming on quite poor sandy soil which of course is an advantage  
**1:00:21-1:00:26:**  but I think we produce exceptional hay out of that soil and I think there's something  about plants being stressed and and pushing in a harsh high altitude environment and it's  quite interesting because you have like exceptional quality hay coming out of poor soils which  
**1:00:40-1:00:43:**  can be a bit counterintuitive because you would assume that you know the best richest  soil would produce the best hay and I'm taking this I'm just sharing the experience of the  farmers I've been working with you know this isn't anything published or whatever but been  
**1:00:53-1:00:59:**  working on five six farms and they've all told me the same thing is like cows will eat  much more of this hay that we produce here this thin mountain hay is much more edible  I don't know how you say it in English but in French is a petal means tasty for the animals  
**1:01:11-1:01:16:**  then for example the hay from the plains which is much more abundant and I think there's  something interesting and I kind of link it back to what you were also talking to about  you know secondary compounds and the health of like very diverse plant communities.  
**1:01:29-1:01:37:**  You raise a hugely interesting and important topic when you're saying that and you mentioned  that you know you don't have any research to back that but what comes to mind is a my  mind is a huge amount of research that absolutely consistent with everything that you're saying  
**1:01:49-1:01:55:**  and what it illustrates and this will depend on the compounds that we're dealing with but  let me generalize and tannins would fit into this that as you as fertility as resource  availability let's say declines you can concentrate compounds you can concentrate both primary  
**1:02:10-1:02:16:**  and secondary compounds they become more concentrated in plants you don't have the dilution that  you get due to growth when you increase for still at the or resource availability and  so you know even though it may not be you're on these poor quality soils and you're maybe  
**1:02:27-1:02:33:**  not getting the production you can have a very much a concentration of both the primary  and the secondary compounds and make very good quality kinds of food hay for animals  under those conditions so that it's a huge point that you raise and a very good point  
**1:02:47-1:02:55:**  and I often think of that relative to fruits and vegetables that we grow and that you know  if you provide too much nutrients you can get you can accent growth at the expense of  final chemical richness it's it's a kind of a balancing act between how much is how much  
**1:03:07-1:03:14:**  fertility and the plants are responding so hugely interesting and an important area we  used to think of that a lot with plants I'm thinking of a plant called sericea lespedeza  it's a it's a form that's very high in tannins and depending on where it's growing it's either  
**1:03:27-1:03:33:**  highly palatable or highly unpalatable same plant species absolutely it's simply a function  of the environment if it's growing in a really resource rich environment in this case a lot  a decent amount of water and nutrients it becomes more palatable to cattle in this case  
**1:03:47-1:03:55:**  because it because you do dilute the tannins a bit if it makes it if you get too much tannin  the animals can't can't utilize it in the case of sericea the tannins it has and so  forth so if it's growing on these harsh sites cattle don't want to eat it much because the  
**1:04:05-1:04:10:**  tannins are too concentrated in if you go the other direction and so you could imagine  a continuum of that right so it's I think hugely interesting and friends I worked with  over the years and some of the work we did too was just realizing the the importance  
**1:04:24-1:04:28:**  of what you're observing you know and so you you're absolutely right with what you and  the farmers are are are seeing it makes sense and then there's a there's a big amount of  research that absolutely supports everything you said that will be some consolation to  
**1:04:43-1:04:48:**  all of us farming on poorer soils you know we can at least comfort ourselves knowing  that we can still have a very high quality production with these concentrated fodders  and productions I was going to loop back to you know a bit before in the conversation  
**1:04:59-1:05:04:**  because we we touched upon it but I think it's a massively important aspect we talked  about training to avoid a certain food and we mentioned the ability to introduce new  types of food that's the next step after having increased diversity in your landscape while  
**1:05:14-1:05:21:**  you want your animals to use that diversity and the method to which you reach that I think  is really interesting you know let's say you know I'm on the farm I've planted new shrubs  with willows or anything else I know theoretically it's possible or I might not even know that  
**1:05:32-1:05:37:**  it's possible for animals to eat it but I might just want them to try it how do I approach  this you know there's a variety of ways that that person could approach that if you have  if you have animals that are familiar with eating those the plants that you put in or  
**1:05:55-1:06:02:**  if your neighbor has animals that are familiar you know a few a few animals to to guide the  other animals can be really valuable and I we we've gotten involved with people who come  to appreciate that and think you know if I introduce have a few of these animals that  
**1:06:12-1:06:17:**  are knowledgeable they can train my animals really quickly to to get onto those foods  so that that's that's one thought another thought there's a lady that worked with our  program for many years and went into business then for herself livestock for landscapes  
**1:06:29-1:06:36:**  her name is Kathy both and her one of her goals in in all of her work was training animals  to use foods that they ordinarily wouldn't use and so she would offer them figure techniques  to offer them in feed bunks to animals and just to get them familiar and you know you  
**1:06:49-1:06:56:**  think why wouldn't they use them why wouldn't they be familiar and I think you know on the  on the landscapes that we have there are many many species in our particular case and maybe  some species they just simply have never paid attention to it's never been a part of of  
**1:07:09-1:07:15:**  their radar screen in the supermarkets where we go here there can be six hundred thousand  different items available to you and I was thinking of this lately we have a neighbor  down the road that she's in a wheelchair right now and we ask her if she want us to do some  
**1:07:25-1:07:32:**  shopping for and when we went into Bozeman recently and she asked us to pick up a couple  of items and one were these little peas these snap peas and I had never paid attention to  those I'd walked by those I don't know how many times in the store you know and we got  
**1:07:45-1:07:51:**  those four and I thought I'm gonna get a bag for us to just absolutely love them well wasn't  that I didn't like it it's just I never had never had occurred to me that they were there  or to use them so that's a little bit how I think of Kathy's work of just offering animals  
**1:08:02-1:08:08:**  in a setting where they can become familiar with it there's a friend that I was corresponding  with about a shrub called rabbit brush that animals don't don't always utilize and cattle  he was working with cattle and he knew of some work that we'd done where we sprayed  
**1:08:19-1:08:24:**  molasses just take a little bit of molasses and spray that on the shrubs to attract the  animals that are familiar with molasses to attract them to utilize it he was sending  me pictures he was so happy how the cattle had just taken to eating this rabbit brush  
**1:08:37-1:08:42:**  like crazy where you ordinarily they don't touch it at all rabbit brush too is interesting  plant because it regrows really readily after it's you know you browse it this time of year  in the fall and winter next spring it'll grow back like crazy so it's it's a great potential  
**1:08:55-1:09:00:**  forage resource but his cattle had never used it so you know it's the ideas like that that  a person can use of just ways to try to get the animals to to try it try it out and see  it's not so bad but you wouldn't want to you know take it too far because then you're kind  
**1:09:12-1:09:17:**  of messing around with their feedback loops let's say you're spraying something with with  the molasses so you just want to do it once so they they pay attention to it but then  you want to let them still be able to decide if that is positive in their nutrition or  
**1:09:27-1:09:33:**  not right and if it's not then just drop it absolutely the case absolutely the case and  that's where too a person has to you're raising such such an important point in that sense  some of the plants that animals don't don't use they're not using because they are potentially  
**1:09:49-1:09:54:**  toxic to the animal it's a huge huge point that that we want to make here they're potentially  toxic and the animals very well may be totally avoiding them because they are so toxic at  a particular time or limiting their intake a great deal maybe 10 bites is enough of this  
**1:10:09-1:10:16:**  particular plant species so it's very true what you say that there could be this introduction  to the plant and the animal gets to experience and try it out but then letting the animal  rely on those feedback systems that that that they are so in tune with it it amazes me how  
**1:10:30-1:10:36:**  well they're able to do that and I I won't talk about all the studies we did right now  but they're coming to my mind and just thinking it's amazing how much in tune they seem to  be with their own bodies and how then I think about how easy it is for we humans to kind  
**1:10:49-1:10:54:**  of maybe not stay in tune with our own bodies but yeah a good point that you're raising  of how you know introduce them to that and so that they're familiar with it and then  allow them to to adjust their their use of that plant as a function of what their body's  
**1:11:07-1:11:11:**  able to to tolerate and need so forth.  Another interesting point is how much is linked to you know training and knowledge in the  herd and how much is linked to genetics even within a species for example you know I have  
**1:11:24-1:11:31:**  cows and they're not necessarily eating or utilizing enough the local resources is it  is it better to invest in like trying to train these cows or should I be reconsidering maybe  the the breed and going for like a harder breed of cows or you know what what how would  
**1:11:42-1:11:45:**  you see that?  Yeah that's another excellent excellent excellent question the the genetics I think gets down  to how an animal's built and how an animal's body's actually functioning and what that  
**1:11:58-1:12:07:**  animal is capable of for instance for for instance utilizing I mentioned endophyte infected  talphescu earlier and that by all rights it's a toxic plant well people who work a lot with  livestock cattle and endophyte infected talphescu in fact do select for animals that have the  
**1:12:20-1:12:27:**  ability to ingest high amounts of alkaloids so so their body how their body is able to  detoxify those alkaloids handle those alkaloids and so forth that that so there is that basis  in terms of morphology and physiology that enables animals some animals to to ingest  
**1:12:44-1:12:49:**  plants that other ones might not be able to a goat isn't a sheep isn't a cow and that  they're different in terms of their how they're built and how they function and same within  cattle breeds.  
**1:12:54-1:13:00:**  The other thing to realize is that within a breed within your your flock of animals  or herd of of animals there's going to be great variability amongst individuals in that  group to utilize.  
**1:13:08-1:13:13:**  I'm thinking of studies now that were done at the poisonous plants research lab in Logan  where they had five different breeds of cattle and they were looking at their ability to  to utilize this toxic plant called larkspur delphinium probably you have that it's it's  
**1:13:26-1:13:32:**  grows in many parts of the world it's a beautiful beautiful plant but there was more variation  within a breed than across breeds in terms of ability to to ingest this plant so it's  a key point that that you're raising there are these differences you know the degree  
**1:13:45-1:13:50:**  to which that starts to happen to in utero and early in life gets us into this whole  area of epigenetics and gene expression and what mother is doing and what genes get expressed  that end up making each individual different that that all becomes a basis of of this genetic  
**1:14:06-1:14:16:**  epigenetic kind of effect but certainly it's important and and then realizing like I say  that within the animals you have there's going to be variation and if you don't want to to  try to buy whole other animals and then again it's the relationship you have but you know  
**1:14:30-1:14:39:**  you trying to to it gets down to what what different individuals are doing and then then  how do you identify which ones are doing that in those studies they were able to to monitor  but it was amazing to see how much variation within a breed all these individuals just  
**1:14:50-1:14:57:**  totally different in terms of their ability to to ingest that that plant and yeah and  then with the endophyte infected tall fescue what happens is the the ones that aren't doing  very well get selected out of the herd the ones that do well are kept in the herd and  
**1:15:09-1:15:16:**  it's it's easier in a sense because it is such a mono monoculture kind of system so  your animals are either doing well or they're not doing well it's not a diversity of different  thing different plant species out there they're really challenged and yeah and so the the  
**1:15:26-1:15:31:**  producers are selecting for the ones that do the best it feels like listening to you  that you know because so many farmers can't operate in such a precise manner as research  where you have other tools to measure the best you can try and do is like increase your  
**1:15:41-1:15:45:**  chances by like okay let's just generally increase diversity let's try and make sure  that animals can find a diversity of molecules in the landscape and then let's observe and  remove individuals that are doing badly for whichever reason it is without trying to necessarily  
**1:15:59-1:16:03:**  understand it completely because if you don't have this kind of pattern approach to it there's  so many variables that you it'll be really hard on a on a farm level to actually understand  all these connections absolutely the case absolutely the case you know encourage diversity  
**1:16:15-1:16:21:**  see which animals are performing best and doing the things that you want done in the  landscape performing the best and then yeah and the ones that don't do well and so then  you become a little bit like nature in that sense right the the animals over time that  
**1:16:32-1:16:38:**  are in a herd of deer or elk or or whatever creature sheep or whatever creatures might  be the ones that that are able to perform well under those conditions reproduce have  their offspring and they they come to to dominate within within the the herd in that particular  
**1:16:49-1:16:55:**  area absolutely that's that's how how it all ends up then yeah because this this ties to  another thing we mentioned but maybe i didn't push it quite enough around you know some  caveats or dangers in in in bringing new elements into the diet and this experimentation you  
**1:17:07-1:17:12:**  know many people maybe would be afraid of like poisoning their animals you know is is  there some advice there on like you know maybe going slowly or just maybe trusting your animals  to to select and and and to be able to recognize something that might be toxic that's a good  
**1:17:25-1:17:31:**  another i keep saying good questions but they are good question they are very good very  good questions and uh you know what what comes to my mind is that that's where i think having  animals that know quote know your range having animals that are familiar with the landscape  
**1:17:44-1:17:50:**  and uh mothers that know know the landscape and that can train the offspring that that  becomes the real really the important buffer and then um you know and then gradually introducing  things when that when they're familiar with a landscape uh adding one new thing or or  
**1:18:02-1:18:08:**  a handful of new things to the diet for them to explore um that that becomes relatively  simple for the animals what's overwhelming is when you bring animals from uh another  totally different environment into a new environment then they've got to sort everything out they've  
**1:18:20-1:18:25:**  got to figure try to learn it all and there's that learning curve and that's when a lot  of mistakes can be made i think of when when my wife and i were living in the backwoods  of colorado on these huge landscapes that that were had combinations of a forest deciduous  
**1:18:39-1:18:46:**  and conifer trees as well as as big expanses of grasslands and there were animals that  cow calf herds that were familiar with those landscapes and they they've been born and  raised they'd had their offspring there their offspring had their offspring and so forth  
**1:18:56-1:19:01:**  and they knew those ranges really well and they performed well they they looked great  they grew well during the the spring and summer that they were there there's also a practice  in the united states where people buy what is referred to as stocker cattle they they're  
**1:19:12-1:19:18:**  animals that are perhaps roughly a year of age in that that ballpark and they buy them  in lots and then they move them to landscapes and they they they put them on those landscapes  to hopefully gain weight and then they sell them you know it's a it's a put and take kind  
**1:19:30-1:19:36:**  of system when they would put those stockers on those landscapes they didn't perform well  they and it's the same landscape the reason they don't know the landscape they're stressed  you know you could see the animals don't know where they are they don't know what's up here's  
**1:19:49-1:19:54:**  this whole new environment in terms of not only the plants but there's a lot of predators  up there too from mountain lions and bears to to wolves and so forth so and i used to  think you know they could make this better by simply taking lead animals taking mature  
**1:20:11-1:20:15:**  cows that knew that landscape and put them out there with those with those stalkers those  stalkers would would go to those animals and they they would help them make that transition  it wasn't being done and we weren't a part of what was going on so i you know i didn't  
**1:20:25-1:20:32:**  have didn't feel it was my place to to go talk to people like you know like some know-it-all  or something but but it was it was it was clear you know these animals are stressed  you could see in their movement they stick together in one tight little group rather  
**1:20:41-1:20:49:**  than spread out and um and there's lack of familiarity so it goes back to to the point  if the animals are familiar with an environment the value of that of mother and these transgenerational  linkages really starts to become evident and important in those those cases and then you  
**1:21:02-1:21:08:**  know introducing new new foods or whatever that that can all be done quite quite quite  nicely let's let's take an example for example let's say you know i have a open pasture and  then all of a sudden i'm planning out a silvopasture system and i'm planting black locust and actually  
**1:21:20-1:21:25:**  it seems black locust has a bit of a controversy because you know you read certain sources  say oh it's toxic for livestock and then you read other sources or farmers you know that  say well actually it's high in protein or whatever and animals really benefit from it  
**1:21:36-1:21:40:**  but you know let's say i'm a bit cautious because i've heard these these two stories  i've planted my trees and and now it's coming to the moment where i could start cutting  a few branches off and feeding it to my animals um yeah what's the approach there i think  
**1:21:50-1:21:55:**  exactly like you said cutting a few branches don't give them too much give them just a  little bit and allow them to sample it cautiously you know to do to do their sampling of it  and then uh let them become familiar you know we did it we did a a bunch of studies with  
**1:22:09-1:22:16:**  sheep and cattle not with black locust but that relate and uh they had to do with with  feeding animals grain and high grain diets and grain grain can make animals sick right  they can you can get quite sick on on grain acidosis and become incredibly ill and uh  
**1:22:31-1:22:37:**  the studies we were doing with sheep and cattle were were simply they were in feedlot and  it was during the last two three months of their life we were finishing them before we  slaughtered them and we had one set of animals that was on a total mixed ration so they didn't  
**1:22:47-1:22:53:**  have any choice we ground four four different four different uh sources alfalfa hay corn  silage corn barley things like that were ground and mixed and put into the ration or we simply  offered animals a choice of the ingredients allowed them to to select free choice all  
**1:23:07-1:23:12:**  you want eat away and people said you know you're going to make them sick on the grain  they're going to get sick on the grain and we were we thought a lot about that too but  what we realized is that if we put them on the other foods the alfalfa hay the corn silage  
**1:23:23-1:23:30:**  the foods that are safe and then we very gradually introduce the grain very gradually introduce  the grain to them they learn how much grain they can eat and we could offer we could offer  free choice all those ingredients and they would simply self-regulate their their intake  
**1:23:40-1:23:46:**  we never got any animals sick and it the point the key point is the point that you're making  introduce it gradually let them let them figure we could have made them very sick and the  way that happens is if animals have eaten a little bit of grain like a candy bar right  
**1:23:58-1:24:03:**  you have a little piece of candy a little piece of chocolate it's it's wonderful but  if you eat the whole box of chocolate you're going to get sick and if you don't understand  that the first time you get exposed to the whole box maybe you eat it and get sick that's  
**1:24:13-1:24:16:**  the way that that we're able to make sheep and cattle get sick give them just a little  bit and then someday give them all they want they can eat they can eat so much so quickly  that they don't realize if you allow them to to learn that this stuff can make you sick  
**1:24:30-1:24:37:**  by gradually introducing it into the diet then we I'm thinking of studies we did with  with sheep right now too where we had 24 individuals as uniform as you could make them age sex  everything else and we offered them a choice of of alfalfa pellets or or barley and it  
**1:24:54-1:24:59:**  was amazing to see no animals ever got sick and you'd have everything from animals that  wanted hardly any barley at all and mostly alfalfa hay all the way across the ones that  ate large amount of barley and not much hay you know and they were all growing doing just  
**1:25:10-1:25:15:**  fine that gets to I say that because it gets to so many points we're making how they're  built and how they're function each one's different right and so they they do what what  works for their their particular body all growing and developing just just fine but  
**1:25:30-1:25:35:**  so back to your your point it's to gradually if you have something that could be potentially  harmful gradually introducing that into the diet and and allowing them to to figure out  each one what's what works for them how much they can eat of that and then goes to another  
**1:25:48-1:25:54:**  point that you we alluded to and we've as we've mentioned the other the other items  that are in their diet are going to influence how much of that black locust they they can  actually eat and do do well with goes back to your point that some producers say this  
**1:26:06-1:26:11:**  is a toxic plant others say oh no my animals do well it's a great source of protein what  else is in the diet is is influence their animals themselves what else is in the diet  all those factors are are influencing the response of the animals and so you can take  
**1:26:24-1:26:28:**  that's what's amazed me over the years you can take exactly the same thing and is it  good or not good well it all depends always all depends on all these things the factors  we've been talking about you know we're gonna take this interview towards an end but I do  
**1:26:39-1:26:46:**  have one last question if you have the patience it's about you know how do you include this  imperative of diversity as you plan the movement of animals through the landscape we're moving  a bit away from maybe agroforestry here but I think it is important because anyone managing  
**1:26:57-1:27:03:**  animals is going to think about paddocks and what to include and and what to exclude and  you know on the one hand you kind of want to do homogeneous paddocks because you want  to have animals eat kind of evenly the plants but on the other hand you want to have diversity  
**1:27:15-1:27:22:**  overall so I guess my question is what temporal window do you have for diversity do animals  have to have like diversity every day is it okay for them to have you know eats diversity  within the month within the weeks what kind of window do you have to give them diverse  
**1:27:31-1:27:37:**  plants you know I think to the degree that you can enable animals to have diversity within  the day that's a good thing they can certainly survive fine without diversity in the day  you know there are times when when they're going to have have moved more toward monotony  
**1:27:53-1:28:01:**  I think during the winter time here and people feed alfalfa hay all winter long on on out  on on pasture there's not a lot of diversity that they have they they they perform they're  able to do it so so I think it's you know it's a question of what's feasible what's  
**1:28:15-1:28:21:**  possible to do and animals can certainly make it when when if the quality of the food is  good enough they can certainly make it during the winter without diversity to the degree  that a person can include diversity daily weekly seasonally I think it has huge value  
**1:28:37-1:28:42:**  I often think from some of the studies we did back in the days and work we did I used  to think back when we were looking at how experience early in life influences animals  ability to utilize foods you know if a little bit's good whole bunch is even better and  
**1:28:53-1:29:00:**  when when we would give them other choices after they'd been on the same food for weeks  and weeks oh they they couldn't you could see they couldn't wait to get to eat something  different you know they were sick and tired of eating the same old thing and I think that  
**1:29:12-1:29:18:**  you know if we had to eat the same thing meal after meal after meal day after day after  day we we don't like that we don't like that and in part we don't like that because it's  hard to have one food that absolutely meets all of our needs all of our needs nutritionally  
**1:29:31-1:29:37:**  as well as medicinally when we get a variety of foods it helps us to do that so I think  that's part of what what's getting manifest in the animals and then to the degree that  we can give them diversity in the pasture choices and the ways that we do that I think  
**1:29:48-1:29:54:**  it's it's a good thing for for their health and well-being for their welfare I think they  become less stressed when and I'm thinking this from studies we've done that look at  cortisol levels in in the in the animals I think they're less stressed when when they  
**1:30:06-1:30:13:**  have choices and ability to choose I probably shouldn't shouldn't digress to this degree  right here but I'll say one other thing for you you can cut it if you want but I mentioned  Pablo Gregorini earlier and the work he's doing with diversity and he has one of him  
**1:30:25-1:30:30:**  is one of his grad students did a study where they offered ewes while they were pregnant  either a diverse array of different plant species or pretty much a very limited choice  and then they looked at cortisol levels in the hair of the lambs at birth they looked  
**1:30:45-1:30:53:**  at and cortisol is the hormone involved with stress and the the the ones whose mothers  had been on on a really pretty much monoculture diet had much higher levels of cortisol in  their hair at birth so that's reflecting that mothers in more of a stressed condition during  
**1:31:06-1:31:14:**  pregnancy than not you know and I guess if I was was asked ahead of time would would  you see a difference Pablo I'd say I don't know that you would but here you know here  he's showing big differences in terms of cortisol stress levels during pregnancy as a function  
**1:31:23-1:31:29:**  of having diverse foods versus versus no food so can they make it on on monoculture certainly  they can wild wild animals do it and domestic too do they like it probably not if they can  have diverse some diversity probably good for them I think that's a that's a really  
**1:31:42-1:31:49:**  nice conclusion to this interview and I really want to thank you for such a stimulating conversation  and a lot of things to think about and I'm sure our listeners will have enjoyed it as  much so yeah thank you so much for joining us Fred and thank you so much I I thoroughly  
**1:32:01-1:32:07:**  thoroughly enjoyed enjoyed the chance to visit with you and to and to get into some topics  that that many times on the many podcasts I do we don't have a chance to talk people  are so wanting to talk about that it's been wonderful wonderful for me to have a chance  
**1:32:18-1:32:25:**  to do that with you thank you very much for listening as usual all the links are in the  description I really encourage you to go and check out some other talks and videos from  Fred where he explains his work from another perspective and in more detail please feel  
**1:32:35-1:32:41:**  free to reach out for any questions or suggestions and if you could support the podcast that  would be amazing and help us make this sustainable in the long run.  