---
title: 37 Increasing Tree Cover From 3 To 20 For Resilience Profit And Biodiversity With Jill And Andrew Stewart
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

<script src="https://cdn.podlove.org/web-player/embed.js"></script>
    <script>
        document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', function () {
          if (document.readyState === 'interactive' || document.readyState === 'complete') {
            podlovePlayer('#player', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast/37-increasing-tree-cover-from-3-to-20-for-resilience-profit-and-biodiversity-with-jill-and-andrew-stewart.json', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast/config.json').then(registerExternalEvents('player'))
          }
        })
  </script>

### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2022-03-31)  

**0:00:00-0:00:23:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:23-0:00:35:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry.  In order to find out how it can help us with these challenges, we'll be interviewing farmers,  
**0:00:35-0:00:47:**  scientists, and other experts to share with you their experiences, practical advice, and  scientific research.  Hello and welcome to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:00:47-0:01:00:**  I'm your host Dimitri and today we just had a fantastic interview with Andrew and Jill  Stewart from Yan Yan Gert West Farm.  This farm is a leader in regenerative and holistic farming based in the Otway Ranges  
**0:01:00-0:01:14:**  of southern Victoria in Australia.  In the past 30 years, they've been planting agroforestry systems such as shelterbelts,  riparian buffers, farm forestry, and silvopasture on about 230 hectares, complementing their  
**0:01:14-0:01:26:**  lamb business.  They went from 3 to 20% tree cover without reducing their traditional crop productivity  since they started, which is an incredible achievement.  
**0:01:26-0:01:39:**  This episode is about an incredible farm that takes regenerative agriculture extremely seriously  and where tree crops and trees have played a fundamental role.  So tune in to find out more and I really hope you enjoy.  
**0:01:39-0:01:45:**  Andrew, Jill, welcome on the podcast.  Thanks for inviting us.  It's a pleasure.  
**0:01:45-0:01:50:**  Thanks Dimitri.  We're really happy to be here and speak with you.  Yeah, me too.  
**0:01:50-0:02:00:**  I'm very excited to delve into your amazing farm.  And if I'm not mistaken, you recently won an award, right?  Quite an important award for Australian one.  
**0:02:00-0:02:18:**  Is that correct?  We won the Bob Hawke Landcare Farming Award and Bob Hawke was a former Prime Minister  of Australia and in 1989, he elevated landcare from a small estate organization which emanated  
**0:02:18-0:02:38:**  in Victoria in southern Australia and he took it to the national stage.  And 1989, so that gave it a bit of leverage and some great national support to really  kick landcare off in Australia as a national organization.  
**0:02:38-0:02:50:**  And we were fortunate enough to win that award last year.  Wow, that's incredible.  Is there only one farm per year that wins the award?  
**0:02:50-0:03:02:**  Yes, one farm.  It's to recognize leadership in landcare and sustainable agriculture and that's what it  was.  
**0:03:02-0:03:19:**  It is actually a single person award, Dimitri, so Andrew actually won the award.  Of course, we all helped him.  The award couldn't be given to multiple people or a family.  
**0:03:19-0:03:32:**  That's the way they had it set up.  It goes to a single person, so Andrew was the one that was nominated for the award.  And then since then, we've actually also won the Victorian Government Farming Landcare  
**0:03:32-0:03:35:**  Award.  Andrew and I have both won that.  Wow, that's fantastic.  
**0:03:35-0:03:47:**  We've won the award recently.  Well, it makes me very grateful to have you on the podcast because having award-winning  farmers on the show is fantastic.  
**0:03:47-0:04:04:**  Another thing we should say, I think, with the national award, the Bob Wolk Landcare  Award is that it's also recognition of the community and the groups we've worked with  over the last 30 years with the Otwayaga Forestry Network and the East Otway Landcare Group  
**0:04:04-0:04:16:**  and the Pangamite Catchment Management Authority.  There's been a lot of collaboration for example on the revegetation of the Yan Yan Girth catchment  involving many farmers.  
**0:04:16-0:04:32:**  So that's all part of it.  There's been a lot of community activity in this region in land care and agroforestry.  So it's also recognition of those efforts because no one person can do this.  
**0:04:32-0:04:44:**  It's got to be a collaboration.  It's about networking and working together and coming up with better plans for our farm  and farming systems.  
**0:04:44-0:04:52:**  And that's the case for your farm as well, right?  You're working as a family, if I understood correctly.  That's right.  
**0:04:52-0:05:03:**  So Andrew and I mainly run the farm.  We have three daughters and two of those daughters work on the farm with us.  And then when we have tree planting days and things like that, the extended family comes.  
**0:05:03-0:05:17:**  So the rest of Andrew's family that live in Melbourne and down on the coast come up and  help plant as well as a whole heap of other people as well, friends and people that think  tree planting is a real novelty.  
**0:05:17-0:05:24:**  So that happens every year.  We have a family and friends tree planting day.  So we've been doing that for 30 years, that tree planting day.  
**0:05:24-0:05:36:**  So that's been great.  And just pre-COVID in 2019 when everyone was allowed out, we had 74 people turn up.  And that was a big event.  
**0:05:36-0:05:49:**  And that turned into a nice social activity too, Dimitri, because that's part of the poly  ethos of land care and running farms is the community aspect of it.  And we really enjoy that.  
**0:05:49-0:06:02:**  And so after planting, we have a late lunch and sit down and enjoy the scenery and each  other's company.  Yeah, we usually have a bit of a bonfire somewhere up where we've been planting and everyone  
**0:06:02-0:06:09:**  brings food to shares.  So it's a really, really lovely day.  But we've been doing it for a long time.  
**0:06:09-0:06:23:**  Some of the people that have been coming have been coming for nearly 30 years.  Last year we ended up, sorry, pre-COVID we did a bit of a tour to look at all the stuff  they've planted in the previous year so they could see how some of their trees have grown  
**0:06:23-0:06:29:**  that they've helped plant many years before.  So they're pretty excited about that.  That's incredible.  
**0:06:29-0:06:37:**  They've seen the whole evolution of the tree planting since the beginning, right?  Because 30 years ago that it started.  More or less, yeah.  
**0:06:37-0:06:49:**  It's intergenerational now because our daughters are now sort of in their late 20s, early 30s.  And then our oldest daughter has three girls.  So we've got three grandchildren.  
**0:06:49-0:07:03:**  Then my brothers and sisters have family and they come down and their friends come down.  So we've been getting a lot of young people, which has been motivating.  So that they've really taken on the whole idea that tree planting is a good idea.  
**0:07:03-0:07:17:**  And they encourage their friends and they're very enthusiastic.  And you get a lot of engineers, you get young people around and that's great for us older  people because I think it inspires everybody.  
**0:07:17-0:07:26:**  We just had a planting day last week with 50 people.  And in a few hours we got so many trees planted.  It was incredible.  
**0:07:26-0:07:34:**  And then we had, again, same thing.  I can really relate to your experiences thanks to this because we then had a big barbecue  going.  
**0:07:34-0:07:47:**  All the tables were out in the field and everybody was eating and drinking and enjoying after  the tree planting.  It was perfect because it worked super well for the farmer that wanted the trees planted.  
**0:07:47-0:07:57:**  It worked for people that wanted to learn about tree planting.  And then they wanted to get out of the city and spend a bit of time in the countryside  and be on a farm and connecting and networking.  
**0:07:57-0:08:06:**  It was really an important, let's say, moment.  It was very inspiring.  It's like a cross-pollination, isn't it?  
**0:08:06-0:08:12:**  City gift.  Exactly.  And it makes it more enjoyable for us too than us just going out there and planting  
**0:08:12-0:08:22:**  the trees.  We have other people here as well so it makes the whole job much easier and much more fun.  So it's great having all the young people here.  
**0:08:22-0:08:32:**  They're all pretty enthusiastic.  And a lot of those come back, the mates of ours, daughters come back and they help prune  later on because they love getting up and they've got high pruning some of the agroforestry  
**0:08:32-0:08:41:**  trees.  So that's been sort of a carry on from the planting.  Maybe we could go a bit into the story of the farm.  
**0:08:41-0:08:50:**  How did you get started with your farm?  How did everything begin?  When did you start transitioning towards these new practices?  
**0:08:50-0:09:04:**  I suppose to answer that we should give a little bit of history about the farm.  Our family has been on this property for 116 years.  It came here in 1905.  
**0:09:04-0:09:22:**  And so we're now up to the sixth generation on the property.  And our father, he actually started planting native trees back in 1967 because he was keen  on shade and shelter for these sheep and birds.  
**0:09:22-0:09:30:**  He loved birds.  And he and his friend who had a farm or has a farm as well was of a similar feeling to  that.  
**0:09:30-0:09:44:**  And so they got together and started planting native trees, which was not a common thing  to do because at that stage, people were mainly planting cypress trees and pine trees or maybe  even cutting trees down.  
**0:09:44-0:09:56:**  And so that was a bit of a shift in those days.  And it wasn't easy then because they went to land care groups, they went to nurseries.  It wasn't the communal support that we had.  
**0:09:56-0:10:06:**  But they battled away.  And it was only small scale then, but they really pioneered planting native trees in  this district.  
**0:10:06-0:10:24:**  And then later on, as we grew up, I think that had an impact on us.  I remember planting trees when I was a kid with my father.  And then when we came and became really active in the farm, we thought we should develop  
**0:10:24-0:10:43:**  a whole farm plan because we were facing a lot of issues on the farm, even though a bit  of tree planting had occurred, we needed a lot more because we had issues such as erosion,  tumbler erosion and stream bank erosion and gully erosion and then salt affected areas  
**0:10:43-0:10:56:**  as well, water logging back in those days, lack of biodiversity.  Baddocks being too big.  So as a family, we developed a whole farm plan to try and avert these issues and come  
**0:10:56-0:11:11:**  up with a strategic approach to seeing what we could do.  And it coincided with land care.  Land care sort of kicked off in about 1986, 87.  
**0:11:11-0:11:28:**  And then we were developing our whole farm plan in the early 90s.  So we were working with land care and then our colleague, Rowan Reed, whom you've interviewed,  he bought a property only three kilometers away and we became friends way back in 1987.  
**0:11:28-0:11:41:**  And we've been friends ever since.  And the first day we met, we were talking trees and the last conversation I had with  him three days ago was still talking trees and that'll continue.  
**0:11:41-0:12:03:**  And so he had the idea of agroforestry and we really hadn't thought much about that because  we were focusing on looking at how to address these issues using the land care approach.  And so we started fencing out areas such as the creek lines and the drainage lines and  
**0:12:03-0:12:11:**  the salt affected areas and planning those out and the waterlogged areas and the remnant  vegetation areas.  And this is what we had on our plan.  
**0:12:11-0:12:28:**  But with the agroforestry, it seemed to us after talking with Rowan that why don't we  integrate some agroforestry with the plantings because we're doing all this work.  Why not manage some of the trees for tree products?  
**0:12:28-0:12:38:**  So we took the fences out a bit wider than the normal land care planting and flanked  them with some of those trees that we could manage.  And that's how it really evolved, I think.  
**0:12:38-0:12:57:**  And we've been working towards that plan for the last 30 years and now we've established  50,000 trees and shrubs along these areas and that's really resulting in a web of connected  trees throughout the farm forming wildlife corridors and protection for the soil and  
**0:12:57-0:13:15:**  the animals and the waterways and it's brought in the birds.  And also we're connecting with neighbours because at that time there was the Yan Yan  Gurr Creek catchment plan through the land care group we worked with.  
**0:13:15-0:13:24:**  So we were very involved with that.  So our wildlife corridors are connected with our neighbours and that Yan Yan Gurr Creek  catchment is now 18 kilometres long.  
**0:13:24-0:13:33:**  It's pretty much all been fenced out and pretty vegetated.  So there's been a lot of collaboration.  So there was a whole mood of people doing a lot of things at that time in land care  
**0:13:33-0:13:45:**  in agroforestry and then coming up with more sustainable farming systems.  So that's sort of roughly the evolution of where we've got and Jill might have something  to add that I've forgotten.  
**0:13:45-0:13:58:**  Well I think we covered it all.  Yeah, I mean we were working on the farm so we were aware of the issues that we had, the  physical issues that we had in the landscape and it was certainly very exposed out working  
**0:13:58-0:14:14:**  particularly on some of our top hills.  We just had no shelter, no shade and we were getting, one year it was very dry and we lost  a lot of topsoil blowing off the pasture and the pasture was probably not as good as it  
**0:14:14-0:14:19:**  could have been.  We didn't have as much ground cover as we should have but also no trees to stop the  wind either.  
**0:14:19-0:14:34:**  We thought at the time when we were up there putting a fence up that we really need to  plant some trees to try and slow this wind down and keep our soil on our own place and  add a bit of biodiversity.  
**0:14:34-0:14:47:**  So this was a very, let's say, complete introduction.  I really enjoyed it and I know some of the listeners may be thinking, you know, but wait,  what is actually being produced on the farm apart from the trees?  
**0:14:47-0:15:00:**  So I think it's the time to mention as well maybe, you know, what's your main crops coming  out of the farm, what acreage are you farming on?  Some of these basics would be really great to hear.  
**0:15:00-0:15:18:**  Yeah, well I mean the main production off the farm is sheep so we raise sheep prime  lambs for meat.  So that's our main, and this year we've raised around, sorry last year we raised around 1700  
**0:15:18-0:15:33:**  lambs that have gone off the sale.  We have a base flock of 1300 ewes that we breed from with rams that we put over them.  So that's our main production but there's lots of small side productions happening now.  
**0:15:33-0:15:47:**  A lot to do with the other opportunities then being created through the agroforestry network.  So we've planted native flowers.  So we've had a system where we've been going through the farm and fencing off all our dams  
**0:15:47-0:16:01:**  to improve the water quality because we've found if stock get into dams they make a bit  of a mess and they also cause erosion around the edge.  So we're now slowly going around the whole farm and fencing every dam off and some if  
**0:16:01-0:16:13:**  they're high in the landscape with the trough off them which is just gravity fed and others  where we just have a very small stock access where the stock can get in and get a drink  but they can't wallow around in the water or get around the banks.  
**0:16:13-0:16:28:**  And so every dam that we've fenced off we've planted out because we just thought we'd add  to the biodiversity on the farm and makes the dams look a lot nicer and provides habitat  for wild animals and things like that.  
**0:16:28-0:16:45:**  But one of the dams we decided to take the fence out a bit further and we planted about  27 different species of Banksy as native Australian flowers and really we did it for fun.  We put lots of things in there as well we put Leucodendrons and Leucospernums and Cunzias  
**0:16:45-0:16:58:**  and all sorts of other plants in there.  But it ended up of course all those things flowered and we thought well maybe we'll start  selling them at the top of the driveway so I was just making up bunches and putting at  
**0:16:58-0:17:11:**  the top of the driveway which just went like hot cakes probably because they were too cheap  but anyway.  And then I had like our local Landcare office come to me and say oh we're having a Landcare  
**0:17:11-0:17:27:**  event can you do the flowers for it so that all started to happen and then you know friends  someone knew someone were having a wedding and they wanted native flowers so we started  supplying those and then we had probably oh I don't know how many bushes of flowers we  
**0:17:27-0:17:45:**  had 27 species but we've probably got a couple of hundred bushes of Banksy planted in this  area and so of course we had a lot of flowers so I thought well I've got lots of flowers  there and need to do something with them so picked them and took them into local florists  
**0:17:45-0:18:03:**  and they just jumped on them they just they're hard to get hold of and when they're freshly  grown and locally grown they were very keen to support that.  So I now supply local florists and colac and which is sort of half an hour from us and  
**0:18:03-0:18:19:**  that's a regular thing now so every week I'm taking orders they have standard orders that  they put into me each week and every week I take those orders in and deliver them to  them so that's actually become a fairly substantial income for the farm now I mean not as cheap  
**0:18:19-0:18:35:**  but it's pretty good and in fact it's been so successful we're now putting another plantation  in so we've sectioned off another area in the farm that's not so productive for grass  and sheep but that would be a good well-dained site to put more Banksy's in and we'll probably  
**0:18:35-0:18:50:**  make this a more commercial plantation so we'll actually plant it in rows and things  so it's easy to harvest whereas the site where it is now it's a beautiful oasis and it's  gorgeous but the plants are just planted all over the place and pathways are pretty thin  
**0:18:50-0:19:03:**  to get in between plants and things particularly now it's 10 years later that we planted that  it's getting quite overgrown and pretty hard to get through to pick flowers so we thought  well we'll put a commercial plantation and it's going to be a bit easier to pick but  
**0:19:03-0:19:20:**  it's amazing we do farm tours and we have that's one of the favorite spots you know  nearly every tour group that comes they love the farm but boy they absolutely fall in love  with the Banksia site and it's got native foods and things in there too we're growing  
**0:19:20-0:19:35:**  native mint and lily pillies and a few other things in there just just trialing for fun  and then my brother-in-law Andrew's brother Hugh has been heavily involved with that site  and he's planted fruit trees in there so it's sort of like a seed and flower forest now  
**0:19:35-0:19:50:**  so it's something that's been a great you know just a side thing to the farm that wasn't  there before.  I mean firstly I've seen the the video that they filmed with this spot and it looks incredible  
**0:19:50-0:20:06:**  I would and I've only seen it in a video so I can't even imagine what it's like in person  but it seems to be quite a high value area as you know per area in the sense it's very  high value per hectare kind of thing right it's very concentrated quite small in producing  
**0:20:06-0:20:18:**  this very high value product whilst you know benefiting biodiversity it seems like such  a huge win-win.  It is a big win-win I mean it's in that area now there is 12 species of honey eaters and  
**0:20:18-0:20:33:**  before that there would have been no birds there it's just an eroding dam with nothing  around it so it's now incredibly diverse there's lots of little bush swamp rats up there echidnas  in there there's all sorts of things in there now it's really quite a really biodiverse  
**0:20:33-0:20:48:**  little spot and one of the beauties of the banks here is that they like not very good  soil acidic sandy loam soil is what we've got up there and that's what banks here is  like so we haven't had to do anything we've planted them nursed them along a bit to get  
**0:20:48-0:21:03:**  them going but really apart from me pruning the trees the and the plants now you know  it's not you don't have to put fertilizer on you don't have to be up there watering  them all the time because they like a lack of water they've been grown in western Australia  
**0:21:03-0:21:16:**  a lot of them so they used to you know drought and so they're very drought tolerant so they're  very easy and they're they you know they're just the most beautiful flowers they're very  unusual and a lot of people really like them.  
**0:21:16-0:21:34:**  Well part of the program up there is I think it's looking at the graded site that Jill  mentioned where the cattle were just utilizing it and it was so sandy they were pushing it  in and so it was very bad for agriculture but fantastic for banks here so it's it's  
**0:21:34-0:21:54:**  matching you know another management system for that site and turning a problem into a  creative solution and now Jill's hard work has become also an economic proposition as  well which was a bit unexpected as Jill explained so sometimes I mean we consider this as part  
**0:21:54-0:22:15:**  of our agroforestry you know the the bushes and and shrubs and and flowers native flowers  part of our agroforestry so sometimes you get you get unexpected unexpected benefits  coming out of the woodwork and that's one of them and there are others that we can talk  
**0:22:15-0:22:25:**  about later.  And the other beauty of that too is the the water quality has improved out of sight in  that dam because the cattle aren't making a mess of it now it's got a trough off it  
**0:22:25-0:22:38:**  so it's on a hillside so the trough can just be gravity fed and that's down below outside  the plantation and the paddock for the stock to get a drink so you know the water quality  is so much clearer than it was it was very muddy before but it's really quite clear and  
**0:22:38-0:22:49:**  a lot of reeds have grown up in the dam now that couldn't have done before because the  cattle would have just like either knocked them or eaten them so you know it has been  a real win-win situation.  
**0:22:49-0:23:00:**  And there's a lot of there's the cacophony of frogs there if you go up there in the evening  the frogs all over the place although I didn't ever see a frog there for 30 years and now  there's heaps of frogs.  
**0:23:00-0:23:13:**  Yes it's a beautiful spot and it's really lovely to go up there and pick because it's  you know I have I have I do employ someone now because I'm selling so many flowers so  I employ someone to come and help me pick and I've just you know the people I've employed  
**0:23:13-0:23:25:**  have only had a couple of them and they've just said this is the best job they've ever  had you know this is just really fun.  Being up there and I saw the birds listening to the frogs and picking these beautiful flowers  
**0:23:25-0:23:34:**  and you know so they just love it.  I suppose we should talk about some of the other things you know the products that have  been derived from the trees on the farm.  
**0:23:34-0:23:50:**  Yeah I would love to get into that but before that I just wanted I had one thing in mind  and I was just thinking about you know the tulip production systems that they have in  in Europe with these massive fields of just which is one flower and they're all chemically  
**0:23:50-0:24:02:**  managed and etc.  When you think about if we could produce flowers in this way especially with you know as you  said more a bit more rational systems with lines a bit more organized even though that  
**0:24:02-0:24:18:**  wouldn't be so beautiful of course but it just seems like you know it could just transform  the the flower industry especially if it's in high demand it's something that's you know  if I went to a shop personally I would definitely buy perennial flowers rather than annual flowers  
**0:24:18-0:24:32:**  in the same way that we try to eat as much perennial food as we can right?  People realized how many flowers were being imported because a lot of them couldn't be  imported anymore and I think I don't think many florists actually educate their buyers  
**0:24:32-0:24:45:**  about where the flowers come from but I think what happened is a lot of people went into  the flowers to get their normal flowers whatever they get and you know told oh no well we can't  get those and then you know why not oh well they come from Chile or they come from South  
**0:24:45-0:25:01:**  Africa or somewhere and people just were absolutely amazed at how many flowers we actually import  when we've got these beautiful ones here that we can just you know grow in our own country  that are suited to our soils that we don't need to be using fertilizer or and we don't  
**0:25:01-0:25:15:**  we don't even use any sprays up at this site it's it's there is a bit of maintenance physical  maintenance that has to go on up there but we've planted a lot of native grasses and  tussocks and things like that like up there to try and keep the weeds under control so  
**0:25:15-0:25:32:**  that we don't have to be doing too much maintenance but yeah it's a pretty pretty good site.  Maybe we shift to the some of the other products that you have that have emerged from from  the forestry plantations from the agroforestry sorry plantations what you know what other  
**0:25:32-0:25:47:**  kind of products have you started selling based on the tree plants?  Well we we have sold we've got some pine plantations in and we even though we haven't harvested  any big logs out of that yet originally when we were first growing the trees we had an  
**0:25:47-0:26:02:**  approach from someone that wanted to buy Christmas trees so we actually went through and just  marked the trees that we would allow them to take which weren't probably the best form  for us for our agroforestry logs but okay for them to take for Christmas trees so a  
**0:26:02-0:26:18:**  guy actually came and just harvested those we just went through and marked the ones he  could take and then and when he paid us for those they actually paid for the establishment  of the pine tree so it was a really good good way to get those established.  
**0:26:18-0:26:35:**  And other things we've we've done small amounts of harvesting for round wood timber so we've  got our daughter and her partner are natural builders and they're within a set of friends  that are natural builders so they use a lot of round wood tinder logs so they've come  
**0:26:35-0:26:52:**  in and harvested a few of those that are just smaller logs out of our plantations that aren't  big enough for to go for big logs at this stage and yeah Michelle our daughter's partner  Nick is a landscape designer so he's harvested round wood logs for a wild playground down  
**0:26:52-0:27:10:**  at the coast that he built for a kindergarten.  What else have we what else have we?  We've also got had some harvesting for blue gum pulp for high quality paper making and  
**0:27:10-0:27:28:**  but instead of planting our pulp logs our blue gum logs in one big block we've stretched  them out into three kilometers of tall grow shelter belts throughout the farm and all  along our land class subdivisions because when the company first approached us about  
**0:27:28-0:27:46:**  blue gums I think they were keen just to put them all in the say a 20 acre block but we  thought that was high risk you know and and it wouldn't get many multiple values from  that so we had our whole farm planned in place so it was an ideal situation to then use that  
**0:27:46-0:28:03:**  to negotiate with the company that we could place 12 road plantations along our land class  subdivisions and into three kilometers of shelter belts which has given a significant  shelter for the farm of course they get harvested they were planned in 1993 and harvested in  
**0:28:03-0:28:21:**  2007 and now they're really growing because they coppice from the stump and end up with  more four or five litres and we come in maybe 18 months later and take out the poor leaders  and leave the strong leader and so we've been managing the crop for a second rotation which  
**0:28:21-0:28:40:**  will be a few years down the track and so that's that also provide us with a good cash  income to put into a tree fund for the farm and then we've used that tree fund to finance  other plantings throughout the property and that's how we how we've managed that there's  
**0:28:40-0:29:05:**  also some seed so we've got a seed orchard and we have we have spotted gum and sugar  gum and we've been in a partnership with another group with that and my brother and we've surrounded  the seed orchard with three rows of biodiverse native plantings to protect it and to enhance  
**0:29:05-0:29:22:**  the pollination to give better seed production and improve the environment and so the thinnings  from that plantation are the ones that Jill referred to have been used for the round wood  timber building and we're letting the others grow on for soil logs as well as harvesting  
**0:29:22-0:29:38:**  some of the seed we haven't sold much seed we thought there was going to be more demand  for it there is seed in storage so that that might change but it's also a plantation which  is protecting the lives of the sheep giving them good shade and shelter as well so we  
**0:29:38-0:29:58:**  really like to focus on the multi-purpose functionality of these projects so they're  probably the main things we've used that we've sold there's also the sculptures that we have  we have we've got a fairly artistic daughter who goes to lots of festivals and she's she  
**0:29:58-0:30:13:**  and a crew of people have been artists at festivals building big sculptures so they've  bought some of the timber for us some of the some of the thinnings as Andrew's talking  about to build sculptures for festivals so some of it's gone off to that and then out  
**0:30:13-0:30:32:**  we've got another daughter she makes she makes cut placemats out of timber so you know even  if it's just foreign logs or or thinnings she'll she makes placemats out of you know  beautiful placemats so often out of she oak so she's just cutting a thin a thin thing  
**0:30:32-0:30:46:**  straight across the round log and then making placemats and they're beautiful she oils them  and gives them away as presents and things the other product which is coming online soon  but not quite there yet is will be saw logs we've got some saw logs that are ready for  
**0:30:46-0:31:02:**  harvest we've got some that are 80, 83 or 4 centimeters of diameter at breast height  and they've been high prune and so a number of species you've probably got about 10 species  of saw logs that we're managing including finest radiata and blackwoods and blue gums  
**0:31:02-0:31:21:**  and yellow sugar gums and spotty gums and others and so they're all integrated mainly  with our plantations and we manage those and so they'll be coming on stream that'll be  fused down the track and that'll be pretty exciting when we get those happening as well  
**0:31:21-0:31:38:**  How much does that represent? I mean is that a quite a big chunk of the shelter beds shelter  belts that you've planted that have been used for you know timber production?  Well this way I guess we've taken the property from 3% woody vegetation in 1991 to 18% now  
**0:31:38-0:32:00:**  and probably pushing closer to 20% I suppose and so of those about half those are being  managed in different ways in that system there's a lot of understory integrated with those  plantings as well because we're really big on biodiversity and overall we've established  
**0:32:00-0:32:17:**  about 120 species of overstory and understory of trees and shrubs throughout the farm  Yeah so there's lots that we will never cut down that are just there for biodiversity  and wildlife and shelter and shade and things like that  
**0:32:17-0:32:33:**  And how are you going to, I'm just thinking a bit about the saw logs that you're going  to be harvesting soon because I imagine that represents quite a big chunk of first year  income but also of the trees that you've planted for economic reasons  
**0:32:33-0:32:47:**  How do you plan on harvesting and selling that without being a forestry farm? One of  the things that we often encounter is farmers don't have the knowledge or the infrastructure  to be able to do that and then when they're planted in shelter belts often companies can  
**0:32:47-0:33:00:**  be a bit slightly pissed off really at having to come in and harvest them, they'd rather  have them in monocrop blocks so how are you guys going to navigate that problem?  Well I suppose if we look at the bluegums which have been harvested and we've had the  
**0:33:00-0:33:19:**  experience now although they were done in those belts it did make it more difficult  and more challenging but they still did it and we were in a profit share program and  we both made a profit so it actually worked so we know that and we know it can work again  
**0:33:19-0:33:29:**  so that's fine  And what we did do with the bluegums though when we did get them harvested the first time  we actually cooperated with neighbours and other people in the area that have got bluegums  
**0:33:29-0:33:43:**  on their farms too so the company could come and they could harvest the next door neighbours  they could harvest the guys down the road and so we all cooperated with each other and  we all harvested at the same time it made more worthwhile for that company to come out  
**0:33:43-0:34:00:**  and know that they had a few farms where they could get a harvest of bluegums from  That's right and that was done in collaboration with our Ottawa Agroforestry network as well  so that was definitely, to get back to your question, with the Pinus radiata we have three  
**0:34:00-0:34:24:**  small lots of Pinus radiata and we have had discussions with a company that's about 30  neighbours away some years ago and at that stage they said if we could get the logs up  to a landing up near the road somewhere well they would pick them up but we think that  
**0:34:24-0:34:50:**  there would be probably sufficient volume there to justify a proper harvester to come  out and do those logs as well with the other ones which are more niche opportunities we'd  be looking at harvesting those ourselves and using a portable mill to those and I think  
**0:34:50-0:35:08:**  that that sort of thing is starting to come on stream now where I think it's going to  be more possible, not quite there yet but I think over the next 5 or 10 years there's  going to be more of this activity getting around and so we feel confident that we'd  
**0:35:08-0:35:21:**  be able to do that and be able to harvest those because that would just be small scale  and it would be interesting to see how that all pans out but that would be something we'll  have to negotiate at the time.  
**0:35:21-0:35:36:**  There is a call now, there is starting to be a call now from architects that are looking  for sustainably grown timber and that sort of thing so the  Forestry Network is starting to get people like that ringing up going we've got a project  
**0:35:36-0:35:48:**  we want to do and the owners have called for sustainably grown timber, what have you got,  what can you supply so we think that sort of thing, the demand for that sort of thing  is going to increase.  
**0:35:48-0:36:05:**  Because when I'm thinking about the scale of this project I'm thinking about 50,000  trees maybe a quarter of them managed for timber, that seems like quite a big harvest  project as well, that seems nearly like a full time job for somebody to be harvesting  
**0:36:05-0:36:21:**  that and then milling it with a mill on farm.  We're harvesting individuals, we're not harvesting everything at the same time so that niche  timber that would be harvested as we get orders so it would be a small job, you're obviously  
**0:36:21-0:36:37:**  not harvesting if you've got 50,000 trees and you're harvesting a quarter of them or  you're not doing that all at the same time, it's over a year probably.  Whereas the blue gums obviously all come out all at once and the pine trees would probably  
**0:36:37-0:36:54:**  come out mostly at once too but the others would all be singly harvested.  I think keeping in context is that the blue gum plantations there's about 8,000 of those  so that's going to be done mechanically and we've already done one iteration of that and  
**0:36:54-0:37:16:**  with the pines there's probably about 1,000 of those thereabouts and then probably a bit  more than that actually so we think we can do that with more of a commercial operation  and then the other trees as you were saying, it's more selective over time, that would  
**0:37:16-0:37:30:**  be over probably a 20 year period or 15 year period or something like that so you'd be  just doing some selective logging from time to time and we'll just have to see how that  goes but that'll be the excitement trying to work out.  
**0:37:30-0:37:46:**  And I guess that that's also going to enable you to get higher value for those logs because  if you manage to sell them directly to smaller groups or smaller enterprises that are looking  for specific native high quality wood, hopefully that would help with gaining value, right?  
**0:37:46-0:38:01:**  Our colleague, Rong Lee, he's already been doing this so he's been paving the way for  us so we're learning from him and our orders are keen on the project because they've been  involved in even planting the trees and now they've been involved in breeding them and  
**0:38:01-0:38:12:**  now they get interested in how we're going to harvest them so these are the discussions  we're having.  So like all these things when you're trying something a bit different, the whole thinking  
**0:38:12-0:38:30:**  process is an evolutionary process and there's nothing set in concrete about this so we'll  just have to see how it works out but thus far we've been able to harvest and gain return  from some of our trees and the shrubs with the banks as the deal does and so it's just  
**0:38:30-0:38:45:**  a learning curve all the way through because we're coming from a low knowledge base because  this is the first iteration on this farm of this sort of activity so it's like it's sort  of pioneering in a way and just sort of seeing how it goes.  
**0:38:45-0:39:02:**  But meanwhile, if we don't ever take some of those trees out it won't matter because  of all the multiple benefits we're getting from having the trees on our place so we're  not really set in stone that we're going to cut all those trees down but they're providing  
**0:39:02-0:39:18:**  multiple benefits as they're growing so it doesn't matter if they don't get harvested  they can stay there and provide shade and shelter and biodiversity and habitat and all  the other things that trees provide for you in the meantime.  
**0:39:18-0:39:36:**  Jill's quite right there, I mean in a way it's like the tree products is icing on the  cake and we didn't harvest any of those trees they're all earning their right to be on the  farm but because we've been managing them we've kept the opportunity alive to have the  
**0:39:36-0:39:52:**  choice of cutting them down or leave them there for their carbon or for the birds and  not take them out so we might take some and leave some or take more or take less so we  can decide and make decisions as we go.  
**0:39:52-0:40:10:**  I mean in the sense originally you planted these trees in shelter belts for example if  we break into a bit the shelter belt example to give more of a visual and more detailed  understanding to our listeners and to myself I'm fascinated by this we've got shelter belts  
**0:40:10-0:40:26:**  that have been originally planted for the ecosystem services, windbreak, shade for the  animals etc that's their original function and you've just extended them a bit in order  to be able to add a bit more forestry opportunities.  
**0:40:26-0:40:45:**  Not only have we planned along the riparian zones and the drainage lines and the salt  affected areas and the remnant vegetation areas but we've also planned along land class  subdivisions and they're all connected so you can see how that can provide a lot of  
**0:40:45-0:41:05:**  ecosystem service by having wildlife corridors right through the farm and then getting all  that protection benefit and now we have a 23 kilometre interface of plantation to pasture  so in a sort of a thing in a permaculture sense that that's where you get a lot of really  
**0:41:05-0:41:26:**  good interaction in the biology of the farming system so it's sort of quite exciting and  so in the harvest of the saw logs in those plantings and of course not all the plantations  have trees that we are managing some of them have trees that we're not managing as well  
**0:41:26-0:41:41:**  so it's a real mix batch you know but so with the harvest it's going to be done on a mosaic  over space and time so you would hardly notice that trees have been harvested from there  because the harvest and the replant and only doing small numbers as opposed to the blue  
**0:41:41-0:41:56:**  gums which is different but with the saw logs is the way that it would occur so it gives  us plenty of time to be able to come up with mechanisms and opportunities to manage this  even if we've got a contract you know or we'll mill it coming in or something like that or  
**0:41:56-0:42:10:**  even if we walk on ourselves if the girls have become really interested in this and  that might become another add-on business for the property.  And so what you're saying is that you would by harvesting kind of spot harvesting around  
**0:42:10-0:42:23:**  the shelter belt you wouldn't actually compromise the function the ecological function of the  shelter belt.  Yeah that's right it's still yeah your shelter belt would still be worth doing its work what  
**0:42:23-0:42:35:**  it's meant to do it's just got the odd tree taken out of it which of course we replant  when we take out so.  If you're sometimes just taking an individual tree that can be an act of conservation too  
**0:42:35-0:42:49:**  because you're allowing more light in the understory as well and then you can plant  another tree there a different variety if required.  The only challenge that I see with that is is the efficiency of the harvest right in  
**0:42:49-0:43:04:**  terms of that kind of harvest and that kind of plantation in the shelter belt so integrating  agroforestry and shelter belts and harvesting timber means that you know it'd be difficult  for a company to come in and efficiently you know harvest things mechanically also would  
**0:43:04-0:43:14:**  be pretty impossible right.  No that's right it's not it's not for that you know that that type of planting is not  for that I mean our blue gums is for that and our pine trees we can do that with but  
**0:43:14-0:43:28:**  I suppose we're we're we're still putting our eggs in a few baskets so we've we've got  areas that can be mechanically done and others where we would just be taking individual trees  out that we've been managing ourselves.  
**0:43:28-0:43:50:**  I think with the pine trees that because we've got quite a few of those and we probably could  do that in in one go there but they're so positioned also that there are other trees  nearby where they are which will help fill that that issue void of protection as well  
**0:43:50-0:44:07:**  while the other trees would grow after replanting.  Yeah but certainly doing the niche harvesting wouldn't be attractive to a company and that  that's got to get down to you know an individual contractor who would go around with a portable  
**0:44:07-0:44:20:**  mill to help with that.  Which is a job opportunity you know it's an opportunity for someone to set up a business  where they could go around to farmers places that are doing agroforestry like we are and  
**0:44:20-0:44:32:**  mill trees.  Based on your kind of estimates it is spot harvesting from the shelter belts and and  and creating saw logs yourself and selling them is is going to be worth your time investment  
**0:44:32-0:44:43:**  it's going to to be able to pay for your time and makes a little extra on the side as you  know I'm just trying to think is it best to do that or would it be best to just leave  the shelter belt as it is and not harvest.  
**0:44:43-0:45:01:**  Yeah well that's right so that becomes an interesting decision particularly now with  carbon sequestration and this sort of thing.  But what Rowan has demonstrated over his place there where he's milled his and air dried  
**0:45:01-0:45:18:**  them but it is economically viable to do that to justify your time and to give a profit  for that type of operation.  So as well as really got the experience with that and we haven't with that sort of in the  
**0:45:18-0:45:31:**  future for us whereas he has done quite a lot of that sort of things we speak to that  better than we would.  We would certainly we'll certainly try a few years down the track and then learn from our  
**0:45:31-0:45:48:**  experiences and then if we decide you know certain trees aren't performing well or whatever  we say well we're not going to harvest those but we'll harvest these or we might say might  go through the process and it came to the point where we couldn't make it pay we just  
**0:45:48-0:46:02:**  leave the trees there and they continue to form the function on the farm.  So it's not a lost investment because we've had all those fixed costs of doing the fencing  this service and buying the trees which we do for a normal land care planting.  
**0:46:02-0:46:23:**  It's just so happens that we've made some of those trees to get the opportunity alive  to develop a commercial product from in terms of timber and so in that sense that's our  risk management strategy and if we were just planting 10 hectares in a block for the soil  
**0:46:23-0:46:40:**  logs well that would be a high risk strategy because you really to justify the end of that  because you're getting very very few other benefits because you've got a big block in  terms of our traditional agricultural production that becomes more of a straight forestry investment  
**0:46:40-0:46:57:**  and that is a high risk proposition but if you have the trees integrated and getting  them multiple values that's low risk in fact it's an important part of the risk management  strategy of the whole farm if you turn that on its head and say that because those trees  
**0:46:57-0:47:14:**  are there it's protecting the natural resource base and providing all the other benefits  we've been talking about and so that's like a win-win.  That's really really interesting to look at tree plantation and agroforestry through that  
**0:47:14-0:47:29:**  lens because there's a lot of criticism around about how planting trees is risky it takes  away you know there's many fears as well and not necessarily always founded in the actual  you know reality that we see in the field but there is a lot of fear around this and  
**0:47:29-0:47:45:**  tree planting is often considered risky and so what you're saying here is by merging these  multiple functions together you know you're buffering risk because if you don't manage  to have a perfect saw log well you've got these other things going on and you know if  
**0:47:45-0:48:00:**  the price is right of timber at some point you know and you've got high very good prices  for certain logs native logs for example you get in there and you harvest a few and you  get a good deal out of it it gives you a lot of flexibility.  
**0:48:00-0:48:16:**  That's right it gives you flexibility because you know if the price isn't right we don't  sell the log so it's you know with these other plantations we and I mean not only that they're  monocultures those big plantations which isn't healthy for our ecosystem and for our biodiversity  
**0:48:16-0:48:32:**  so you know biodiversity is healthy and so those those plantations that we've put in  have got multi species in them as well as saw logs and so they're much healthier for  the environment and for habitat for birds and animals and you know insects and things  
**0:48:32-0:48:51:**  like that so I think that you know to us it's a healthier way for the environment to plant  and we think that's incredibly important and that also provides resilience for the farm  in the face of climate change so you know if you're planting monocultures it's well  
**0:48:51-0:49:10:**  known monocultures are not healthy in any system you know whether it be wheat or you  know three thousand three hundred bluegums so and you've got you've got all those benefits  that if you have a a multi-species system that often those things will look after each  
**0:49:10-0:49:26:**  other if you have an insect come and attacked a certain tree well one of those other things  that plantation might harbour something that will kill that insect that's that's getting  stuck into another tree so you know the biodiversity is just much healthier than that type of planting  
**0:49:26-0:49:38:**  and we see that as being very important.  You can have small monocultures within the context of a polyculture though in the mosaic  over space and time over a landscape.  
**0:49:38-0:49:57:**  The other thing I suppose, Demetra, here is that this is about fitting the trees into  the landscape to capture those multiple values and so by doing that we have the fixed costs  as described before with the fencing and establishing the trees and doing the planting and so on  
**0:49:57-0:50:14:**  which we're going to do anyway for the reasons we have spoken about.  The only added variable cost to bring that tree to a saw log is the act of doing a form  prune and the act of pruning up to six metres.  
**0:50:14-0:50:32:**  All the other costs are the fixed costs the same as you would do for straight land care  planting so that variable cost probably only amounts to probably about half an hour of  your time to do that to get it to that point maybe an hour perhaps less.  
**0:50:32-0:50:46:**  That's on each tree.  On each tree so that's a very small cost to keep the opportunity alive to potentially  harvesting an 80 centimetre tree breast height and getting two cubic metres of timber and  
**0:50:46-0:51:04:**  selling that as an air dried product for maybe a thousand dollars or something like that  which was probably a realistic statement.  So I think they're the sort of economics I carry around in my head when looking at a  
**0:51:04-0:51:19:**  tree and then we say okay one day we might harvest that and do that or we might just  leave it.  Either way it's a winning situation providing it doesn't burn down.  
**0:51:19-0:51:32:**  I see that I often have in my head the voice of the agroforestry septic.  I'm quite sold on it but I like to carry that voice of a person that's hearing about it  for the first time and that would say yes but.  
**0:51:32-0:51:47:**  One of the things that often comes up is this fixed cost of implementation and so I think  there's a multiple, there's many things that people would that would that would kind of  prevent or block a farmer from implementing agroforestry or some knowledge etc but a big  
**0:51:47-0:52:04:**  part of it is you know that initial cost to plant it and so what we're seeing is that  often people are just really waiting on subsidies for example notably in our context in Europe  to plant trees and they may not take the initiative themselves and the cost on their own businesses  
**0:52:04-0:52:18:**  to plant these shelter belts which could provide economic value in the future but if you just  focus on that that's quite risky so it's not any of you know we talked with Rowan about  this and he talks quite actively about the fact that we need to plant for conservation  
**0:52:18-0:52:35:**  not just for profit and it relates very closely to what you were saying now and so what my  question would be you know how would you approach that fixed cost problem how do you in your  context in Australia how does how does that work how do you work around that?  
**0:52:35-0:52:56:**  Well the we have a fixed cost for doing our land care planning and if we weren't doing  any agroforestry we would be doing that anyway and because we've got around about 18% of  our landscape under woody vegetation we found that it hasn't actually reduced our traditional  
**0:52:56-0:53:19:**  agricultural output in other words we're still last year we produced 1800 lands and then  you know so we're still producing as many as many lands and as much wool as we were  back 30 years ago but we've got all these trees in the landscape as well and we're getting  
**0:53:19-0:53:41:**  the other products from these trees which we've already talked about that had already  come out and more that are coming so it hasn't in that sense affected our production system  but what it has done is it actually has improved the resilience and robustness of our farm  
**0:53:41-0:54:02:**  environment in terms of providing shade and shelter for our livestock and for our sheep  and also bringing the biodiversity back into the system you know looking at our integrated  pest management as well and our waterway management and reducing erosion and reducing solving  
**0:54:02-0:54:26:**  so we're getting all these other benefits to the natural resource base so that is relevant  in terms of a straight business cost to put up this biological infrastructure for the  web of trees across the farm if it's just straight land care plantings so and also it's  
**0:54:26-0:54:47:**  generated a carbon neutral farming program for us in fact we're now carbon positive for  our system and so that's where we all want to be and I think that if you look at it like  that then you say okay if you're going to manage some of those trees you invest say  
**0:54:47-0:55:06:**  half an hour or an hour of your time per tree in the life of the tree you've kept the option  of alive actually harvesting a tree which could potentially return you the gross of  a thousand dollars and taking out harvesting expenses and dry expenses from that it still  
**0:55:06-0:55:27:**  I would think be a profitable option if it wasn't well you just leave the tree there  and so we still got our system in place so it's this system is a lot about risk management  and developing a robust and resilient farming system as Jill said in the face of climate  
**0:55:27-0:55:50:**  change so that we're better protected less likely to have major events in terms of weather  variability and what we're finding is that the farm is actually cooler in the summer  which we know from all the 23 kilometers in the face of trees to plantation every paddock  
**0:55:50-0:56:11:**  is shaded from whichever direction because of the way the planning has been done and  they're just straight lines if I was a contours of the land and it's also relatively warm  winter when you look at the chill factor on newborn lands if you can reduce the wind speed  
**0:56:11-0:56:30:**  chill factor reduction is a function of the square of the wind speed so therefore it's  far better for newborn lands if we get adverse conditions they're going to be more protected  and get a higher survival rate the last two years we've averaged 150% landing percentages  
**0:56:30-0:56:51:**  from our flock and we think that the shade and shelter helps as well as other factors  of change management and different bruising different pastures but we think that the protection  from the plantation where the trees is certainly beneficial for us in that as well so there  
**0:56:51-0:57:07:**  are all these little bits of additive values and collectively they're significant we think  and then you have the improved value of the property over time as well because of the  aesthetics and the risk management strategy that we've evolved on this farm.  
**0:57:07-0:57:28:**  I think one of the main things a lot of people don't talk about too is when you re-vegetate  your farm it's a much better place to live in so I think there's a lot of discussion  around a lot of the other benefits but over here I don't know what it's like over where  
**0:57:28-0:57:48:**  you are but there is a lot of problem with farmer depression over here particularly when  times are really tough with droughts and things like that and if you've got a really barren  wind swept sun baked landscape to go out into the works of the day it can be pretty depressing  
**0:57:48-0:58:03:**  whereas we can go out and if we're out doing work and it's really hot we can get ourselves  under a tree and get a bit of shade if it's really windy we can get behind a plantation  and get out of the freezing cold wind in winter or the driving rain we can get under a tree  
**0:58:03-0:58:20:**  or behind a plantation so it makes the quality of our working life on the farm a lot better  as well and it's just lovely working on a farm that's so beautiful you go out into the  paddock there's lots of trees there's flowers and whatever else but it's a beautiful place  
**0:58:20-0:58:38:**  to be and we get enormous amounts of comments about that from people that come and visit  the farm and just say you know it's oh there's lots of people say it's like a park so you  know just having a really nice environment to work in is a really big thing you can't  
**0:58:38-0:58:57:**  really place an economic factor on it but you certainly can place an emotional and emotional  one on so in a sense i don't know if you received help financial help for the plantation etc  but based on your position right now and your experience right now you wouldn't hesitate  
**0:58:57-0:59:18:**  to invest yourself in tree planting and riparian buffers shelter belts windbreaks etc this  is a decision as farmers that you think should be it can be justified you know can be paid  for by the farmer himself and can be justified in your context that's correct and and i think  
**0:59:18-0:59:35:**  there's been a been a and you mentioned before there's been a danger about um governments  giving our subsidies for trees and tree guards and uh sometimes that land care approach can  then help in the sort of welfare estate mentality where farmers will only plant when they get  
**0:59:35-0:59:51:**  a subsidy so we've taken the view over the last 30 years it will make an annual notation  in our budget for tree planting and we'll do that each year and we still do it we're  doing um we're doing habitat enrichment now and that will that will you know just that's  
**0:59:51-1:00:09:**  likely you need to have an annual budget for fencing we'll have an annual budget for planting  trees and and our economics we can justify that because we think it's important in terms  of um you know how we encourage people to plant trees i suppose that with the Otleaga  
**1:00:09-1:00:29:**  Forestry Network that Rowan and I have been involved with and we now have over 200 members  and we've been going since 1993 our philosophy is to is to focus on the community capacity  building the networking and giving farmers confidence and knowledge and share information  
**1:00:29-1:00:49:**  and have field days and we do peer group mentoring and Rowan involved the Master Tree Gower program  we've worked with that and so that all that any funding we get is all about if you like  working with the the software of the whole program and not the hardware and so if if  
**1:00:49-1:01:05:**  we put the farmer at the center of the decision making so they have ownership of the decision  to plant a tree they're the ones who know where they should the trees should go and  surround that farmer with you know community capacity building and good networking and  
**1:01:05-1:01:23:**  and good information good science come into that with the programs that i was just talking  about that you've got a better chance in the long term of coming up with a a program which  is going to be more robust and resilient in the future because the farmers will take ownership  
**1:01:23-1:01:41:**  of what they're doing and start off small and build their confidence and we think that's  probably the best way that's how governments should better spend their money to try and  stimulate activity and interest in these sorts of projects you know i've i'm i find that  
**1:01:41-1:01:55:**  a really fascinating approach because i've already been involved for example in switzerland  maybe listeners can will get bored of this because i think i've already mentioned this  before but um i i've gotten i've been involved with plantation of agroforestry systems funded  
**1:01:55-1:02:12:**  by the government and they basically sell a model so you have to plant this species  in this spacing um and with you know this kind of format they they have a very strict  kind of model to plant agroforestry or what they call agroforestry i wouldn't even call  
**1:02:12-1:02:27:**  it agroforestry and then so they they go out and the farmers take out some very productive  land um which already there's not a lot of in switzerland um because it's all mountains  so they take out this very productive land in the plains and they plant these these these  
**1:02:27-1:02:42:**  basically a mix of fruit trees um that are in french we call them longtage so they're  like you know tall fruit trees on vigorous root stocks they'll take years to produce  they'll be very hard to harvest it's not a fruit tortured really nor is it a silver pastoral  
**1:02:42-1:02:53:**  system because the grass is underneath but i think they'll you know often these farmers  they're not cut they're not actually they don't have sheep or cattle they're often tree  farmers and and grain crop farmers and then the government is going to pay them every  
**1:02:53-1:03:06:**  year per tree something like 130 swiss francs every year for 10 years and then after 10  years you know we were talking a lot with different farmers that are very critical of  this technique and they were saying well they're probably just going to rip the trees out and  
**1:03:06-1:03:20:**  that's like an approach to funded agroforestry which goes which i think is if i understand  correctly is the complete opposite of what you're doing in the ottway agroforestry network  which is you know how to how do you empower farmers into making decisions around trees  
**1:03:20-1:03:35:**  that will actually contribute to their farm into their business and to their lifestyle  as well right it's so that's quite extreme every farm is going to be different isn't  it because um you know the farmers have a different production system and landscapes  
**1:03:35-1:03:51:**  different topography and different objectives so it's about those farmers working how can  they best fit trees into their system to support their production system and you get all these  other values coming from it and what we found here is that some of the areas where we've  
**1:03:51-1:04:07:**  planted out such as along the riparian zones where there's been erosion you know bad for  agriculture but fantastic for trees and a lot of those places are low in the landscape  moisture concentration nutrient concentration a better wind protection as they're low in  
**1:04:07-1:04:24:**  the landscape and great place for trees and a bad place for agriculture so try and get  that matching going and you know most farms you can have five or ten or fifteen percent  trees on the property in our case really up to twenty percent without compromising a traditional  
**1:04:24-1:04:36:**  agricultural system and so you're still getting a production but you're getting these other  values and you're putting the trees where you want to put them where you think they  should go and that's the exciting part about it and then think of the diversity you can  
**1:04:36-1:04:55:**  build into the system get all these other values from it and some productive trees also  so overall this approach is taken throughout the world we'd end up with better connected  landscapes and more productive and more biodiversity and probably happier farmers.  
**1:04:55-1:05:10:**  I mean in the past ten minutes you came out with some pretty incredible statements such  as the trees have enabled you to have a carbon actually positive farm you've also gone from  three to twenty percent recovery and has not reduced your traditional crop production this  
**1:05:10-1:05:27:**  is these are some big statements here that I hope the listeners are not taking lightly  because this is some serious achievements and also some serious feedback from the field  from 30 years of experience actually doing it you know this is happening in reality it's  
**1:05:27-1:05:43:**  not just you know some studies or in a book or some theories so that's for me when I was  reading the documentation you provided I really jumped out and I was really quite impressed  and one of the things actually that came up when thinking about this you know that maintaining  
**1:05:43-1:05:57:**  this this productivity of course we're talking about suddenly we're talking about tree and  grass interactions and in agroforestry we're often trying to understand you know how do  these interact especially with eucalyptuses for example which in Europe at least are considered  
**1:05:57-1:06:10:**  to be you know everybody is scared of eucalyptuses everybody says you know eucalyptus will suck  up all the moisture from the land and and nothing grows under eucalyptus and I don't  really have a strong opinion about that because I've seen both cases happen where things were  
**1:06:10-1:06:28:**  fine and things weren't fine so but my you know I'm curious as to how what you've observed  in terms of you know pasture and shelter belt interactions do you see the grass greener  more productive less productive does it dry out sooner what's your experience with this  
**1:06:28-1:06:46:**  with this interaction yeah we certainly have noticed the eucalypts do don't promote growth  underneath them but what we've found is is around the edges of the paddocks where we've  put plantations and you've got a lack of pasture and close to the to the base of the trees  
**1:06:46-1:07:01:**  up to the fence we've used that as a vehicle runway so rather than driving across our pasture  which you shouldn't really do for compaction reasons you can drive around the edge and  not only that it's in winter it's sucking up the water and it means we can actually  
**1:07:01-1:07:13:**  get around there whereas we may not be able to get across the paddock we'll get ourselves  bulged because it's too wet so we can go around the edge we know the trees have sucked up  a bit of that moisture there's not a lot of pasture there so we're not compacting that  
**1:07:13-1:07:34:**  but we are finding that because you do get a slowing down of the wind the pasture further  out actually will often grow better and because you're not getting that wind chill factor  as much on the pasture and that slows down growth obviously when it's cooler and the  
**1:07:34-1:07:53:**  other one was so just a second joe when you say the pasture further out what do you mean  i'm a bit confused i mean the pasture that's closer to the trees after the road so if you've  if you've got a line of trees along a long a plantation in a paddock and then you've  
**1:07:53-1:08:10:**  got your fence next to next to your tree plantation and then just out from the fence for you know  maybe five to ten meters it'll be quite dry and there won't be much pasture if it's a  eucalypt plantation that you've got there because they don't that they're they're allopathic  
**1:08:10-1:08:25:**  to growth underneath them so they don't not much grows underneath them but what we've  done is instead of looking that as a negative we haven't got much pasture growth there we've  said okay well we can use that as a vehicle track and we can get we can get through there  
**1:08:25-1:08:39:**  in wet weather because we know it won't be as wet there because those trees have sucked  up a lot of that moisture but then further out into the paddock from that you'll often  get better growth because you've got a slowing down of the wind particularly really cool  
**1:08:39-1:09:00:**  wind in winter and that that will promote better growth because the ground and the pasture  and the soil is not getting as cold from cold winds and I mean and certainly also with you  know lambing and that sort of thing so I mean that's certainly something that we've found  
**1:09:00-1:09:13:**  with the other thing we've also found is people we have quite a few people say to us are you  growing all those trees you end up all the limbs over the fence well if you're doing  agroforestry and you're high pruning those trees that are against the fence you don't  
**1:09:13-1:09:27:**  end up with limb damage on your fences so that sort of makes a difference I mean obviously  where we're not doing that high pruning that's not happening we do get limb damage on the  fences that we have to clean up but agroforestry plantations certainly don't get that damage  
**1:09:27-1:09:48:**  and it does provide cover for foxes to move through and and kangaroos and kangaroo numbers  are getting fairly out of hand over here at the moment so but yeah we don't really look  at that as being a negative but it certainly it certainly does make us look into looking  
**1:09:48-1:10:02:**  at other species for some of our agroforestry that maybe do grow pasture further up against  underneath depending on where they've been planted on the farm one of those is silky  oak that'll we've been planting quite a lot of silky oak and that lets pasture grow right  
**1:10:02-1:10:16:**  up to underneath but of course your trees when you plant your trees in a plantation  there's always a certain distance back from the fence anyway where you've got your fence  so if you don't have pasture there it doesn't matter that's inside the plantation so it's  
**1:10:16-1:10:34:**  probably better for weed control it's just the bit that you've got outside that fence  in your paddock where you're not getting much growth but you know we've we haven't really  found that to be too much of a detriment just on the point of competition the um i think  
**1:10:34-1:10:52:**  this is where we need more research to to find out some of these answers um so as you  all said it is that competition zone it's there has been quite a bit of research in  cropping systems you know to look at the micro environmental differences of a crop which  
**1:10:52-1:11:14:**  has been protected by trees and one which hasn't where you have less drying more humidity  built up more protection and what has been found there there's some results show how  after you take out the competition zone for the trees and you look at the increased growth  
**1:11:14-1:11:34:**  further out like Jill was saying which has been measured that overall you know there  is an increased production further out from the trees and that the balance is that there  is actually more crop if you have appropriately designed plantations but in pasture systems  
**1:11:34-1:11:56:**  i haven't seen any research which verifies this and but i guess our gut feel is that  it probably is happening and then if you look at our system where we're now producing as  much agricultural production as we were when we had like when we had three percent woody  
**1:11:56-1:12:14:**  vegetation compared to now we've got say 18 to 20 percent woody vegetation we we haven't  reduced our agricultural output but there have been other factors there so so obviously  the sheep must still be getting the same amount of feed otherwise we wouldn't have the same  
**1:12:14-1:12:37:**  production but there have been other differences as well in this discussion because we've changed  our grazing style we changed some of the grazing species and so and now we're doing a self-replacing  flock whereas we used to buy it by a bin so there there have been other management changes  
**1:12:37-1:12:57:**  along with this so it's hard to pull out those variables to say which is the which are the  major cause of agents for the changes or will maintain the status quo for for the grazing  system so it's an area where i think that more searches more research is required yeah  
**1:12:57-1:13:16:**  yeah that's very interesting currently reading lots of papers on on on these interactions  as part of a master's degree that i'm doing and it's you know one of the things that comes  out is is it's i mean it changes from species to species from soil type to soil type from  
**1:13:16-1:13:36:**  context to context from season to season as well it's not so it's not always so clear  yeah the different climate and so on and that's quite true because here we we we can get very  cold strong winds southwesterly winds and where the trees we think are a great benefit  
**1:13:36-1:13:49:**  for sheltering the sheep but in other areas they wouldn't get that so if we measured ours  it might be different to another environment that's the sort of thing you're pointing out  i think and also the style of the shelter belt you know how what's the porosity of the  
**1:13:49-1:14:03:**  shelter belt how tall is the shelter belt you know there are a lot of variables involved  in this it's hard to tease out those variables but you know i suppose get back to our point  that we're still producing what we used to produce and and that's an indicator but it  
**1:14:03-1:14:20:**  doesn't tell the whole story and that's what you're saying and i agree with you i suppose  one thing that we could say is that we've we've got um far more choice with our lambing  paddocks now than we used to we you know there was some of our lambing paddocks where they  
**1:14:20-1:14:34:**  were really quite exposed and we and we often wouldn't lamb down in there because of that  so now we've got more choice over the whole farm as to where we can lamb down because  we've got better protection over the whole farm the last kind of small questions that  
**1:14:34-1:14:50:**  i i had um was about tree planting it's something that you know you've planted 50 000 trees  that's a lot of experience as compared to other people and i had a bit of a question  as to how you manage the weeds so how do you ensure that after the the tree is planted  
**1:14:50-1:15:08:**  and you established it how do you make sure that they're you know you're not managing  you're not weeding by hand some 50 000 trees or however it is that per year that you're  planting well most of our trees have been established with um weed control chemicals  
**1:15:08-1:15:28:**  so we've had a knockdown and a residual okay over time and um and sometimes we've gone  back and uh and have done the second round of weed control and that's about it and then  we just once we've had good weed control for 18 months we just let them go but now we're  
**1:15:28-1:15:45:**  trying to use other techniques that's i don't have to use chemical using weed mat and we're  experimenting with different ways of doing that now so that's probably it in a nutshell  it's it's more labor intensive certainly though when you don't use the chemical um you know  
**1:15:45-1:16:02:**  we're having to dig dig away an area and then put a weed mat down plant into that and then  we're having to put um you know wire holders around the edge of the weed mat so it just  doesn't get pushed up with the weed so it is it is more time consuming but we like the  
**1:16:02-1:16:19:**  fact we're not using roundup that makes sense but also the the challenge of the efficiency  there is huge yeah it is it's much quicker you can get a lot more trees than if you're  using a sprayed and if you're using weed matting but i mean we we're we're sort of to the stage  
**1:16:19-1:16:33:**  now where we're not planting huge amounts of trees like we were we're planting thousands  per year because now we're putting in you know hundreds per year so so i suppose we've  got a little bit more time we've got lots of people turn up to help so we you know we  
**1:16:33-1:16:47:**  have crews we have someone putting in putting on milk cartons we have someone digging away  the the grass and stuff and then someone putting the weed mat down and someone putting the  wires and so you've got lots of people there and you know you can do it and it is it is  
**1:16:47-1:17:05:**  nice to know we're not using that chemical anymore because it's you know it's not not  got a good good um what do you call it you know what roundup's not not got a good reputation  at the moment and it's it's but it's a short-term cost for a long-term benefit as well if you  
**1:17:05-1:17:21:**  look at the cost benefit we can go without it that's great but if we look at you know  being able to plant more trees and just use it once or twice it seems like it's also you  know through the lifetime of the of the tree which could be 50 years it seems like an interesting  
**1:17:21-1:17:34:**  approach as well interesting okay that's what i wanted to check with you uh on that and  just to have a bit of a of an understanding of how you manage that because it's one of  the biggest management problems that we come across it's how to manage the weeds after  
**1:17:34-1:17:50:**  the trees are in it's quite it's much easier to get a tree in than it is to to manage to  make sure that it survives and to and to you know make sure that the weeds don't overcome  it so so that's fantastic um i really it was a fascinating conversation um extremely interesting  
**1:17:50-1:18:06:**  we talked about some some some some yeah you brought up some great elements to the conversation  really contributing to our our understanding of agroforestry over here so a huge thank  you okay thanks for taking interest in our project Dimitri i think it's a wonderful thing  
**1:18:06-1:18:25:**  with the communication that we can talk to you when you're uh over in Portugal there  and um and it's it's great that we can you know we've shared some of your ideas and i'll  be watching um connecting with your um regenia vagroforestry program to pick up on other  
**1:18:25-1:18:38:**  interviews that you've done and we're really Jill was saying oh when we go on our holiday  we're going to play the i've seen we've got all these podcasts on Dimitri and all these  things around the world we're going to be listening to those as we're driving around  
**1:18:38-1:18:51:**  australia camping and so you're connecting with us we're connecting with you and isn't  that a fantastic thing that we can share this information and share our stories because  i know you've got some wonderful stories that in those podcasts that we're looking forward  
**1:18:51-1:19:11:**  to to hearing and uh and if we can be part of that we'll we're delighted to be part of  that as well and i will just add one other thing saying that about the carbon neutrality  is that because we're managing you know roughly half our trees for for um soil logs and for  
**1:19:11-1:19:28:**  commercial products we are trying to maximize the growth you know with spacing and species  selection and getting far more carbon sequestered in those trees which we may harvest one day  compared to a normal land care planning so therefore we're reaching carbon neutrality  
**1:19:28-1:19:47:**  at say about 18 percent of our landscape whereas if it was just all traditional land care planning  it would be a lot higher so there's another advantage of actually managing those trees  for agroforestry because even if you don't harvest them your carbon sequestration is  
**1:19:47-1:20:04:**  going to be better for the farm system and our daughter she buys lambs off us and sells  them with a special marketing program she sells a farm story with the meat and carbon  neutrality and carbon being carbon positive is one of those stories so there are those  
**1:20:04-1:20:19:**  other spin-offs in the future for our maybe our niche marketing by managing the trees  to maximize our growth and sequester more carbon and reach carbon neutrality at a lower  percentage in the landscape so that's i think an interesting point i suppose another point  
**1:20:19-1:20:36:**  to add to that too is that um actively growing trees sequester more carbon so if you're if  you are cutting down and replacing and growing all the time you're going to sequester more  carbon because you know trees reach a state where they're static and they're not absorbing  
**1:20:36-1:21:14:**  more carbon so if you've got a cycle going all the time you're absorbing more carbon  thank you so much for listening to this episode i hope you enjoy it don't hesitate to reach  out to us on social media we're waiting for you there and see you next time  