### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2022-04-18)  

**0:00:00-0:00:16:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:23-0:00:27:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  these challenges.  
**0:00:34-0:00:38:**  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Hi and welcome to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:00:48-0:00:50:**  I'm your host Etienne.  This episode is brought to you in collaboration with AgriMix, a network that brings together  farmers, researchers and policy makers to explore agroecological solutions in Europe.  
**0:01:00-0:01:03:**  They are sharing their network with us so that we can bring interesting agroforestry  projects on the podcast.  My guest is today Carl Schuard, who produces pigs in France.  
**0:01:10-0:01:14:**  He has received EU funding for his project, so we try and understand with him what kind  of opportunity that means for farmers.  He also shares some of the challenges he has encountered with deers and we assess together  
**0:01:20-0:01:25:**  the potential for increasing the proportion of perennials in pigs' diets.  I hope you enjoy the episode.  Hello Carl and welcome to the podcast.  
**0:01:30-0:01:31:**  Hello.  Why don't we get started by a bit of a story of how you started your farm and some context  on your farm.  
**0:01:39-0:01:48:**  Okay, well before I came to France I was a teacher in agricultural subjects in Scotland,  south of Scotland.  I had gone into teaching which wasn't the first choice of career really.  
**0:01:54-0:02:01:**  I wanted to farm but the capital needs of that made it impossible in Britain.  In the 90s there was a lot of publicity suggesting there were opportunities for farmers in France,  for young farmers.  
**0:02:11-0:02:20:**  So we decided to have a go at it and we moved here in 1990 and we rented a farm for seven  years before buying the farm where we are now.  And what does the farm look like, a bit in terms of climate and main productions?  
**0:02:31-0:02:38:**  The farm is situated in Main Iloire which has quite a soft temperate environment, climate  sorry.  It's a farm in what was an old slate mining area.  
**0:02:45-0:02:48:**  So we're on a sort of sandy loam.  It's 45 hectares.  We converted to organic in 1997 so we've been organic for over 20 years.  
**0:02:59-0:03:06:**  The farm itself is very nice because the house and buildings are in the centre of the land  so it's very well, very easy to organise and access all the various fields.  Your main production, you raise pigs if I'm correct?  
**0:03:15-0:03:21:**  Funnily enough when we first came to France we started with sheep but my personal background  is more within pigs.  I just didn't, was sceptical or worried about starting with pigs because as you know pigs  
**0:03:29-0:03:37:**  have up and down cycles which can be quite brutal economically speaking and I was worried  coming to France with having to cope with a new language, a new administration so I  didn't at first go in.  
**0:03:44-0:03:51:**  But then as sheep farming took a turn for the worse we decided that I should return  to pigs and it coincided if you like with the outbreak of the mad cow disease which  then led to the development of organic farming and that suited my sort of philosophy and  
**0:04:08-0:04:10:**  approach to keeping animals.  So we decided to try to go into organic pigs which meant keeping the pigs outside and there  was a huge demand so it helped us to get going in that way because the pigs were easy to  
**0:04:26-0:04:27:**  sell.  Currently today we are running 40 to 50 organic blue pigs.  Pigs aren't actually blue, they're actually a cross between a saddleback and a landrace  
**0:04:41-0:04:50:**  which gives a pig with slate-like coloured tashes on it, patches on it which give it  the blue name.  These are kept outdoors in four bands of 10 to 12 which produce every six weeks.  
**0:05:00-0:05:08:**  We consecrate about 15 hectares which is about a third of our surface to the pigs for their  breeding and their rearing and the remainder of the land is in a mixture of perennial and  annual crops, cereal crops.  
**0:05:20-0:05:28:**  We became conscious of the fact that the organic standards were coming somewhat diluted and  more and more people were doing organic pigs or called inorganic pigs in buildings and  we wanted to try and go more towards a pig of quality and a pig with higher welfare standards  
**0:05:45-0:05:50:**  which to us meant rearing them as long as possible outdoors.  There was another aspect which was feed costs, the primary cost of pig production and we  wanted to try and do something about reducing that where possible.  
**0:06:03-0:06:08:**  So there was an economic interest to try and cut feed costs but also to enhance the quality  of the meat by introducing forage crops and that's something that agroforestry actually  lent itself to rather which we can explain in due course.  
**0:06:22-0:06:28:**  Well since you mentioned agroforestry, how did you first come across the term and what's  kind of the story that led you to implementing it on your farm?  It comes back to some extent as to my beliefs in what being a farmer is and I believe that  
**0:06:40-0:06:44:**  farming is about stewardship of the landscape.  In other words, it's not about, in France there's a term exploitant agricole which if  you translate it literally sounds like you're exploiting the land and I don't believe that's  
**0:06:58-0:07:00:**  what farming's about.  So I have this notion that one should work with the land and landscape and integrate  it into your activity.  
**0:07:09-0:07:17:**  So for me that included trees and before we actually opted into an agroforestry programme  we were already planting apple trees.  We planted around 60 apple trees in two different orchards and we started to experiment with  
**0:07:30-0:07:37:**  pigs in these orchards and I wouldn't say exactly at the same moment but around that  sort of time there became I think more concern globally for the environment with climate  change and regionally there were initiatives to encourage agroforestry as a means to fight  
**0:07:55-0:08:00:**  against climate change and enhance soil fertility.  So this seemed a natural path for us to follow in addition to what we'd already done.  And how did the project start?  
**0:08:11-0:08:16:**  Maybe if we take it from the beginning, where did you turn to get some kind of technical  support or information?  The technical support in our region comes from an association called Silver Agra and  
**0:08:27-0:08:35:**  there we had access to a technician or an advisor, Samuel Le Gray.  Samuel came and we discussed how we could integrate agroforestry into our farming system.  By that I mean how to decide the spacings and the layout of the trees, the species and  
**0:08:54-0:08:55:**  so forth.  And Samuel put together a project for us in consultation with me which was then presented  to the region.  
**0:09:08-0:09:14:**  It's partly, in short, it's funded partly by Europe and partly by the region.  In our case the region pays to Loire and otherwise Europe.  If I translate it, it's the European Funds for Rural Development, FEDA if you use the  
**0:09:30-0:09:32:**  abbreviation for it.  And they offer a subsidy of 60% of the total cost and the region pays to Loire another  20%.  
**0:09:45-0:09:53:**  And obviously you have to sign up, they have to approve the project which is where the  local association comes in with their expertise.  Well it's interesting to explore this because at least in Europe there's a lot of funds  
**0:10:02-0:10:08:**  now for hedges and different agroforestry systems but of course every time you take  money you have to accept certain constraints with it.  And I think it might be interesting to understand how did this source of funding affect the  
**0:10:18-0:10:23:**  design of the agroforestry system and how it shaped it in a sense.  The things that I remember that you have to respect are the distances, the density of  trees and the choice of species.  
**0:10:40-0:10:51:**  Things actually have changed because basically the choice of species is done according to  the soil type and actually on our farm we have very different soil types which meant  that the choice of varieties was for trees corresponding for example to dry areas, semi-humid,  
**0:11:09-0:11:13:**  very humid areas.  The one thing that I do slightly regret is perhaps there wasn't enough discussion as  to the specific integration of given species to the farm system, in other words in my case  
**0:11:33-0:11:35:**  pig production.  And there were also some constraints which I believe have changed as to the inclusion  of fruit trees.  
**0:11:48-0:11:57:**  At the time you weren't actually allowed to incorporate fruit trees within the tree mix.  Now I believe you can have 20% and that seems a little bit disappointing really because  our aim was to, one of the aims, I mean there are various benefits to having the trees,  
**0:12:13-0:12:21:**  but one of them was to provide an alternative food source and a food source that could have  a beneficial effect on the quality of the meat.  At the time it didn't feel like a huge constraint in terms of the spacing's kind of corresponded  
**0:12:31-0:12:34:**  to what seemed interesting anyway.  To have it approved, I mean you have to rely on the professionalism and expertise of the  association who were presumably deemed acceptable by Europe, they were accredited I presume  
**0:12:52-0:13:01:**  by Europe and the Paise de la Loire as being capable of producing the plants, so that was  your credibility working with them.  So yes it was working with the association, they were the ones who knew the necessary  
**0:13:16-0:13:20:**  constraints more than me.  From a farming point of view it was more working towards finding out or the appropriate and  planning the appropriate distance of the trees to fit in with your cultural practices and  
**0:13:36-0:13:40:**  grazing practices.  In our case we spaced our tree rows, they were planted in lines north to south at 26  metre intervals and the idea of that is that between each, on either side of the tree there  
**0:13:56-0:14:03:**  is a metre space obviously to allow for root development and that leaves you a 24 metre  space on which to cultivate which corresponds to most modern day implements of 6 metres  width, so that represents four passages.  
**0:14:16-0:14:23:**  If you think of our farm as four quarters, square quarters which is roughly the northern  part which represents two large fields of, one parcel is 11 and a half hectares and the  other is 6 and a half hectares, that's all in agroforestry.  
**0:14:41-0:14:49:**  For the pigs it was surprisingly easy to adapt, my pigs obviously are born outside, they are  familiar with electric fences and by the time they come into the forage parts of the agroforestry,  in other words in the alleys, between the trees, we found that they respond and respect  
**0:15:04-0:15:14:**  very well a very simple ribbon type electric fencing system as opposed to a wire, in other  words it's a ribbon which is very visible, one strand along the side of the rows and  they respect it, in other words there's no problems we've encountered with pigs trying  
**0:15:27-0:15:37:**  to root out trees or root round them, they're protected and we operate a system of, a bit  similar to how cattle farms work with an electric wire in front and one behind, so we put the  pigs on a given section of an alley which will depend to the number of pigs and then  
**0:15:57-0:16:05:**  they graze on that particular area for a given time till I consider that they've eaten it  down and then I close it off and move them onto another paddock in front of that, so  they basically move systematically up an alley and then once they've reached the top we can  
**0:16:21-0:16:32:**  shut that alley off and leave it to recover it or they start again from the bottom, it's  a flexible pattern and certain alleys we shut off with a view to making haylage in plastic  bales which then the pigs get the benefit of that during the winter months.  
**0:16:49-0:16:54:**  The one thing I found very good, certainly bearing in mind we're an organic farm, is  that you can manage much more imaginative rotational systems, be it grazing or growing  cereal crops or other because the nature of the alleys, if you imagine one of the fields,  
**0:17:14-0:17:23:**  the 11 hectare field has effectively 10 alleys in it, so whereas before either you monocultured  or you split it by approximately, but now I can define each alley, give it a number  for example, and I can have several different crops and therefore a much richer rotation  
**0:17:41-0:17:47:**  within the same field, so I find it very good for that.  Of course, if I understand the trees are still quite small because this was all planted pretty  recently, can you remind me what year you put these systems into place?  
**0:18:00-0:18:08:**  We actually planted at the beginning of 2017, the project was started in 2016 but obviously  there are certain times of the year when you don't plant, sometimes you do, and by memory  we planted at about the same epoch then as we are now.  
**0:18:18-0:18:23:**  And you mentioned you were a bit disappointed that the trees weren't more integrated to  your main enterprise which is pigs, but at the time or even now, what kind of expectations  would you have of including trees?  
**0:18:34-0:18:41:**  You've said that the motive was at the beginning environmental and more land management based,  but in terms of even advantages for the animals, is shade for example a key issue for pigs  in the summer or on the contrary, is it more like protection in the winter?  
**0:18:53-0:18:58:**  Can you give us a bit more of an idea from your farmer perspective?  There's multiple advantages for the livestock, certainly shade.  I think we all know the original wild boar, wild pigs are more forest like creatures,  
**0:19:11-0:19:23:**  they live in the woods, so you're trying to reach out to that sort of environment, they're  generally pale skinned, so they do burn pigs in sunlight, so shade is very important.  Well the other thing that comes to mind might be feed as well.  
**0:19:38-0:19:43:**  Is there any kind of substantial feed that you could expect from a mature agroforestry  system or would that just be a little sprinkle on top?  I think it's difficult to quantify the exact feed benefits because there are some, obviously  
**0:19:56-0:20:06:**  you've got nuts and fruit like apples, acorns, chestnuts, which are sort of visible if you  like, but then as the trees develop you're drawing a richer insect and grub population  and it's very difficult to quantify but I did read a study that claimed that a pig will  
**0:20:28-0:20:36:**  consume something like half a kilo of earthworms, so to attract earthworms you obviously need  a good organic matter status and obviously maturing trees in an agroforestry project  will bring that.  
**0:20:49-0:20:59:**  I think probably, again I personally think the future of farming and certainly where  pigs are concerned may change and I think we have to change perhaps our criteria for  what represents productivity and so forth and I think at the moment the aim is just  
**0:21:13-0:21:21:**  get your pigs off out of the system as quick as possible and off the market and I think  agroforestry perhaps represents a chance to look at, to go more towards perhaps a slow  food approach to pig production.  
**0:21:33-0:21:45:**  So perhaps a pig on that system will eat well but eat a more varied diet and produce a richer,  more nutrient dense piece of meat.  That's the hope, that's how I see it.  
**0:21:56-0:22:01:**  I think there are economies on your global feed bill that are possible and that's one  of the things we're studying in the agro mix project that I'm involved with to see what  percentage you can perhaps comfortably drop your concentrate feed costs by through agroforestry.  
**0:22:20-0:22:28:**  That is interesting and I'm wondering in the future what kind of landscape do you visualize  because would you let the system go more towards like a forest ecosystem but then the issue  with that is with less light you would lose a lot of the grazing aspect or would you envision  
**0:22:40-0:22:47:**  more of a kind of savannah type system with some productive trees but then still a lot  of like, still a dominant grass layer so that the pigs can continue grazing?  Yeah I think I would go somewhere between the two.  
**0:23:00-0:23:10:**  I, a mixture actually of, well let's say, dense, there's coppices of dense plantation  within an area but at the same time with, if you like, the agroforestry system of more  linear because if you're going to rotate perhaps or integrate other animals in then it lends  
**0:23:29-0:23:36:**  itself to that, having trees more uniformly laid out because once you get into a hazard  arrangement it's very difficult to manage so it's a compromise I think.  I mean I think in an ideal world, you know, I think pigs are creatures of a forest and  
**0:23:47-0:23:53:**  if you had woodland, yes, to run them in, yeah that would be great.  Whether that's sustainable over a long period because of course you can't change, you have  to either abandon the wood, in other words pigs in or pigs out, you can't sow an alternative  
**0:24:11-0:24:13:**  crop in there in between.  And I imagine, going back to this idea of feed because I think a lot of people have  these images of pigs eating acorns or pig eating chestnuts but I assume to get the results  
**0:24:27-0:24:34:**  you want and to do it in an economically viable way you have to be pretty technical with the  different moments of feed and when you're fattening pigs it's a specific diet at a certain  moment of the year so you can't really base your system on something as seasonal as that,  
**0:24:43-0:24:48:**  it would just have to be a bit of a kind of add-on, a bit of diversity to their diets  but you would still have to have the bulk of your feed that's along the same lines as  today which is to say grains or you know annual plants.  
**0:24:58-0:25:08:**  Yeah yes you do, although we are looking at, well we already have them, we work with, we're  using Fodabeat, we're looking at Jerusalem artichokes and we do grow and have been working  with looseairn as a crop because they, and we have got evidence that you can, they do  
**0:25:34-0:25:37:**  reduce the need for concentrates.  The reason why I asked this is because I recorded an interview a few weeks ago with Eric Tonesmeyer  who basically, his thesis was that a good way to make our diets more perennial was to  
**0:25:53-0:25:58:**  start making livestock's diets more perennial before you know changing people's diets, saying  you know it's easier to give chestnuts to pigs than having all French people eat chestnuts  and flour based bread but you know when we look into how it actually functions that's  
**0:26:10-0:26:16:**  why I'm asking you know how realistic do you see that in terms of how does that intersect  with your production cycles and I imagine like logistically it would be quite complex  yeah to have like a totally perennial base for pigs' diets.  
**0:26:29-0:26:36:**  Yeah I think it's possible, I think it comes down to scale, I mean as I mentioned earlier  we have a couple of apple orchards which obviously can be included in the agroforestry, it's  not, it wasn't subsidised, that was a personal choice to plant those and yeah we've run pigs  
**0:26:52-0:27:03:**  directly under the apple orchards and that's a traditional way of doing things but you  know obviously there's a limited window there in the season and it comes down to volume  which raises the question of, that's one of the things that has struck me as far as the  
**0:27:23-0:27:31:**  agroforestry and actually this farm and the question and when I mentioned earlier about  the during the planning of the project we didn't have, we didn't sort of talk about  specifically about, we didn't relate the pigs to the tree planting it was just right agroforestry  
**0:27:44-0:27:53:**  the land, the trees and then we went our own way as far as integrating the pigs into it  but I do think that it would be interesting to look at a whole farm picture for example  and perhaps if I was doing it all over again to say right okay here's the basis I'm planning  
**0:28:09-0:28:18:**  a 50 sow unit fattening through to slaughter and I've got this agricultural project, sorry  agroforestry project and look at it and maybe say well hang on a minute it might be better  to have a more multi-species approach to it to get the most out of that project and the  
**0:28:33-0:28:42:**  farm, by that I mean maybe you know I haven't got the sums in front of me but imagine you  said well let's okay let's not do 50 sows let's do 20 sows and 15 cows or look at rearing  chickens within the trees you know combinations of to try and have to try and arrive obviously  
**0:29:06-0:29:12:**  one has to be keep your eye on the ball and produce a living and there's the question  of in my case being a one-man band you know being able to cope with it all but I think  that mixity or mixed mixing livestock would be would be a way forward.  
**0:29:29-0:29:35:**  Going back a bit more to the the practical daily level could you describe to us what  it looks like to manage these trees that you've planted on the farm both in terms of what  their uptake requires in terms of workload and how that might have affected the workflow  
**0:29:47-0:29:53:**  through the year but also understanding maybe some of the challenges that have risen in  terms of implementing these trees and taking care of them.  Probably the biggest challenge we've had has been through pest damage namely deer despite  
**0:30:05-0:30:12:**  the fact that the trees were were staked and protected with guards the deer are terribly  persistent and we we've had a lot of damage.  In the two the two areas you know I mentioned I have two fields principally one of 11 hectares  
**0:30:24-0:30:33:**  one of six the six six hectare field is actually fenced with a sheep netting all the way around  and noticeably the that was bit that was to some extent to for the BO security because  it's that field that we're doing the work with grazing the pigs between the rows of  
**0:30:45-0:30:54:**  trees so there's been noticeably less deer damage however a given agroforestry project  it would it would add an enormous cost if it was deemed that you should fence the whole  the whole area destined for planting.  
**0:31:04-0:31:14:**  So anyway we've had we've had problems with that and we're now which has led to tree deaths  and therefore replanting we've now actually moved on to putting a repulsive which is a  non-chemical one it's an approved one it's a natural repulsive based on blood I believe  
**0:31:30-0:31:39:**  sounds gross but we're trying that and sheep's wool apparently is a repellent to deer so  that that's been what was probably the most challenging and the most disappointing to  go out and find damage if not destroy trees.  
**0:31:47-0:31:52:**  And since you've had all these issues with deers have you had any echoes or you know  have you seen anything that you could have done differently to prevent this damage do  you think?  
**0:31:57-0:32:02:**  I think we did everything that was necessary in other words we protected the trees with  guards and stakes I think what what we should have done is perhaps used a repulsive from  the beginning rather than than wait to this stage.  
**0:32:17-0:32:24:**  And moving on to bit management one of the challenges that comes to my mind is if you're  used to have a big field of 11 hectares or whatever and you all of a sudden put in trees  in areas of uncultivated land that's that many more borders that you have in your field  
**0:32:36-0:32:43:**  with potential you know weeds coming out of them and some technical issues around that  how have you been you know tackling that issue of managing the understory of those tree lines?  Well we tend to I mean it depends what you have growing in the alleys by the trees because  
**0:32:56-0:33:00:**  obviously if you've got a cereal crop that becomes a given time of the year when you  can't access because you've got the crop growing and you would be running in a standing crop  so but usually for the weed control I have I think we call it a broyer in French don't  
**0:33:18-0:33:26:**  we but a topper a weed topper which goes to take the weeds down so we cut them obviously  we're organic so we don't spray obviously so it's mechanical work which is not that  easy obviously because with trees even at eight meters apart it's you can't you obviously  
**0:33:41-0:33:46:**  can't drive a straight line because you go over your trees so it's not that easy but  at the same time the weeds and the plants I always remember one of my college professors  describing weeds as plants whose virtues we haven't yet discovered and I think you know  
**0:34:05-0:34:14:**  that they provide a habitat for insects and bird life so I'm not too obsessive about whacking  the weeds down to be honest I don't it's not been a big amount of a particular problem  in my eyes but have you had any issues for example with brambles taking over or you know  
**0:34:26-0:34:32:**  as you leave pieces of land undisturbed for a while you might have some undesirable species  or not at all it's funny but within the agro within the agro forestry brambles have not  been an issue I do have brambles in other places but to be honest the one thing I've  
**0:34:49-0:34:56:**  noticed is that brambles do our nature's way of actually helping trees get established  because the one thing brambles do is they keep deer off because they but obviously you  know you can't let a great infestation take place but I'm not I haven't had an issue with  
**0:35:14-0:35:24:**  that no in fact I have a little experiment outside of the described agro forestry fields  in the pig field where I have my breeding stock and in certain of my parks maternity  parks for example I have brambles that have taken hold and at first I was going to try  
**0:35:40-0:35:48:**  and rip them out and then I had the idea to to try and plant a few trees within those  brambles even though the pigs are running free around just to see if their trees would  develop naturally and be left alone by the pigs because obviously if I planted a tree  
**0:36:02-0:36:10:**  within a free standing within a one of the pig fields it would get rooted out so we'll  see what happens that's just a by the by approach but it is interesting to just at least know  that for you you know having some vegetation developing close to your arable crops hasn't  
**0:36:22-0:36:27:**  caused any major issues and I think that's that's an interesting takeaway for anyone  listening yeah and I also but I also think one of the things we haven't talked about  yet is is actually alternative management strategies for the space between the trees  
**0:36:39-0:36:49:**  and it's something that we are touching upon in the agri mix project and it's been suggested  that for example we could look at integrating aromatic plants it's as we say in English  horses for courses that somebody on a given project might find that quite interesting  
**0:37:05-0:37:15:**  to explore with it in between the trees soft fruit herbs flowers yeah in other words there  could be alternatives to to just having grass between or weeds between the trees it could  be actually seen as a as a minor productive well minor or major productive a complementary  
**0:37:30-0:37:39:**  product productivity and so we we planted some mint and there's anyone that knows mint  knows that it spreads voraciously and and that's worked quite well it's it's it's moved  its way up and may may prove to be a good alternative to to having to to to to mechanically  
**0:37:56-0:38:01:**  cut weeds it kind of shows that some things that might be let's say technically feasible  or ecologically feasible or even with a productive potential like maybe densifying and having  productive crops in the understory that still requires you know you either to have the time  
**0:38:13-0:38:18:**  to do it which I doubt you have because you're already you know running like a full-time  business or finding someone to collaborate with and and that kind of ties into a conversation  I was having in my last episode about you know the the possibility of layering enterprises  
**0:38:29-0:38:35:**  on a one same piece of land and maybe creating opportunities for for younger farmers and  and you finding maybe a young person in the region that wants to get started and doesn't  have access to land and say well listen I've got you know X amount of meters of tree lines  
**0:38:46-0:38:52:**  and you're welcome to come in and grow a crop on that tree line and you know again that  sounds like a good idea then you know how feasible is it in terms of you know on practical  terms like it you'd have to see that but I do find it interesting like it seems like  
**0:39:04-0:39:09:**  one of the limits of agroforestry at the moment is finding new structures social structures  and work structures to enable like us to really reach the full potential of the land yeah  yeah no I agree I I always find it curious that on a farm I on my farm of 45 hectares  
**0:39:24-0:39:29:**  it's it's there's a there's an old bread oven which no longer functions and it but it's  very clear from the size of that bread oven that it catered for a lot more than just the  farmer and we know in that that there were a lot more people involved one way and another  
**0:39:42-0:39:46:**  I mean some of them on domestic chores within the house looking after children what have  you but but I do feel that when we talk about the future and we talk about food shortages  and the population growing that we only scratch at the surface really of what our farms are  
**0:40:00-0:40:12:**  capable of producing and and I'm having the farm within alleys is is is is is is a way  of diversifying and as you say it's a complicated issue but you could imagine giving access  to to somebody else to to produce vegetables or or within within the alleys and a great  
**0:40:31-0:40:40:**  a much greater diversification and productivity on the farm I feel could be possible when  I when I read about India and how the productivity that the some of the Indian farmers have off  a one acre plot you know it gives you room for thought obviously it's complicated in  
**0:40:57-0:41:06:**  Europe because of because of labor charges and what have you but perhaps in the future  an alternative to that and you know I remember discussing this with a farmer with a bit of  a similar system to what you've been describing arable you know arable crops a bit with some  
**0:41:20-0:41:25:**  tree lines and quite widely spaced trees well he was saying that he'd much prefer having  hedges instead of these like wide spaced trees you know if you're gonna have a line that  he prefers to just have to manage a hedge because he felt that would be a bit cleaner  
**0:41:34-0:41:38:**  in the landscape with you know less weeds around it would that something that would  resonate with you as well or are you happy with those kind of widely spaced trees well  it's funny you should say that but this morning we just finished planting 600 meters of hedge  
**0:41:53-0:42:04:**  line in which in a in a in a in a another field which is a 12 13 hectare field which is now  because of that hedge planting split into three parcels of four hectares approximately  and and just on the same lines of what you think of what you've the point you've just  
**0:42:17-0:42:27:**  made um I I wanted to break that field up with an agroforestry idea but when I when  I think about it I think uh hedge line I don't know why why not as opposed you know I don't  know why where the the notion of having trees only at eight meter intervals came about I  
**0:42:45-0:42:51:**  mean we know that eight meter spacing is for the eventual canopies when the trees there  that they're not overcrowded but there's all that space underneath which as as the the  person you mentioned said um planting shrubs and other things cuts out the need for weeding  
**0:43:08-0:43:16:**  and provides a more interesting biodiversity again so so yeah proof of pudding is yes we've  put in place hedges as opposed to agroforestry and of course within it within a hedge I mean  a hedge can be managed um one thinks of a hedge a privet hedge which is uniform square  
**0:43:30-0:43:37:**  but this we're not talking about that we're talking about hedges of diverse species some  of which can be left to develop into trees so you can manage that hedge as you wish for  the future it can become an agroforestry hedge and so uh you know just maybe wrapping up  
**0:43:52-0:43:59:**  this uh this management um discussion uh you know there's the planting there's uh establishing  the trees but then on the kind of yearly base uh do you do any pruning or any weeding or  do you just let them be yeah I actually um I do that we I sometimes do that with um the  
**0:44:14-0:44:24:**  advisor from um from the association silvia he'll come and we'll prune the trees to encourage  them to take the desirable shape if you like so that that's um and and whilst doing that  that's the moment when you can identify any trees that need replacing or or or sometimes  
**0:44:41-0:44:46:**  what we found sadly due to the deer damage is the trees haven't actually been killed  but they've been damaged to the degree that they're better off being cut down to ground  level and and then letting them re reshoot um which obviously is a bit frustrating um  
**0:44:59-0:45:06:**  in terms of the time scale of things because you know it's taking them backwards rather  than forwards but um it's better it saves planting you're not losing a tree you know  as we as we take this uh interview to an end I did want to ask uh you know very honestly  
**0:45:21-0:45:27:**  uh today do you see agroforestry as something that uh can pay for itself that a farmer can  do uh you know out of just like uh just a purity farming concern or or does it have  to be something driven by an ideal and convictions I think uh it depends how you define paying  
**0:45:40-0:45:46:**  I mean for me it pays me every time I step outside into the environment because as I  stated earlier for me farming is is is being integrated into your environment and it gives  me enormous pleasure just stepping out into my fields and seeing all those trees um you  
**0:46:01-0:46:09:**  know given my age of 60 plus uh no it will not pay for me it's it's uh but it but I hope  it it will pay um for the future generation um and my children and their children um I  don't there's no short-term profit I mean obviously eventually there is a there is a  
**0:46:26-0:46:32:**  timber value there's there's now we people take branch prune trees and use the branches  for heating so yeah there's something to be had out of it and also um you know as we've  said maybe there's a an opportunity for marketing produce that benefits from the fruit and nuts  
**0:46:47-0:46:56:**  uh from this as a food from the trees and enhances the uh the flavor of the meat so  yeah no but I I honestly if I have one thing I think it's you do it out of conviction um  and as a gesture for the planet and the environment and future generations  
**0:47:10-0:47:15:**  thank you for this really interesting conversation and uh you know hopefully we can check in  in a few years and hear about uh how you overcame the the deer challenge and how your trees  are doing yeah very much so thank you for listening as usual you'll find the relevant  
**0:47:28-0:47:33:**  links down below in the description you can contact us through our website or through  our social media we'd be very grateful if you considered supporting the podcast so that  we can make this sustainable in the long run thank you  