---
title: 4 How To Create Profitable Agroforestry Systems With Propagate Ventures
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

<script src="https://cdn.podlove.org/web-player/embed.js"></script>
    <script>
        document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', function () {
          if (document.readyState === 'interactive' || document.readyState === 'complete') {
            podlovePlayer('#player', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast/4-how-to-create-profitable-agroforestry-systems-with-propagate-ventures.json', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast/config.json').then(registerExternalEvents('player'))
          }
        })
  </script>

### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2020-08-30)  

**0:00:00-0:00:23:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:23-0:00:33:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  these challenges.  
**0:00:33-0:00:47:**  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Hello everyone and welcome on the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:00:47-0:01:02:**  We're your hosts Dimitri and Etienne and today we're very excited to be interviewing Ethan,  Harry and Jeremy founders of Propagate Ventures, an innovative company that connects economics  analytics and agroforestry, helping farmers integrate perennial systems on their farms  
**0:01:02-0:01:08:**  whilst connecting investors to the value of trees.  So welcome on the podcast.  We're really happy to have you here.  
**0:01:08-0:01:11:**  Thanks so much.  Glad to be here.  Thanks for having us.  
**0:01:11-0:01:19:**  Awesome.  Well, we're very excited to have you guys on and to talk about all of the amazing work  that you're doing at Propagate.  
**0:01:19-0:01:28:**  But before we get into that, do you think you could tell us a bit about how you guys  started getting interested in trees and in agroforestry?  Sure.  
**0:01:28-0:01:46:**  Let me tell you the story of how we all found our way into agroforestry and regenerative  agriculture for each of us and for different reasons.  And I'll let Jeremy and Harry jump in here.  
**0:01:46-0:02:08:**  We all found agriculture through food.  In search of healthy food for Jeremy and myself for health care reasons.  For example, I'm diabetic and so the food I eat has a direct impact on my health.  
**0:02:08-0:02:25:**  Jeremy has a similar journey around that, although sans the diabetes.  And with Harry, he worked.  I mean, Harry, what, the first quarter of your life where you were an Olympic hopeful.  
**0:02:25-0:02:42:**  And so good food meant athletic performance.  And I think for all of us, once we opened that door to start looking at how is food  produced, where can we get the most healthy food?  
**0:02:42-0:02:53:**  It's a very natural gateway to having conversations with farmers and getting a deeper understanding  of how agriculture operates.  Now, that's a whole basket of worms.  
**0:02:53-0:03:14:**  And all of a sudden you get into the food system and how land is managed and the health  of our ecosystems, which naturally put us into a journey learning more and getting our  hands dirty with agroforestry in particular, because we all grew up with a passion around  
**0:03:14-0:03:31:**  agroforestries, either running through the forest or just being mildly connected to trees  by being born on Earth Day, for example.  And so all that comes together.  
**0:03:31-0:03:47:**  We now learned about agroforestry, regenerative agriculture.  And then the follow up question to all that for us, and this is where the inception of  propagate comes in the sort of light bulb moment, if you will, trying to answer the  
**0:03:47-0:04:10:**  question, why are trees not part of the conventional agricultural model today?  And because they're not the standard, what can we do to make it easy for farmers and  everybody else that would be involved to utilize trees as an effective tool in the toolkit  
**0:04:10-0:04:20:**  of agriculture?  I'll stop there.  Jeremy, Harry, do you guys want to add a little bit of flair to what I've shared?  
**0:04:20-0:04:36:**  Of course, yeah.  Just on a personal note, building off of the where our food comes from idea for me with  athletics, the macronutrient sources, i.e. fat, carbs, protein, having those places,  
**0:04:36-0:04:46:**  those landscapes for the food I was eating came from be in concert with my lens stewardship  ethic.  That was extremely important.  
**0:04:46-0:05:08:**  And growing up in a forested biome next to about 50 acres of orchard, actually Massachusetts,  the connection, say, between intact forest and clean water and say cropland that was  tilled and water that was murky was always very visceral.  
**0:05:08-0:05:34:**  So linking that in with, so I guess agroforestry being the resulting paradigm from that, that  really emerged when I guess back during undergrad when I was in a finance course and reading  a book on agroforestry at the same time.  
**0:05:34-0:05:52:**  And that's really when the light bulb went off for me.  So it's been a great journey linking up together as propagate over the past four years or so.  I guess, Jeremy, you can also jump in maybe with your background in the timber products  
**0:05:52-0:06:07:**  business.  Yeah, as a kid, I grew up in a third generation family business doing stair railing manufacturing  at a relatively large scale.  
**0:06:07-0:06:25:**  And coming out of that, going into my older years and having some health struggles, I  was inspired to start farming in college.  And through that journey, saw the mismatch between the way in which we were managing  
**0:06:25-0:06:40:**  resources on farms and what was being done in terms of manufactured goods across the  world.  And so that really led me on a journey to find agroforestry as a solution set to helping  
**0:06:40-0:07:05:**  solve a lot of those problems.  I would add here that it wasn't so clear in the early days of that discovery process that  it was a possibility following the early inspirations of people who went out and did it on their  
**0:07:05-0:07:24:**  own was really the nugget of potential that enabled the discovery of agroforestry as a  potential solution.  I would say it's not an easy place to land from an economics perspective when looking  
**0:07:24-0:07:37:**  for solutions to these problems.  And I'm glad that's where my journey brought me, but also where together we landed as a  good solution set to focus on.  
**0:07:37-0:08:01:**  Yeah, and so what Jeremy and Harry are pointing out is kind of turned into this, I guess,  infamous motto at Propagate where the three of us, and we want to have this be part of  the culture and the day to day because we're all so passionate about the food system and  
**0:08:01-0:08:24:**  agriculture is that we really feel it's important to demand that the health of our land and  our ecosystem is the same as the health of the food that we want to eat.  And that's fairly macro or maybe bird's eye view.  
**0:08:24-0:08:47:**  But at the end of the day, the goal that we all are striving for with Propagate is to  create a business that can drive that forward, where there are healthy landscapes that are  biodiverse and that produce food that's very healthy and delivers caloric value.  
**0:08:47-0:09:01:**  Great.  Okay, well, so what we were thinking to basically give an idea of what you guys are doing exactly  is maybe you can walk us through the different stages of a project, kind of from the beginning  
**0:09:01-0:09:17:**  to the end, so that everyone gets an idea of the whole different levels and the different  activities that you offer through the solution and through your platform.  So maybe just to start off, you could tell us who usually initiates the projects.  
**0:09:17-0:09:26:**  Is it farmers coming to you or investors?  And from what end does it start?  To answer your question, it's a range.  
**0:09:26-0:09:42:**  We have farmers that come to us, we have investors that come to us, we have nonprofits and as  well as buyers and brands that come to us.  And really the way in which they find us is they're looking out at their landscapes and  
**0:09:42-0:10:01:**  looking for holistic solutions to solving problems in their landscapes.  And those problems typically land into two categories, diminishing on farm income and  stability from an economic perspective and diminishing ecological diversity and kind  
**0:10:01-0:10:19:**  of some clear ecological problems that are occurring on their farms.  And so depending on each of those stakeholders that we're working with, they all come to  us with kind of a different mix of those two things and the level of how they weigh those  
**0:10:19-0:10:28:**  in their thinking.  The way in which we engage with them really is on the upfront helping define their context  and their goals.  
**0:10:28-0:10:41:**  So that way we can get a really good sense of where they want to lean in terms of the  type of systems and crops they would potentially focus on in integrating with their existing  production systems.  
**0:10:41-0:10:58:**  Oftentimes what this looks like is we're working with a farm, they're raising cattle, they're  interested in the shade benefits of trees on their cattle and their pastures to be able  to increase weight gain in the heat of summer.  
**0:10:58-0:11:08:**  But where we kind of have to understand is what is their labor capacity?  What is their infrastructure?  How close are they to markets?  
**0:11:08-0:11:25:**  And as a result, we can help really define what the right fit crop is for their goals,  both from an economic perspective in the outcomes that they're seeking on the farm, as well  as from a lifestyle perspective based upon their context and what they want to manage  
**0:11:25-0:11:41:**  today and where they want to be managing and what they want to be managing 10 years out.  That really helps define the upfront of the process and helps us get buy-in for a plan  that is really co-developed with each of those stakeholders.  
**0:11:41-0:11:55:**  From there, we have an analysis tool that we've built that enables us to run 30-year  long economics on each of these systems and what it will take to implement them on the  farm level based upon their specific context.  
**0:11:55-0:12:06:**  And by their specific context, what I mean is what is their machinery on the farm?  How do they want to manage?  Do they want to manage from a low maintenance perspective or from an intensive management  
**0:12:06-0:12:15:**  perspective?  So we can really get into the details of what type of infrastructure they need to build  and the efficiencies that they're seeking with the infrastructure that they're going  
**0:12:15-0:12:29:**  to have on the farm.  That analysis, and I'm happy to dive into the details of that, which I think is a robust  part maybe of this conversation, but at a high level, maybe we can paint the picture  
**0:12:29-0:12:41:**  and go from there.  Once they run through that analysis process, the next phase is project development, where  we work with them with tools that we've built to enable them to go out and actually plant  
**0:12:41-0:12:51:**  the project.  And depending on the farm, the way in which we do that ranges in a wide array of potential  service that we provide.  
**0:12:51-0:13:05:**  At the most basic level, we work with them to help source the right quality tree genetics  to ensure that they're actually meeting the expectations of what the projections were  in the analysis.  
**0:13:05-0:13:19:**  That swings all the way through to us actually providing the full suite of project development  services, working with local labor, working with local machine operators to actually implement  the system on their farm.  
**0:13:19-0:13:38:**  So that full range of project development can really be context specific.  Some farms have the tools and the labor and the know-how to go out and implement.  Some farms need us to be able to bring that training onto the farm and the ability to  
**0:13:38-0:13:56:**  actually implement with a high efficacy onto the farm.  And then the final piece of what we do is financing, which really the big key to that  whole part of our business is being able to invest into the trees as assets separate from  
**0:13:56-0:14:13:**  the land and to enable multi-party engagement into those trees.  A big part of what we do is focusing on working with third party investors to be able to finance  those trees for farms that are interested in being partners on a long term basis that  
**0:14:13-0:14:25:**  don't necessarily have the capital to buy into those systems over that long time period.  A lot of the time these systems are expensive.  This is essentially farm infrastructure.  
**0:14:25-0:14:36:**  And so having that third party capital source is really key to being able to help a lot  more farms transition toward agroforestry.  I'm going to stop there and maybe we can dive into more specifics.  
**0:14:36-0:14:48:**  Thank you for that overview of the whole process.  Does one of you want to explain to us a bit more about that process of analytics?  What kind of data do you use and what methodology do you mobilize?  
**0:14:48-0:14:56:**  Of course.  Yeah.  Let me provide a few sentences with a bit of jargon and then we can deconstruct that  
**0:14:56-0:15:12:**  from there.  So everything starts with taking a look at the biogeophysical climate around the farm.  So weather patterns, soil type, what's going on in that regard, coupled with Saveri's holistic  
**0:15:12-0:15:21:**  management framework.  So what did the decision makers actually want out of their land?  So we have biological factors and social factors.  
**0:15:21-0:15:37:**  Those are the inputs there.  So say that's a in-depth survey and conversation and holistic context development that's coupled  with landscape architecture, tools and software.  
**0:15:37-0:15:54:**  So say robust KML files is another input there.  And then the outputs on the back end are 30 year long income statements.  So what starts out as landscape architecture actually finishes as very comprehensive agronomy  
**0:15:54-0:16:11:**  work.  I think it's important to talk a bit about just from an agroforestry level, what's important  when looking and designing a landscape and then kind of what we do and being able to  
**0:16:11-0:16:26:**  do that.  So an important concept is this concept of over yield, which is the ability to increase  the productivity of an acre by bringing multiple crops together as compared to them in isolation.  
**0:16:26-0:16:39:**  And what we do in terms of looking at it from a design perspective is trying to maximize  the trade off between any losses in productivity and any gains in productivity by bringing  systems together.  
**0:16:39-0:17:00:**  And what that looks like is if we're looking at a cattle production system or hay or looking  at row crops, looking at being able to understand the data behind at what spacing of that system  does it make sense to grow the crop that is the primary yield, which is the hay or the  
**0:17:00-0:17:14:**  row crop or the cattle or other livestock production system with a tree crop integrated  into that system.  So part of that design process is being able to understand things like data like light  
**0:17:14-0:17:30:**  penetration to the understory, light captured by the tree and being able to optimize from  a geophysical perspective, the 30 year long kind of goals in aligning with those trees  that are being planted.  
**0:17:30-0:17:46:**  So an example of this is let's say you want to maximize cattle weight gain and you want  to be able to ensure that productivity of the grasses between the trees maintains a  certain level of volume as well as protein content.  
**0:17:46-0:18:01:**  So we have the kind of data sets that enable us to make the decisions in terms of spacing  that allow for us to maximize in the amount of cattle that you have on the farm in terms  of the feed required.  
**0:18:01-0:18:16:**  So not compromising on that while being able to integrate that second layer of trees into  that production system.  From an analysis perspective, what that looks like is a sub centimeter accurate GIS enabled  
**0:18:16-0:18:31:**  design of where the trees are going onto the map.  So that way if the farm is technologically complex and they actually have the equipment  to plug that into their tractors, they can automate some processes in terms of planting,  
**0:18:31-0:18:47:**  mowing, et cetera, around where the trees are.  But it also is important to know that those maps can translate down to somebody who might  not necessarily have that technological capacity just through things like basic GNS and GPS  
**0:18:47-0:19:02:**  services that they can implement on the farm.  In terms of the agronomy side, a big part of that is being able to understand the growth  rates of those trees and how that plays into the economics of being able to both manage  
**0:19:02-0:19:23:**  the biomass, manage the fruit or nut of that tree, but also to be able to understand the  revenue side of what's possible in terms of the offtakes.  And from a lot of what defines those potential outcomes is looking at site infrastructure.  
**0:19:23-0:19:38:**  So the equipment, the efficiency of that equipment, the protocols of management and how much it  takes to manage that crop.  And then the market side of what's possible in terms of how many potential sales and the  
**0:19:38-0:19:56:**  price of those within the given crop that's being focused on is possible with the farm,  where that farm is located, the infrastructure that's around that farm, be it cold storage,  wineries, food brands, et cetera, restaurants.  
**0:19:56-0:20:18:**  And being able to build out a strategy that encompasses all the factors that are unique  to that farm is what allows us to kind of take those geophysical pieces of spacing and  the market and cost pieces of managing to be able to put out a highly efficacious model  
**0:20:18-0:20:23:**  for what that implementation can look like.  Great.  And where do you get this data from?  
**0:20:23-0:20:31:**  Is it from university studies?  I was wondering, what's the raw material?  Yeah, of course, I can jump in there.  
**0:20:31-0:20:49:**  It's very much from disparate sources.  So yes, university studies, yes, calling up farmers in specific locations and asking them  about their yields or going to those farms.  
**0:20:49-0:21:11:**  And what we're doing is also creating mechanistic models.  So based off of certain assumptions, what can we expect from yields, say, in year nine  in upstate New York, given yields in year seven down in Kentucky, for example?  
**0:21:11-0:21:26:**  So that's just different latitudes for those that are not in the United States.  And how do you manage to synchronize this data with the local context and some of the  particularities of farms then?  
**0:21:26-0:21:35:**  Because we all know that from farm to farm, there's so many differences.  And how do you make sure that you can be relevant to that context?  Yeah, of course.  
**0:21:35-0:22:03:**  So a lot of it, it's all location specific, as you're noting.  And if there are yields that are, we'll say, in the direct vicinity, we'll look at growth  rates of single tree, excuse me, single trees and really create forecasts from there.  
**0:22:03-0:22:17:**  The catch here is that we're often working with crops that are, we'll say, growth market  crops, like chestnuts in the United States, like blackcurrants in the Northeast United  States.  
**0:22:17-0:22:40:**  So what we gain in kind of majority market share in a formerly niche market, we might  compromise on certainty in projections.  That being said, working in enough, say, correct contingency factors allows us to predict with  
**0:22:40-0:22:50:**  generally very good certainty what yields are going to look like.  Yeah.  And I'll kind of jump in and add to all that, based off of everything that both Jeremy and  
**0:22:50-0:23:12:**  Harry have outlined, you can get an understanding that there's a lot of detail and nuance that's  associated with making an agroforestry system very successful.  A lot of what we want to do and what we're actively doing is taking those very complex  
**0:23:12-0:23:38:**  details and simplifying them so that a farmer can have all of the insights they need to  more confidently manage an agroforestry system, whether they're transitioning to an agroforestry  system or starting a new one, a lot of those details around geo, physical, economic markets  
**0:23:38-0:24:07:**  that are otherwise really extraordinary question marks for an operator, that we can remove  some of those barriers and provide a very simplified way to approach these components  so that the transparency and access to information is very clear, while also making sure, as  
**0:24:07-0:24:27:**  Harry pointed out, that from a place-based perspective, there's some economies of scale  or what we like to say economies of place that are supportive in terms of what one farm  or multiple farms require in the same region.  
**0:24:27-0:24:45:**  When you look at, for example, an agroforestry system, a silver arable agroforestry system,  there's a lot of different interactions there between the tree and the plant and the crop.  For example, trees reducing wind damage and therefore increasing crop yield, or trees  
**0:24:45-0:24:57:**  increasing the soil organic matter, which can then have an impact on water content and  again on fertility, productivity.  Do you manage to get to that level of detail in your modeling?  
**0:24:57-0:25:20:**  The below-ground interactions, say between roots and crops, based on water availability,  at least in the non-brittle high precipitation climates of the majority of the locations  of where we're working, are less important than the light interactions.  
**0:25:20-0:25:41:**  How much irradiance a tree captures, how much photosynthetic active radiation that tree  canopy is intercepting as that light makes its way down to the crop.  What's important to look at, number one, is how much light is the tree capturing and over  
**0:25:41-0:25:56:**  time how is that changing.  That's really contingent on three factors.  We actually know this from the research that the SAFE report, the safe...  
**0:25:56-0:26:08:**  Silvo Arable Agroforestry for Europe, mostly out of France and Montpelier, three factors  there.  They have an equation.  
**0:26:08-0:26:28:**  It's the canopy width of the tree, the diameter breast height, and then the distance from  the tree itself dictates how much light is passing through the canopy.  From there we can look at what species have different sized canopies in different years  
**0:26:28-0:26:44:**  and what does that interaction look like between the tree and the crop beneath.  At the end of the day we have to ask the question, are we maximizing yields, so dry matter itself,  or are we maximizing profitability?  
**0:26:44-0:27:04:**  If the margins on the grain crop below or the pasture crop below are really second and  say lower than the margins on the tree crop yields, then it would make more sense to prioritize  the tree crop yields and say put more space between those rows.  
**0:27:04-0:27:22:**  Excuse me, that would be the opposite.  If the tree crop margins and we'll say net income is higher than the understory, then  put less space and prioritize the trees and more space for the opposite.  
**0:27:22-0:27:39:**  You're not necessarily including so much of the data on the impact of the trees on the  soil, on the crops in this case, because just to understand it's got less of an impact.  The light is the predominant factor that will impact the production of the intercrop, for  
**0:27:39-0:27:52:**  example.  Yes, 100% and that's pretty consistent from southern France, say Mediterranean Montpelier  over to Guelph, Ontario is what they found as pretty consistent.  
**0:27:52-0:28:04:**  Then in eastern China at about the latitude of South Korea, they found the same thing  over there.  That's super interesting.  
**0:28:04-0:28:22:**  And could you guys give us some examples of some of the systems that you guys have been  designing and helping farmers implement, maybe some of your favorites?  Yeah, that's the fun part.  
**0:28:22-0:28:48:**  Some of the favorites that I think we've really landed on with farms are integrating black  locusts into the cattle production rotational grazing systems down in Maryland.  That is where we're doing relatively wide spaced alleys of black locust integrated with  
**0:28:48-0:29:09:**  a rotation system of Angus cattle.  Another one is black current production systems integrated with hay at a relatively tight  spacing for hay, which is about 20 foot row centers.  
**0:29:09-0:29:25:**  Still allows for most of that hay to be in production over the lifespan of that system  while getting a quality yield out of the black current.  And another one would be chestnut production systems being able to integrate cattle as  
**0:29:25-0:29:38:**  well as hay crops into the chestnut.  And those are different spacings from the hay side versus for the cattle side of things.  Really on the cattle side, it's about maximizing forage growth.  
**0:29:38-0:29:54:**  So it's a little bit of a wider spacing.  And on the hay side, you can get away with a little bit of a tighter spacing if you're  looking at certain goals within that hay crop, like protein production rather than volume.  
**0:29:54-0:30:10:**  So it's a wide array of stuff that we'd like to look at.  And then we've done some projects where we're looking at integrating with corn or soy production  systems where those are super wide spaced orchard bands of things like peaches, as well  
**0:30:10-0:30:28:**  as some longer term hardwoods like black walnut and swamp white oaks, as well as some black  locust as well integrated into those systems.  So more of a long term and short rotational hardwood integration with row crop systems.  
**0:30:28-0:30:37:**  I'll leave it there.  I'm happy to kind of dive into any of those that you think are interesting.  Yeah, I'm sure we'll be able to go into more examples as we illustrate the conversation  
**0:30:37-0:30:49:**  as we progress.  One thing I wanted to ask is, I'm assuming there's a lot of testing that's going out.  Are you able then to kind of feedback information and to record what's going on compared to  
**0:30:49-0:31:06:**  the projections you made?  Oh, yeah, that's hugely important.  Every project we have, we record the successes at the kind of the various levels of the system,  
**0:31:06-0:31:21:**  right?  From looking at weed suppression in terms of base maintenance of the trees based upon  a given protocol through to tree growth in terms of height, tree vigor, tree health,  
**0:31:21-0:31:33:**  things of that nature.  And there's kind of two sides to this looking at kind of the lagging indicators versus the  leading indicators of these systems.  
**0:31:33-0:31:51:**  And at the end of the day, looking at maximizing yield of the tree outputs that you're looking  for, those feedback loops come in longer term periods.  And so, while we have indicators that we can focus on while we're kind of the early stages  
**0:31:51-0:32:11:**  of these projects, those indicators don't necessarily tell us everything we need to  know about the yield that will come from these projects as we move toward production.  Plant health vigor is really kind of where we like to focus on in terms of the short  
**0:32:11-0:32:24:**  term measurements that enable us to say that a project's being successful, a protocol has  been successful, or a protocol hasn't been successful based from a project by project  basis.  
**0:32:24-0:32:41:**  Can you manage this data collection or is this data collection managed by the farmer?  It's project by project.  And so, depending on the farm's capacity and time commitment to the project, they can manage  
**0:32:41-0:33:02:**  it themselves or we can provide that as a resource.  It's also worth noting that every farm has a different level of budget and time constraints  with regards to how much they want to put into these systems.  
**0:33:02-0:33:17:**  And so, some farms measure them more robustly and some farms, we don't measure them nearly  as robustly and we're looking for kind of some one or two key indicators for success  versus five to 10 on certain projects.  
**0:33:17-0:33:29:**  And just to give an example there, if it's a silvopasture system, then the grazer is  going to be much more interested in understanding cow days per acre as the system goes on than  we are.  
**0:33:29-0:33:43:**  And we're going to be much more interested in diameter breast height of the timber trees  or things like yield on the blackcurrants.  And so now you've got this design set out that you've worked with the farmer, you've  
**0:33:43-0:33:54:**  created the context and you've used your data to find out what's the best species, what's  the best system spacings, etc.  Now you're ready to go to the project development phase.  
**0:33:54-0:34:07:**  And so you said it works out in different ways depending on the skills and the capacity  and the infrastructure of the farmer, right?  Do you guys sometimes manage the whole implementation or is this something that you do usually out  
**0:34:07-0:34:25:**  does the farm usually take care of that?  We usually partner with the farm to bridge any required needs of that farm specifically.  And so that can range from us just providing protocols and technical services to us actually  
**0:34:25-0:34:44:**  providing all of the labor inputs and being the so-called foreman of that project.  At the end of the day, we're responsible for ensuring that the project meets the analytics  expectations that it set forth.  
**0:34:44-0:35:04:**  So for us, we have a vested interest in ensuring that that farm, whether or not we're the ones  managing the planting, are doing so in a fashion that enables them to be successful.  In Greece, in our context on Maisi Farm, it was very difficult to find things like  
**0:35:04-0:35:18:**  planting machines and mulching machines and even just wood chips as a general material.  And I saw on your website that you use, it seems that you use quite a lot of machines  to implement your systems.  
**0:35:18-0:35:25:**  Could you explain to us a bit some of these machines that you use?  And it's quite exciting for us.  Yeah, of course.  
**0:35:25-0:35:42:**  Happy to jump into that.  So in the United States, at least in the context that we're working with, agriculture looks  like broadacre, treeless landscapes with tilled soil.  
**0:35:42-0:35:56:**  And to phrase this in the positive, it's never been easier to plant trees because we're working  with a blank slate.  And a lot of the machines that have created that blank slate can also help to diversify  
**0:35:56-0:36:12:**  it.  So whether that's starting with a tree transplant or a water wheel transplant, it's a rain flow  implement to establish the crops through to, say, seeding cover crops such as rye and sudan  
**0:36:12-0:36:32:**  grass in place with a drill seeder and then mowing all of that above ground biomass and  raking it with a rotary rake that would usually be used to just kind of rake hay into windrows.  We can actually rake that hay up against the side of the tree rows and use that as mulch.  
**0:36:32-0:36:48:**  So using that in situ biomass to serve as mulch if wood chips are a more difficult option  to come by.  On the wood chip front, the main machinery that we use is called a row mulcher.  
**0:36:48-0:37:02:**  So a few brands to look up.  Lanco, L-A-N-C-O, and then Mill Creek.  So that it looks like a big trough, if you will, that's pulled behind a tractor and spits  
**0:37:02-0:37:21:**  out the bark mulch or wood chips or compost right out the side.  And that's an extremely efficacious way to add biomass to a system.  A lot of that biomass comes from either sawmills or existing forests in the United, or at least  
**0:37:21-0:37:30:**  in the Northeast United States.  There are a number of biomass power plants that burn wood chips for electricity just  because we have so much existing forest.  
**0:37:30-0:37:51:**  So diverting that, I guess, forest residue to agricultural lands from power generating  stations is a way that we add fertility and water retention and whatnot to farms.  So I've seen some of these machines, some of the time they take is like they can plant  
**0:37:51-0:38:05:**  six thousand trees in a day, for example, things like this.  And it seems that you'd be able to set up an agroforestry system and plant a hectare  in half a day in this case, even a very complex one with a lot of species.  
**0:38:05-0:38:24:**  I think it's important to note that while planting speed is important, I would say planting  quality is probably more important.  And oftentimes with tree projects, what ends up happening is sacrificing quality for just  
**0:38:24-0:38:39:**  getting trees in the ground.  In terms of laying out these systems and making sure that they're sub centimeter accurate,  making sure that all the materials and the protocols are in place to ensure a smooth  
**0:38:39-0:38:58:**  planting process, making sure everyone's trained when they're kind of planting the tree, how  to plant it, how not to J-root it, how deep to stick it into the ground.  All of those kind of protocols kind of get lumped in to the time it takes to make a project  
**0:38:58-0:39:14:**  happen.  And so while physically going with a tractor and a tree planter and sticking the tree in  the ground itself might be fast, the planning process, the training process, the materials  
**0:39:14-0:39:35:**  management and ensuring everything's set up for success is really where a lot of the time  goes to ensure that projects are successful.  And I think in terms of making sure that you're doing things right from the outset, you can  
**0:39:35-0:39:54:**  plant a system on seven acres within two days or within a day or a couple hours, depending  on what you're doing, the spacing, et cetera.  But ensuring that the spacing is perfect, ensuring that every stick or every root that  
**0:39:54-0:40:04:**  is going in the ground is done so with the exact same method.  That's really where the key is to ensure that projects are successful.  Cool.  
**0:40:04-0:40:17:**  And yeah, I just wanted to go a bit further.  I mean, now we've covered the planting and it's been really interesting, but once the  systems are planted, what kind of supports do you offer farmers on management techniques,  
**0:40:17-0:40:27:**  be it pruning or harvesting?  I mean, first of all, do you offer that kind of support?  And if you do, how is that deployed through time?  
**0:40:27-0:40:35:**  An excellent question.  Yes, we do offer that support.  Every farm is different with how we engage.  
**0:40:35-0:40:50:**  And so if the farm themselves is managing their own system and we're hands off, it's  very much like a technical service provider.  One of the things that we're in the process of building out and opening up our process  
**0:40:50-0:41:09:**  too is actually enabling our product from the analysis side to actually take care of  a lot of those educational resources that allow for them to understand different management  practices as well as for them to document what they're doing on the farm.  
**0:41:09-0:41:23:**  And so we haven't released that yet, but where we're going is being able to provide those  project development tools for farms.  So that way they can get access to best practices and protocols in the form of primers, reading  
**0:41:23-0:41:33:**  materials, videos, et cetera, but also to give them the tools to enable them to track  what they're doing on the farm.  I think that answers-  
**0:41:33-0:41:44:**  Yeah, that's great.  But that sets a second question, which is about best practices, because when Dimitri  and I were trying to figure out the best thing to do for our trees in Greece, you have a  
**0:41:44-0:41:54:**  lot of conflicting information.  Even within the small agroforestry world, there's a lot of stuff going on.  There's a lot of experimentation and it's not always that easy to know what is the best  
**0:41:54-0:42:05:**  thing to do.  So I was wondering, how have you guys managed to access best practice?  And I mean, have you found certain key experts that you have trust in and that then you'd  
**0:42:05-0:42:13:**  implement their, let's say, techniques and philosophy?  Or again, are you going more towards the academic route?  I'm really curious about that.  
**0:42:13-0:42:25:**  It's a both-and.  Every crop is different.  So there's people who have expertise in managing that crop for 20, 30, 40 years.  
**0:42:25-0:42:41:**  And there's a lot to be learned from both the conventional management of that crop,  but also the people who have innovated and both looking at it in terms of the results  of productivity, yield, et cetera, but also looking at it in terms of what the trade-offs  
**0:42:41-0:42:53:**  are.  And so for us, where we aggregate best practices is both looking at the things that have been  successful in the past for all those crops, the innovators, as well as the people who  
**0:42:53-0:43:05:**  have done it from a conventional perspective, but then also looking at it in terms of where  people want to go and giving them the options to choose how they want to do it because there  are so many options.  
**0:43:05-0:43:16:**  Some of the best practices in terms of planting chestnuts involve using chemical sprays.  Some involve using mulch.  Some involve using weed mats.  
**0:43:16-0:43:33:**  And so being able to provide the options and then being able to showcase who does what  and the outcomes that have resulted from that is really key.  So being less so preaching about what protocol is best, more so providing the best options  
**0:43:33-0:43:55:**  that are known within the crop itself and the knowledge base of that crop.  And triangulating, say, a four-acre small-scale holistic apple producers protocol with that  of a 200-acre organic apple orchard in the Pacific Northwest.  
**0:43:55-0:44:15:**  And then looking at what machinery and capabilities a farm actually has and modeling everything  pretty exhaustively and then making recommendations from there.  Yeah, I'd say one of the areas where we've put some effort into, and this goes back to  
**0:44:15-0:44:42:**  a conversation earlier about research and where data and insights can come from, is  that there are folks practicing agroforestry globally with different tools and equipment.  And so what we're thinking is really valuable is how can someone in Greece, for example,  
**0:44:42-0:45:04:**  learn from an insight from a producer in New York or Peru?  And to Harry's point about triangulation is to really start to get an understanding globally  that there are different sets of knowledge and different tools and resources and pieces  
**0:45:04-0:45:26:**  of equipment that can drive forward the outcome that we're trying to deliver, which goes back  to healthy landscapes, healthy food, and to make sure that that all gets connected all  the way through to the point where we're able to sit in a place of confidence and say, we  
**0:45:26-0:45:45:**  have a very clear understanding from an analysis perspective of what's needed.  We have a very detailed understanding of where to get the resources we need to be successful  on the farm and to be able to take that forward and be able to bring the capital into place  
**0:45:45-0:46:01:**  without creating any added stress.  I think a lot of this for us has been, what can we do to bring together communities to  collaborate or cooperate, if you will, and remove risks?  
**0:46:01-0:46:30:**  I think as we've reflected on our business and a lot of the conversations we've had over  time is that there are many, many perceived risks for a successful agroforestry operation.  And it takes a special kind of confidence to be willing to jump into that without having  
**0:46:30-0:46:42:**  answers.  And I know you've both attempted this and have been successful at it in Greece.  And if we think more globally, it's like, what can we do to steward that education forward  
**0:46:42-0:46:57:**  so that any agroforestry or globally, wherever they are, can learn from what's happened,  can see the research, can get access to the resources they need, and can find capital  without any nonsense?  
**0:46:57-0:47:11:**  And at a high level, that's what we are driving to accomplish.  Ethan, I'm getting seriously excited behind my computer right now.  It's one of those things like, ooh, everyone should be smiling.  
**0:47:11-0:47:27:**  I smile when I say stuff like that, but I'm biased.  I want to add one more important point to this, which is best practices are only as  good as what the farm wants to implement.  
**0:47:27-0:47:50:**  And so while we can come up with ideas of what makes sense and have options for them,  at the end of the day, they might want to choose a weed mat instead of using a rotary  rake for raked hay because it makes more sense for the amount of time that they want to spend  
**0:47:50-0:48:08:**  in using equipment on their farm.  And so I think a really pivotal part of this is being able to understand what the farm  and the farm manager wants to do, not just what we think is best for the farm.  
**0:48:08-0:48:16:**  Thanks so much for this.  It's super clear.  There's one thing maybe kind of taking a step up in the other direction because it probably  
**0:48:16-0:48:29:**  comes before implementation, but I just wanted to be clear about the whole financing aspect.  And I mean, there's other podcasts with investing in regenerative agriculture that really go  into the detail of the whole investment bit.  
**0:48:29-0:48:39:**  So we won't go there necessarily, but just understanding from the farmer's perspective,  what that relationship means.  Yeah, absolutely.  
**0:48:39-0:48:59:**  So every farm is different, but if you think about trees in agricultural production systems,  they act a lot like infrastructure.  And so when you plant a tree on a farm, that tree doesn't yield for a certain amount of  
**0:48:59-0:49:18:**  years and then it starts yielding and it provides kind of this relatively stable kind of asset  that sits on the farm and adds value over time.  The kind of key to unlocking the financing of that, in the research that we did in being  
**0:49:18-0:49:32:**  able to do that kind of comes from two places.  One, looking at what people were doing in agriculture today that was limiting the scale  of transitioning landscapes to new production models.  
**0:49:32-0:49:48:**  A lot of that had to do with buying land.  And we felt that to enable farmers that own land, to enable investors that already own  land, to enable brands and buyers that have already a broad spectrum of a land footprint,  
**0:49:48-0:50:08:**  that having a strategy that required us to buy land was not necessarily the way to go.  So the second piece of that was learnings from the solar industry and what they did,  looking at how they were able to actually separate the ownership of solar panels from  
**0:50:08-0:50:26:**  the land itself and enable investment directly into those solar systems.  And so what we've built out in terms of financing is being able to invest into trees as assets  separate from the land on a long-term leasing basis while allowing for the farm to be managed  
**0:50:26-0:50:41:**  in terms of the understory as a separate thing.  So that way investors can invest into the trees directly on top of the land while still  enabling the farmers to manage that system the way in which they want to.  
**0:50:41-0:50:56:**  Kind of the way in which that breaks down into specifics, there's multiple parties involved.  The investors can invest into the trees.  The farmers can engage in a profit share in those trees as well as can get paid to manage  
**0:50:56-0:51:06:**  those trees from that third party.  It can also buy out that tree system over time.  The landowner who, so sometimes the farmer and the landowner are different if the land  
**0:51:06-0:51:21:**  is being leased by that farmer.  So if there's an extra landowner, that landowner can also participate in a revenue share in  that system through being able to comp lease rates in the short term to be able to get  
**0:51:21-0:51:38:**  a percentage of that profit over the long term.  And so what you end up with is a multi-party type of system where the farmers can manage  the system, get paid to manage the system, and over time can build equity in the system.  
**0:51:38-0:51:53:**  As well as, without having to buy land, we lower the amount of capital needed to get  exposure from an investment perspective into fruit, nut, and timber crops on land.  And that's kind of the basic framework for it.  
**0:51:53-0:52:13:**  Yeah, and adding to what Jeremy's pointing out there, I think it's important to point  out that we're looking at markets that are pretty stable.  And that things like fruits, nuts, and timber are fairly well understood from an economic  
**0:52:13-0:52:30:**  perspective.  And that we're not asking for something that's wildly misunderstood from an investment perspective.  I mean, in a very simple way to put that is people will continue to buy apples.  
**0:52:30-0:52:52:**  And so that's a crop we work with, for example.  And to Jeremy's point about solar, there were some pretty significant tools used in the  development of the solar industry that helped drive the investment industry into solar as  
**0:52:52-0:53:12:**  an asset class, particularly getting to the point where banks felt very comfortable.  And this is around things like the power purchase agreement, where you basically have a forward  contract on the electricity production prior to the solar array being installed.  
**0:53:12-0:53:31:**  Now to try and transfer that logic to agriculture, you want to be able to, for example, invest  in the trees before they're planted based off of the productivity of those trees and  the fruits, nuts, or timber that they'll produce.  
**0:53:31-0:53:51:**  Now granted, the time between electricity production and fruit production is much different,  but needless to say that the logic is similar.  And so from an investment perspective, what we're doing is connecting those dots and finding  
**0:53:51-0:54:10:**  the areas that have been successful in scaling up other industries, moving from the in solar  pilot projects into a more scale up phase and ultimately commercialization where you  have many, many projects, you have banks involved, and that there's a lot of these different  
**0:54:10-0:54:26:**  components going on from an industry perspective so that there's a robust business ecosystem.  And that's where we're moving.  There's a little bit of adding the kind of like oiling up the gears, if you will, so  
**0:54:26-0:54:42:**  that from an industry perspective, that can all take place.  And I think that's where we're moving pretty quickly within agroforestry and regenerative  agriculture as they're becoming much more hotly discussed opportunities in agriculture  
**0:54:42-0:54:54:**  and impacting investing and beyond.  You were talking about connecting dots.  And for me, maybe the last dots that I need to connect is understanding once the crop  
**0:54:54-0:55:02:**  is ready to harvest, how is the commercialization taking place?  And I'm assuming you also have a part to play in that.  Sure.  
**0:55:02-0:55:16:**  Yeah.  I mean, I know we had touched on this very briefly earlier of the importance of access  to markets and how we want to make sure that buyers are, commercial buyers are engaged  
**0:55:16-0:55:33:**  in the process.  Effectively, what you want is knowledge that once the crop is harvested, that somebody  is already committed to a purchasing price that is fair and that they're ready to receive  
**0:55:33-0:55:46:**  that product.  Well, back to what I was saying about the power purchase agreement.  There's an ongoing discussion in the ag world around something called the produce purchase  
**0:55:46-0:55:56:**  agreement.  Essentially, you buy the crop before the trees are planted at a set price for lack of a better  way to say it.  
**0:55:56-0:56:15:**  So that's one of the avenues that we're working on and really building relationships with  commercial buyers, whether those are consumer goods, brands, retailers, distributors, restaurants,  etc.  
**0:56:15-0:56:32:**  Even wineries or cideries.  Value add is an important component of this as well.  And so being able to connect a fully operable agroforestry system and its outputs, the fruits,  
**0:56:32-0:56:54:**  nuts and timber directly to the place where it's going to land, say, on your table as  the consumer, that everything in between is taken care of.  And we recognize pretty early with Propagate that asking our farmers to both be excellent  
**0:56:54-0:57:15:**  agroforestors, know everything from a technical perspective around the operations and maintenance  of their farm, to also be brilliant marketeers and know how to sell their product in every  corner of the planet and where it goes and to be able to negotiate on price and be able  
**0:57:15-0:57:27:**  to go to the banks and be able to negotiate really good financing deals and be able to  take on debt or equity for the development of other farms.  It's a very tall ask.  
**0:57:27-0:57:45:**  And now to add to it, we're asking our farm community, by the way, figure out how to sequester  carbon and how to build soil health and retain water.  You know, all of a sudden you're staring at this going, that's a lot.  
**0:57:45-0:58:00:**  Thanks for asking me to do everything.  And so from our perspective, if we can start to remove some of those challenges, particularly  around access to markets.  
**0:58:00-0:58:14:**  And so I'll give you an example, we're working with a large pasture raised egg company here  in the United States.  And they're very interested in agroforestry because there's so much ecological value,  
**0:58:14-0:58:30:**  because it delivers more profitability for the farms that they already work for.  And so there's a really clear incentive for this food company to work with the farmers  they already talk to on a daily basis.  
**0:58:30-0:58:42:**  And to build agroforestry into their operation.  And now we're working on a cost share program with them to help those farmers within their  supply chain transition to agroforestry.  
**0:58:42-0:58:57:**  And so there's an example.  Another example, we work with a beer company that makes a really awesome black currant  sour beer.  
**0:58:57-0:59:08:**  And it's one of those beers that you kind of wish you had like every day on a hot summer  day.  Yeah, you got to be careful because it's one of the good ones.  
**0:59:08-0:59:23:**  And so with that in mind, there's a clear opportunity for them to start to vertically  integrate into their own supply chain, the production of black currants.  And that beer happens to be one of their better selling beers.  
**0:59:23-0:59:46:**  So it's I think some of the marketing components around bringing buyers to the table and making  sure that the price per pound of the crop is delivered.  That you find the areas where there's a clear incentive or a clear opportunity that creates  
**0:59:46-0:59:58:**  a winning scenario.  And to be completely honest, that is not always true.  Sometimes there are contracts that get put in place that are not perfect.  
**0:59:58-1:00:13:**  And it's sort of the nature of business.  But also what we can do by bringing in long term partners and collaborators is finding  the opportunity to connect to your point, connect those dots in a way where people have  
**1:00:13-1:00:31:**  a vested interest in the ecological health and more importantly, the economic health  of the farm.  One of the aspects that you've talked a lot about just now and that has been actually  
**1:00:31-1:00:48:**  an overarching theme in this whole conversation we've been having that holds farmers back  the most is innovating new systems for innovating new systems on the farm is economic viability.  And as you said just now, that's especially the case for agroforestry.  
**1:00:48-1:00:58:**  So this is something we wanted to dig a bit deeper in with you guys, because we think  you have something really important to bring to the table here to this whole agroforestry  conversation.  
**1:00:58-1:01:09:**  And from your experience and from what you've been able to model and to understand, how  profitable is it?  How does it actually improve?  
**1:01:09-1:01:15:**  In what way?  And does it actually improve the farm's economic viability?  Of course.  
**1:01:15-1:01:30:**  So I guess to gauge profitability, there are a few different metrics that we have to look  at.  And this really dives into, I guess reasonably complex, but not unreasonably complex financial  
**1:01:30-1:01:40:**  modeling over 20 years.  Two of those really important metrics that we're looking at are the net present value  of a tree system and the internal rate of return.  
**1:01:40-1:02:01:**  So to make that a bit more accessible, the net present value is the aggregate of all  of the future net income from that crop, all of the future profits, say from right when  it starts yielding or actually right when it's installed through to when it's been in  
**1:02:01-1:02:23:**  production for say five to 10 plus years.  And to communicate that future value back to today's dollars, what we use is a process  called discounted cash flow, which phrases cash inflows in the future in today's dollars.  
**1:02:23-1:02:32:**  So happy to dive into that more.  It's a bit complex, but it's absolutely necessary in looking at multi-year profitability because  there is that time lag to yield.  
**1:02:32-1:02:51:**  Secondly, the internal rate of return, the best way to look at it is if you were to get  a loan from a bank to finance this system, what interest rate would essentially eat all  of your profits?  
**1:02:51-1:03:09:**  So if you borrowed from a bank to finance the system at 12 percent, then that's a pretty  high interest rate, at least in the United States.  And if you had a 12 percent IRR on your yields, you would end up with zero dollars in net  
**1:03:09-1:03:27:**  income because that all of that money to service your debt would be going to the bank.  So the higher the internal rate of return, the IRR, the higher the profitability.  Could you translate some of these tools and what they tell you for some of the different  
**1:03:27-1:03:36:**  systems that you're implementing?  Is it something that, as you said, the internal rate of return, is it interesting based on  the kind of funding the farmers can get?  
**1:03:36-1:03:46:**  Is it something that is the economic aspect, an argument that really gets to convince farmers  or not?  Yeah, it's a really good question.  
**1:03:46-1:04:09:**  And to bring the IRR point close to home with something Jeremy mentioned earlier around  the separation of the tree as an asset from the land.  One of the things in our economic modeling that became very clear is to increase the  
**1:04:09-1:04:27:**  IRR of a project, the only focusing on the trees as assets without the cost of purchasing  the real estate.  So remove the cost of the land that actually increases the IRR.  
**1:04:27-1:04:53:**  So to what Harry was pointing out a second ago around having a higher IRR, some of the  structural components are really important from an investment perspective so that both  our farm operators are profitable and as investors get engaged, that their return is delivered  
**1:04:53-1:05:06:**  in a much more exciting way.  And so that's where we really wanted to be able to pull strings on this design of the  investment or the structure of how this gets put together.  
**1:05:06-1:05:19:**  And we've talked a bit about some of that on the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture  podcast.  Anyhow, I wanted to point that out as one of the areas that's an important structural  
**1:05:19-1:05:33:**  factor for why we focus on that as an opportunity.  And then there's plenty to build on there, Harry or Jeremy, if you want to add to that.  Yeah, of course.  
**1:05:33-1:05:50:**  And just look in, I guess, on Ethan's point, separating the trees as assets from the land  itself enables much higher IRRs.  So at least in the United States, it's generally not viable to cash flow a mortgage with an  
**1:05:50-1:06:07:**  agricultural income, except in very rare scenarios.  That's just kind of the economic climate we're living in today.  And so IRRs can range from, say, 9 to 18 to 22 percent, depending on value add and vertical  
**1:06:07-1:06:23:**  integration.  So selling just straight elderberries, unprocessed, it doesn't do a whole lot just because the  lack of buyers and all of the margin there is really in selling a finished product such  
**1:06:23-1:06:35:**  as elderberry syrup.  However, blueberries are the opposite.  Having access to markets for fresh berries is really the go on that front.  
**1:06:35-1:06:59:**  Another important point to make is looking at all of this from a perspective where the  capital is available is a completely different paradigm than bootstrapping a system that  needs to cash flow itself year over year.  
**1:06:59-1:07:25:**  So you can have as high a 20 year IRR as you like, but if the capital isn't available to  start up that system, then that's I mean, a high IRR is all well and good, but the access  to financing and say equity financing is really the leverage point that we've landed on in  
**1:07:25-1:07:40:**  agroforestry.  I just want to build on that a little bit and I think it's important to note that you  can do a lot of things to lower the risk of a project, but that also oftentimes can lower  
**1:07:40-1:07:52:**  the return on a project.  Meaning if you have a single buyer that guarantees a price and you buy that product for, you  have them buy that product for five years, that might limit the amount of upside of a  
**1:07:52-1:08:07:**  project where you might have more than one contract, you might have five contracts that  are paying negotiated prices on an annual basis.  And so a big part of the equation is understanding at the farm gate, what level of risk is that  
**1:08:07-1:08:27:**  farm interested in for the end products that they're selling.  And between that and understanding the capital needs of what it takes to achieve those returns  is really key to understanding at a farm level what the return can be.  
**1:08:27-1:08:48:**  I think everyone always wants to know how profitable it is and to say it's context specific,  I want to make sure that it isn't an out on the question, but it is really a way of saying  that the returns can be incredibly high or the returns can be low and stable, much like  
**1:08:48-1:09:03:**  a commodity, and it's really about the approach on a farm level basis.  And I guess that's also you adapt the system.  For example, a timber system would have a much longer term kind of strategy, whereas  
**1:09:03-1:09:22:**  a very integrated system would be short term cash flow, possibly higher risk.  So it also depends based on the farmer, his needs, the context, and you will adapt the  agroforestry model, which will have an impact on the whole financial situation of the farm.  
**1:09:22-1:09:42:**  Yeah, maybe to bring us down to a specific example, selling trees on the stump is much  less value back to the farm than selling milled lumber.  And if the cost of milling that lumber with a custom miller on site is lower than the  
**1:09:42-1:09:54:**  value add that you get from the difference in selling that milled, it makes sense to  mill that on site and sell finished goods more so than it does to just sell it on the  stump.  
**1:09:54-1:10:09:**  Now on a project basis, some farms just might want to sell it on the stump and make a little  bit less money if they know that it's a little bit less work and a little bit less cost.  And so doing those types of analyses as to both what the farm is able to do and wants  
**1:10:09-1:10:27:**  to do compared with what the actual upside is of a farm product is part of the work.  And so you won't, just to bring it down a little level, and I understand that all of  these answers are context specific and depend on the farmer and apologies if I'm trying  
**1:10:27-1:10:45:**  to simplify things too much, but bring it down a level, you won't engage in a project  on a farm, do you have a standard of if it doesn't provide so much, a certain rate of  return or certain IOR, et cetera, you will not engage in that project?  
**1:10:45-1:10:58:**  Do you have an economic standard?  The short answer is no.  And the reason for that is some farms just want an ecological yield and don't necessarily  
**1:10:58-1:11:12:**  want an economic yield.  And so in those cases, it's still important for them to understand the cost of doing that  implementation and to try to showcase the data of where that value might be coming from.  
**1:11:12-1:11:32:**  For example, I'm looking at the yield of mulberry drops in chicken systems for feed value and  field where it might not be directly an investable return, but it's something that from an investment  perspective can be quantified in terms of the value that's being gained from that integrated  
**1:11:32-1:11:46:**  into their poultry production system.  So the short answer is we're agnostic to what the farm's goals are in integrating trees.  In terms of from an investment perspective, those are much more clear in terms of the  
**1:11:46-1:12:01:**  types of outcomes we're looking for on a farm basis.  And part of that is looking at the scale of the farm, the risk of the project in terms  of the manager and how experienced they are, and then the products that are being selected,  
**1:12:01-1:12:13:**  how confident we are in the markets to be able to fulfill the contracts that we're projecting  within the analysis.  And that what we look at in terms of financing is different than what we look at in terms  
**1:12:13-1:12:29:**  of service providing for agroforestry change.  And just to understand and push a bit more of this example.  So then you do have clients which are farms which aren't seeking external investments  
**1:12:29-1:12:37:**  and then just come to you for kind of technical expertise.  And so they'll be kind of investing themselves into the ecological benefits of their own  production.  
**1:12:37-1:12:47:**  Is that correct?  Exactly.  And say if you're going to plant trees, especially a large number of trees, and really just phrase  
**1:12:47-1:13:10:**  that as a cost to your operations, or just a cost or an asset on the balance sheet.  If that model spits out a negative return, it's important to know how much that's going  to cost and what would it take to move that into a positive return, either through just  
**1:13:10-1:13:29:**  really monetizing the ecosystem service benefits, whether that's formally through something  like payments for ecosystem services, or informally, I guess, through one route, say shade benefit  for livestock, but also just the enjoyment of the farm.  
**1:13:29-1:13:45:**  So how much money is someone willing to contribute to bring a system into existence that is otherwise  unprofitable?  And what would it take to make that profitable?  
**1:13:45-1:14:01:**  Agroforestry systems, when you're planting trees, naturally, you're starting to look  more into the medium and long term.  So how are the farmers adapting their strategies or how are you noticing farmers adapting their  
**1:14:01-1:14:14:**  medium and long term strategies on the farm?  Yeah, I mean, farmers contribute a huge amount to thinking about the management, as well  as thinking about the offtakes.  
**1:14:14-1:14:32:**  It's fascinating how much when they start to get engaged, how much farmers really start  to add value to the system beyond what we can actually add ourselves.  And they start to look at their own systems differently and get excited about what's possible  
**1:14:32-1:14:47:**  when they start to see different results, whether it be through farms initially feeling  like it might be complex to do hay between rows of trees and then eventually feeling  like, oh, this is easy, this is exciting, I might be able to do this more often and  
**1:14:47-1:14:56:**  it actually, I can understand it now.  Through to them engaging and calling buyers themselves and being able to understand where  they're going to sell that product.  
**1:14:56-1:15:07:**  It really is a range.  And that's in terms of the types of farmers we work with.  We work with farmers that are the most conservative or Mennonite or Amish communities through  
**1:15:07-1:15:21:**  to more progressive farmers.  And across the board, the farmers themselves, because they're problem solvers in their own  right, they're willing to get their hands dirty and dig in and understand the systems  
**1:15:21-1:15:37:**  and be willing to kind of find the places where they're most interested in adding value  for themselves.  With Dimitri, we've talked about this numerous times working on the land, is that we've talked  
**1:15:37-1:15:53:**  about this tension that there is between, on the one hand, ecology that drives you to  complexify systems and towards diversification.  And on the other hand, having to balance this with an economic logic that pushes you more  
**1:15:53-1:16:05:**  towards efficiency and standardization to allow for mechanization.  And it's like you're constantly walking on this tight rope.  And I was wondering, have you encountered this tension?  
**1:16:05-1:16:17:**  And if so, how do you manage it?  In short, I'll say delicately.  It's a really great deep dive to go into.  
**1:16:17-1:16:32:**  And it's, it's, it's we can, one of the ways to look at it is we can take a maximal approach  or a minimalist approach.  And adding a single species to a pasture increases biodiversity.  
**1:16:32-1:16:56:**  And if that species is economically profitable, then we can have our cake and eat it too.  And I'll just add that we work a certain amount of support species into the system.  So every, every 10th row might be hyperbiodiverse, such to provide those pollinator and fungal  
**1:16:56-1:17:10:**  benefits to the system.  And that's really just phrased as a cost.  But the more we can say, instead of just normal sunflowers or normal, normal, it's, it's Helianthus  
**1:17:10-1:17:27:**  divericatus, that's a woodland sunflower in the US.  The more we can switch to something like Jerusalem artichoke, Helianthus tuberosus, or from normal  shrub willow to say an ornamental willow and, and at least create the possibility for an  
**1:17:27-1:17:41:**  economic yield, then the more we can do that, the better.  And to kind of add to this, I think oftentimes, you know, we have to ask ourselves, what is  the ecological state that we're looking to achieve?  
**1:17:41-1:17:58:**  Is it ecological stability of a human managed system?  Or is it the biodiversity of a native forest?  And I think, you know, we agroforestry in many ways is a managed, managing complexity,  
**1:17:58-1:18:14:**  but it is still a human engaged system, where we're, we're not just leaving it to be and  turning it back into native forest.  And so I think we have to be somewhat honest with the fact that really it is humans goals  
**1:18:14-1:18:42:**  largely defining the system's context, and being able to provide ecological value in  certain cases may be at odds with, with, with being able to provide human value.  And a good example of this might be things like vol pressure in fields, things like being  
**1:18:42-1:19:05:**  able to ensure that we're not cultivating a deer habitat for within the fields.  And so part of designing the system is to design within the natural predator and prey  relationships that nature provides us, but also not being afraid of using certain approaches,  
**1:19:05-1:19:26:**  like removing biomass from the field in the fall and winter to decrease vol habitat, such  that we can ensure that the trees survive and potential vol damage.  It's that balance that's really key to ensure that the human outcomes are really being prioritized,  
**1:19:26-1:19:43:**  even though we are delicately managing ecological effects of what we're trying to accomplish  on the farm.  And again, are these decisions made by you or do you offer a, you know, a palette of  
**1:19:43-1:19:59:**  choices and consequences and then those, you know, investors or farmers make choices?  How does that happen?  It's a total palette and selection, you know, the, if a farm just wants to plant a single  
**1:19:59-1:20:17:**  tree, let's say they just want to plant a pecan orchard, then that is something that's  totally within what we do, though we work with them to help them understand the benefits  of integrating a pollinator row into that pecan orchard.  
**1:20:17-1:20:31:**  So that way they can come to understand what increasing diversity can do in terms of adding  value.  And we're not going to be very, how do I say this, we're not militant that that is the  
**1:20:31-1:20:42:**  solution that every farm needs to do because every farmer is different and they have different  goals.  And at the same time, we will provide them with the info that bats, for instance, provide  
**1:20:42-1:21:01:**  $22.9 billion worth of ecosystem services per year to farmers globally, specifically  in pest control.  And say in certain regions of, we'll say the global south, the tropical climates, it's  
**1:21:01-1:21:21:**  something like a 1% increase in bats amounts to a 10% decrease in malaria deaths.  So things like that that really hit home in terms of understanding the benefits of an  intact ecology is something we really bring into the farm design process.  
**1:21:21-1:21:40:**  On the same topic, one of the things I wanted to add is how the importance, especially when  looking at agroforestry of putting value on diversity as well, like for example, complexifying  tree lines, therefore providing different products that can have a value, et cetera.  
**1:21:40-1:21:55:**  But obviously this also has costs because more complex commercial strategy, more products  to sell will incur more costs or potentially could.  Yeah, I think an important concept that we like to kind of throw around is the concept  
**1:21:55-1:22:14:**  of structural biodiversity without compromising commercial productivity.  And so for example, if you're going to produce a product that needs to be machine harvested,  putting a tree within that row that's going to be a deterrent to being able to manage  
**1:22:14-1:22:35:**  that shrub crop is really not going to be a positive economic benefit to the farm, but  adding a row of trees next to a row of those shrub crops allows for you to have structural  biodiversity into that system without compromising that commercial productivity.  
**1:22:35-1:22:50:**  Essentially the predatory wasps that live in the rough, structurally diverse biomass  in one row will just fly over to the apple trees and lay their eggs in the caterpillars,  for instance.  
**1:22:50-1:23:05:**  The biodiversity doesn't necessarily need to be in the row of apples or blackcurrant  itself.  And there are some good data on the distance from certain species that you gain a benefit  
**1:23:05-1:23:24:**  in terms of pollinators or predatory insects within a system.  So part of it is ensuring that we're not putting the biodiversity so far away that it's in  many ways not really a benefit to the core crops, but keeping it far enough away so that  
**1:23:24-1:23:36:**  it doesn't impede commercial activity.  It's a huge topic, the whole complexity within agricultural systems and something that we  won't be able to completely break down in 10 minutes.  
**1:23:36-1:23:53:**  But we had one final question that we prepared for you and bringing this interview to an  end slowly.  What's been the biggest challenge as a company to reach your objectives of scaling agroforestry  
**1:23:53-1:24:08:**  or convincing or working with farmers to implement agroforestry?  It's a loaded question.  I have a simple answer.  
**1:24:08-1:24:27:**  It comes down to dollars and cents.  At the end of the day, we're adding valuable assets to farmland.  And the general rule of thumb is that permanent crops have far more value in terms of the  
**1:24:27-1:24:40:**  amount of value captured by the plant per acre comparatively to row crop production  systems or grass.  And so in adding that value, the case is made for itself.  
**1:24:40-1:24:57:**  Now putting all the pieces together needs to be in place before you can make that case.  But that's what we're doing.  And if we can put all the pieces together, the value of the crops themselves speak for  
**1:24:57-1:25:06:**  themselves.  So thank you so much for taking the time and for sharing everything that you've shared.  Of course.  
**1:25:06-1:25:20:**  And thanks for having us.  And yeah, we're excited for this agroforestry podcast.  And if it makes sense to hop on round two with us, we're more than happy.  
**1:25:20-1:25:34:**  Yeah, agreed.  We really appreciate you guys having us on and inviting us to be part of this.  The world of agroforestry is growing and we're excited to have friends all over the planet  
**1:25:34-1:25:44:**  that can be collaborators in this journey with us.  So thank you.  Thank you so much for making it this far and for listening to this episode.  
**1:25:44-1:25:57:**  We really hope you enjoyed it as much as we did.  Since we're starting out here, it's really important for us that we get your feedback  and we'd really like you to get in touch with us and tell us what you think, what you liked,  
**1:25:57-1:26:05:**  what you didn't, what kind of questions you'd like us to ask our guests, as well as what  guests you'd like to see on the podcast.  You can also offer suggestions.  
**1:26:05-1:26:17:**  You can do that through our websites.  You'll have, there's all the forms there and the email.  The link is below, but you can also find it on www.regenerativeagroforestry.org.  
**1:26:17-1:26:26:**  And of course, all the links to the episode will be below as well.  So yeah, I think that's it.  And thank you so much again for listening and we're really looking forward to the next  
**1:26:26-1:26:53:**  one.  