---
title: 40 How To Diversify A Milk And Meat Farm Using Silvopasture And Alley Cropping With Felix Riecken
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2022-06-09)  

**0:00:00-0:00:23:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:23-0:00:34:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  these challenges.  
**0:00:34-0:00:48:**  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Welcome back to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:00:48-0:00:59:**  I'm your host Etienne.  In this episode, I talk with Felix Riecken who is planting out silver pastoral and silver  arable systems on his family farm in the north of Germany.  
**0:00:59-0:01:10:**  He explains the journey that led him to agroforestry and integrating these techniques into the  family business.  His systems being still quite young, we focus the conversation on the design, the objectives  
**0:01:10-0:01:23:**  and the establishment of the tree systems.  This goes from choosing the right genetics to protecting the trees and managing the weeds.  Felix also explains how he successfully funded the agroforestry systems.  
**0:01:23-0:01:34:**  Unfortunately we had many technical issues during the recording with Felix so the quality  of the recording is not perfect.  I apologize for that and I hope you still enjoy the episode.  
**0:01:34-0:01:43:**  So hi Felix, welcome to the podcast.  Hey Etienne, very nice to having me.  It's a great honor to be part of this.  
**0:01:43-0:02:03:**  To kick us off, tell us a bit more about your family farm and a bit of its history.  Okay, it started in 1899 so we have quite a journey ahead.  It's been bought from the father of my great-great-grandfather.  
**0:02:03-0:02:23:**  He got the farm to start off.  I don't know a lot about what happened back then but in one writing it said we now have  to work for all the stuff that got neglected to make this farm flourish again.  
**0:02:23-0:02:45:**  So this is something that got really into my head, something that moved me.  I think all of my predecessors on this farm worked their asses off which makes me very  proud and yeah, career was what was back then but well, this is something nobody can do.  
**0:02:45-0:03:04:**  Nobody can answer me.  Well I have this writing and I want to do the same to make this farm flourish and yeah,  benefit the generations after me as my predecessors did.  
**0:03:04-0:03:23:**  So keeping this journey growing, my great-grandfather, he was known to be a guy that really, yeah,  cared for nature.  He fed the wildlife during winter and he was known to be always carrying a little tree  
**0:03:23-0:03:46:**  with him and yeah, he was trying to fix holes in the so-called knicks that we have on the  borderlines of the paddocks.  We have a lot of wind here in northern Germany between the two oceans so this countryside  
**0:03:46-0:04:01:**  is known for these tree lines that divide different paddocks from each other to reduce  the wind impact.  So my great-grandfather, as I said, he was known to always carry a little tree to fix  
**0:04:01-0:04:30:**  a hole somewhere or to plant.  So back then, the farm got everything that one knows from a child books about farms and  then my grandfather, he was going with his time after the war doing kind of what most  
**0:04:30-0:04:42:**  of the people, most of the farmers did back then.  He was specializing.  In our case, he was specializing on milk production and effectivity that meant to get rid of all  
**0:04:42-0:04:58:**  the small animals that brought diversity but also a lot of work.  It meant to spray, for example, herbicides to not have 10 people weeding all year long.  It meant to invest in a big stable outside the village and machinery that makes many  
**0:04:58-0:05:14:**  trees stand in the way.  He once took me on a walk through a new planted fodder hatch and was kind of apologizing when  he told me where there were trees he took away during the land clearing.  
**0:05:14-0:05:22:**  I find that very impressive but I never judged him for his actions.  It was the time.  You were an outsider.  
**0:05:22-0:05:36:**  I think if you wouldn't take away your trees, maybe the farm wouldn't exist today if he  wasn't taking these decisions.  So we're coming closer towards today.  
**0:05:36-0:05:52:**  In 2006, we built our own creamery to get off the global market on milk.  That was giving us a hard time during the milk crisis.  And now we produce milk and cheese and fresh cheese and yogurt for customers in the radios  
**0:05:52-0:06:10:**  of about 15 kilometers around the farm, which includes our capital of the state Schleswig-Holstein  called Kiel with around 250,000 inhabitants.  We built up a delivery system that brings our goods directly to the front door of our  
**0:06:10-0:06:23:**  customers.  It's about 1,500.  And also we sell to some food retailers close by, some cafes, some kindergartens and offices.  
**0:06:23-0:06:34:**  So in 2016, we got our own shop on the farm with a self-service system.  That was pretty fine.  So very cheap for us to maintain.  
**0:06:34-0:06:53:**  And during the pandemics, we got more products from different farms in our region to sell  next to our products.  And now it's over 300 different products that are also sold over our delivery system.  
**0:06:53-0:07:11:**  And what we also do is like a small kindergarten is placed on our farm.  And every Monday we get like school kids coming here to learn about nature and how food is  produced.  
**0:07:11-0:07:27:**  And finally in 2017, we got organic certified without having a lot to change.  I put a little bit of pressure on my parents because I was amazed by this movement during  my apprenticeship.  
**0:07:27-0:07:50:**  But well, they did all the work that the certification need to.  So the last events like that were just a few years ago, we were installing a wood chip  heating for our whole farm, including the creamery and some more neighbors around in  
**0:07:50-0:08:13:**  the village.  And so, yeah, this gives us the spaces of a very sustainable place to bring our customers  and all the people around us the goods of our land in a very nice way.  
**0:08:13-0:08:24:**  Could you give us a sense at this point a bit more about the production system?  All right.  So the farm is about 90 hectares big.  
**0:08:24-0:08:42:**  It's 222 acres in total.  About 1.5 hectares is the yard itself and all the infrastructure.  And then we have 40 hectares of grazing paddocks and the rest is arable land.  
**0:08:42-0:09:02:**  So yeah, close to 50-50.  The climate here is temperate.  We have about 765 millimeters of rainfall with around 700 hours of sun and an average  
**0:09:02-0:09:19:**  temperature of 8.5 degrees.  So we are a little bit influenced by the Gulf Stream coming here through the North Sea.  And that gives us a little bit of warmth, which is quite nice.  
**0:09:19-0:09:29:**  Let's the grass grow very good.  What kind of soil do you have?  It's clay with some sand inside.  
**0:09:29-0:09:49:**  I'm not sure how the perfect word is for that.  Yeah, but it's a heavy soil.  Hard to cultivate perfectly, but has a lot of nutrients inside and holds a lot of water.  
**0:09:49-0:09:58:**  So yeah, beneficial.  That's for sure.  It's not sand or something that you can't really work with.  
**0:09:58-0:10:21:**  Well, coming back to the climate in 2018, this was very different.  So this year we've had a really warm winter with a lot of rain.  So yeah, I wonder how these numbers are going to change because of the climate change.  
**0:10:21-0:10:42:**  Every year we have some kind of weather phenomena that my grandfather, after more than 60 years  of living here, hasn't experienced yet.  So yeah, it's always hard to tell how the climate is or how it's going to be.  
**0:10:42-0:11:09:**  The soil gives us the benefit that, as I said, the water can be hold very long and we have  a good situation even on a changing climate.  And as I said, we produce milk in the first hand and that's where we are definitely specialized  
**0:11:09-0:11:25:**  at the moment still.  But it's a little bit of diversifying going on.  So last year we seriously started with vegetables, growing garlic and pumpkins and celery alongside  
**0:11:25-0:11:31:**  the trees.  It's kind of amazing.  I will talk later about that for sure.  
**0:11:31-0:11:45:**  And we also produced and sold a few tomato plants for our customers in the spring to  grow in their backyards.  And every year we have one field of grains on our cropping rotation.  
**0:11:45-0:12:07:**  We grow spelt usually for selling to the open market.  And yeah, I think that's about what's interesting to the farm.  One thing is that all our fields are very close by, so we don't have to drive more than  
**0:12:07-0:12:21:**  1.5 kilometers to reach every part of our farm.  This is very amazing.  And especially with the cows, the grazing paddocks are just next to our stables.  
**0:12:21-0:12:34:**  So there's 30 hectares of grass where we can just open the doors and let the cows graze.  Sounds like a pretty epic farm.  It's amazing.  
**0:12:34-0:12:51:**  For having a little bit of picture of the countryside, it's a little bit hilly, not  too much, but not flat at all.  It looks like a little bit from the Lord of the Rings, how it's called, the Shire.  
**0:12:51-0:13:04:**  I always like to compare.  And how do you come into the picture then?  You've mentioned it's a family farm, but have you always known that you wanted to farm there?  
**0:13:04-0:13:12:**  Or how did you come about getting started there?  It's a little bit of a journey.  I will start with the apprenticeship.  
**0:13:12-0:13:24:**  So when I experienced organic farming in my second year of apprenticeship, there was passion  being built.  I truly love to learn how to work with the principles of nature, trying to build nutrient  
**0:13:24-0:13:40:**  cycles instead of chains and trying to interfere with nature to make it more productive in  terms of producing food.  So during this apprenticeship, I always wanted to dig deeper than my teachers could answer.  
**0:13:40-0:13:55:**  And I was on my way to understand how agriculture functions.  At one point, I realized that the main part of agriculture is to solve problems that nature  is setting.  
**0:13:55-0:14:10:**  So we always work against natural processes in agriculture.  I figured that was one key event that would have a bigger impact on what I was about to  experience later on.  
**0:14:10-0:14:30:**  And I went on to study ecological agriculture, agricultural science and pits and housing.  I was trying to set up myself for the role I was going to play here when I'd be home  to detach my dad as CEO of this farm.  
**0:14:30-0:14:46:**  And I soon realized that I would have to spend much more time studying if I wanted to get  the knowledge I needed for taking this position and still doing my bachelor degree.  So I quit writing exams on topics I wasn't interested in.  
**0:14:46-0:15:05:**  I focused on the candy that the university was able to offer.  So that led me to not getting the bachelor's, but I figured myself spending time on studying  way more efficient than most of my fellow students.  
**0:15:05-0:15:21:**  Found myself having much more time for topics that are most valuable for me.  I learned how I could optimize nutrient cycles on my farm.  I spent a lot of time in understanding soil and how it functions, how composting works  
**0:15:21-0:15:30:**  and so on.  I also spent a lot of time to learn and think about sustainability, especially in our system  of food production.  
**0:15:30-0:15:48:**  The common good economy principle, they caught my focus during studies.  And in the meantime, I was spending a lot of time learning how to practically grow vegetables  that I wasn't learning in the apprenticeship.  
**0:15:48-0:16:02:**  Take care of all the plants.  And one point I figured like mushrooms and fungi, very amazing stuff.  Had to learn about that a little bit more.  
**0:16:02-0:16:12:**  So I did.  I had the time.  And yeah, this all together gave me a much bigger understanding of nature and how we  
**0:16:12-0:16:27:**  could bring it into this food producing system.  So in 2018, we had like this drought I was mentioning earlier and I was coming home in  October 2020.  
**0:16:27-0:16:58:**  So it started to rain again after this drought.  And I realized that this is like, well, if we don't solve the problem of water on this  farm, it could be like very influencing our future producing system here.  
**0:16:58-0:17:15:**  And so that year we sold 12 animals to the butcher early to be able to feed the others.  We started to feed our winter fodder in August.  And one cow died at a heat stroke.  
**0:17:15-0:17:37:**  So very extreme situation on this farm, very extreme situation during my time of experiencing  agriculture.  And yeah, I realized that the bigger problem was our climate crisis.  
**0:17:37-0:18:01:**  And with thawing that we'd have to struggle less with extreme weather situations that  would lead to better yields and stuff everywhere around the globe.  And when I came here on the farm in that year, I went to the paddocks and I saw it getting  
**0:18:01-0:18:22:**  green first next to these tree lines I was mentioning earlier.  And I went on the internet and looked it up or start to searching for how trees are influencing  our agricultural system.  
**0:18:22-0:18:49:**  And that led me to agroforestry and I still had one year and a half to start diving deeper  into this and start planning the first systems for our farm.  And yeah, that's what we did first when I came back in October 2020.  
**0:18:49-0:19:01:**  And how did your parents welcome this?  I mean, you arriving with new ideas and the idea of including trees, for example, did  they get that project or were they a bit skeptical?  
**0:19:01-0:19:19:**  I was earlier talking a lot about my grand-grandfather that influenced my dad a lot, the guy that  always carried the tree.  From that impact, my father always wanted to be a forester.  
**0:19:19-0:19:43:**  But his dad made him to take over the farm.  So he was a farmer wanting to be a forester that gave me a very easy time to make him  understand why trees are a good impact to everything else around us.  
**0:19:43-0:20:09:**  So it was a little bit weird for all of them to get these ideas into the system, but it  was everything else and a hard time for me telling them my ideas and making them know  that this would be beneficial for us all.  
**0:20:09-0:20:26:**  So what are these tree systems then?  Give us a description of what they look like and where they are in the landscape.  So we have both silvopastural systems and silvowarable systems.  
**0:20:26-0:20:41:**  I will start on the silvopasture.  It's basically three different systems that are connected to each other.  We have a little chestnut archer, which is a kind of experiment in the first hand.  
**0:20:41-0:21:08:**  And we have an apple and pea orchard on the closest grazing paddock.  And in between these two, we have a fodder hedge that's planted alongside our pathways  for the animals we built early on.  
**0:21:08-0:21:35:**  So the orchards are both ally cropping systems, which have spacings of 12 meters between the  trees and 17 meters in between the tree lines.  So we are able to work with our biggest machine, the slurry tank, which spreads around 15 meters  
**0:21:35-0:21:50:**  in total.  And the chestnut orchard also is set up in a keyline system where we'd be able to work  with the keyline equipment and stuff like that.  
**0:21:50-0:22:02:**  Those fodder hedges, you say they're along the pathways.  That's the paths that the cows take every day to go back to the milking parlor.  And how do you plan to manage that then?  
**0:22:02-0:22:11:**  Do you plan to have them outside of the cow's reach and that you give access to the fodder  when you decide to?  Or do you just let them browse as they go by?  
**0:22:11-0:22:28:**  Well, at first, we definitely keep them outside to let the trees develop.  But later on, when the trees are big enough, we let them browse up to the height they can  reach.  
**0:22:28-0:22:41:**  But not too much inside the fodder hedge.  So there is going to be an electrified fence around it to space them from the essential  parts of the trees.  
**0:22:41-0:23:04:**  And everything that grows above, I'd like to harvest.  And at the moment, we are planning a hay drying system and a new stable for the animals.  And that we'd like to produce fodder hay or leaf hay.  
**0:23:04-0:23:22:**  I'm not sure how exactly you'd call that.  So we have some of that for the winter as well.  I heard and read that there is a lot of minerals in the leaves of the trees.  
**0:23:22-0:23:39:**  And some trees, for example, the mulberry, they have lots of protein that I'd like to  use for the animals.  So both scraping and harvesting for winter is going to be the plan over there.  
**0:23:39-0:23:53:**  Have you come across resources on how you could harvest and dry it efficiently?  Because I think that's one of the main challenges with the tree hay.  However appealing it might be is like compared to grass hay, which is easily mechanized,  
**0:23:53-0:24:04:**  it doesn't seem so easy to put in place on a large scale.  I kind of pushed that a little bit towards the future.  We just planted the trees.  
**0:24:04-0:24:20:**  It's about five, six more years until we really start harvesting.  And so we still have a little bit of time and maybe let the others who are inventing  those machines a little bit of time.  
**0:24:20-0:24:38:**  I have two guys that are in the machinery producing industry and they are curious already  how the fodder hatch is going to look like in a few years.  So they can make like a little bit of brainstorming as well how the perfect machine would look  
**0:24:38-0:25:06:**  like.  From another person in Germany who is working with agroforestry, he's curious about the  winery tools where you drive alongside a vineyard and cut the leaves of the wine grape plants.  
**0:25:06-0:25:20:**  So yeah, still time to figure something out.  We haven't yet paid the most attention to that.  So we were continuing our virtual tour of the farm.  
**0:25:20-0:25:43:**  So what other tree systems do you have in addition to the silvopastral ones?  So there is the Sibero arable system that we planted last year in autumn and this year.  We have willow trees alongside the road that is next to the field.  
**0:25:43-0:26:00:**  And then in the field we have another ally cropping system with a spacing of 34 meters.  So double the spacing of the orchards.  So we can drive a little bit more easily with our big machinery and we always get contractors  
**0:26:00-0:26:20:**  for harvesting the grass for example or harvesting the grains that are growing there.  And they are getting bigger and bigger.  So I figured this could be more sustainable for long term decisions to have a bit wider  
**0:26:20-0:26:40:**  spacing in between the tree lines.  What we are growing there is raspberry at the closest to the ground and honeyberry.  So these two are the berry varieties in there.  
**0:26:40-0:26:55:**  And then so it's built up.  The whole system is a little bit going towards the principles of centropic agriculture or  centropic agroforestry.  
**0:26:55-0:27:18:**  So over the raspberries we grow kind of biodiversity trees and willow trees for organic matter.  And those are going to be overgrown by walnut trees which is maybe the main part of this  whole system to grow walnuts and harvest them.  
**0:27:18-0:27:47:**  And the upper level or the last level that is overgrown by value trees.  So it's for veneer industry in like 60, 70 years when we harvest those trees.  I hope that every one of those trees, it's about I think 25 or something of those, they  
**0:27:47-0:28:07:**  will at the moment give about 6,000 to 8,000 euros one tree.  And I figured this could be a nice possibility for future generations to have when they can  harvest those trees.  
**0:28:07-0:28:13:**  So on the tree line it's planted pretty dense if I understand properly.  Oh yeah.  You have all these different strata's.  
**0:28:13-0:28:28:**  Yeah.  It was hard the whole planting season and to get all the work done.  So we skipped the raspberries and the honey berries for next year.  
**0:28:28-0:28:43:**  At the moment we just have the walnut trees and the value trees growing there.  But it's going to be dense, that's for sure.  And I'm curious to see like, so of course I understood that in the beginning there was  
**0:28:43-0:28:57:**  this context of the drought and everything was dried up and you had to sell cows.  So I understand the silver arable systems really well.  What led you to bring trees into your arable fields as well?  
**0:28:57-0:29:07:**  Was it just to maximize the amount of trees?  Was it because you saw an advantage as well for the crop being grown?  What was your thought process there?  
**0:29:07-0:29:24:**  My main vision for our farm I'd like to call eco-culture.  And with me being an eco-culturist, which sounds a lot better in German I have to admit.  So it's a combination of horticulture, agriculture and forestry.  
**0:29:24-0:29:47:**  And I see a lot of benefits in combining these three systems of land use for maximizing the  intensity to feed 10 billion humans on earth and fight climate crisis with that.  So these are the main goals I think I'd like to achieve with eco-forestry in the beginning.  
**0:29:47-0:29:57:**  So it was the idea of intensifying production in a sense.  You're like how productive can we get this farm?  How many layers of productivity can we add on top of each other?  
**0:29:57-0:30:09:**  That's the main challenge you're answering.  That's for sure.  I mentioned that all of my predecessors they managed to let the farm grow a little bit  
**0:30:09-0:30:19:**  in size.  I think this is a little bit your top pick in the moment because of the crisis of the  land are crazy.  
**0:30:19-0:30:47:**  And I really don't see the point.  But a key of still growing, which is interesting to give more people the opportunity to benefit  of our farm, is to intensify and produce more from less fuel.  
**0:30:47-0:31:03:**  Tell us a bit about the objectives of each specific system and a bit your methodology  in designing those systems.  I think my main motivation was and is to have a serious action against climate change.  
**0:31:03-0:31:20:**  I'm aware my and the existence of those around me depend on it.  So yeah, this is definitely my main motivation.  I also like to see our natural sources as four different production factors like water  
**0:31:20-0:31:38:**  and soil and biodiversity and the sun and the three first ones we are able to regenerate.  So the sun might not be able to be affected by us, but we can try to use it most effective  as possible.  
**0:31:38-0:32:02:**  So this is what we're trying to do with agroforestry.  At first over here in Sleswig-Höllstein it's very windy because we have our country in  between two oceans and the wind reduction and the shade and an increase of organic matter  
**0:32:02-0:32:20:**  saves and stores water in the soil and the ecosystem around it.  So this is quite essential as we saw in 2018.  And yeah, there water came into my head and stayed ever since.  
**0:32:20-0:32:38:**  And like when you start to understand what soil really is and what you can do to increase  its fertility, its ability to grow plants and its ability to store carbon, you'd find  many similarities between what agroforestry does and what soil needs.  
**0:32:38-0:32:54:**  And with our knowledge now and innovative technology, we can build soil instead of letting  it erode by wind and water.  And I think the biodiversity part speaks for itself.  
**0:32:54-0:33:10:**  Definitely a main motivation to connect different wooden structures in our countryside with  each other to let the smaller wildlife be able to move and find partners.  So this is basically what the fodder hedge does.  
**0:33:10-0:33:25:**  It's spreading over our grazing paddocks to connect different wooden structures that already  exist.  As I already mentioned, I think a lot about nutrient cycles in our farming system.  
**0:33:25-0:33:43:**  And here and there we have leakages with nutrients.  Sometimes they are concentrated so they would erode through the soil.  For example, at the pathways of our grazing paddocks where the animals spent a lot of  
**0:33:43-0:33:57:**  time walking.  And there we planted the forage alongside.  So the idea was that the trees would grow underneath and keep the nutrients from polluting  
**0:33:57-0:34:12:**  our water bodies by getting eroded vertically.  So I think this has economic value as well.  So the nutrients in organic agriculture are quite expensive.  
**0:34:12-0:34:27:**  So I focus on keeping them in our system.  For sure I find a lot of motivation in making our animals who are like the part of the farm  that keeps everything running.  
**0:34:27-0:34:42:**  So I'd like to give them a much more enjoyable place on earth.  I find it unethical to use animals for consumption without trying to give them all they need  to live the best life.  
**0:34:42-0:34:57:**  So creating a more homogeneous shade and sun ratios in a warming climate plus give them  something to scratch themselves in case they feel too inexperienced, make them happier  beings.  
**0:34:57-0:35:12:**  So with stuff like this, I always enjoy to create beautiful pictures in the context of  food production.  So last year we started the mother-bonded rearing of our calves.  
**0:35:12-0:35:34:**  And in the fruit orchard on one of our paddocks, we now start to let the cows in with their  up to 1.5 month old calves and rotate in an Irish grazing system in between the trees.  So imagine now 50 fruit trees starting to flower in the spring with happy calves and  
**0:35:34-0:35:50:**  moms enjoying their time underneath.  So those visions gave me the power and motivation and create the emotional impact on those who  think about what kind of fruit producers they want to support with their consumption.  
**0:35:50-0:36:13:**  And yeah, those are like main ideas and main pictures in my head that we like to transform  our paddocks and arable lands with.  But how did you go from those visions and those pictures to actually implementing a  
**0:36:13-0:36:27:**  plan?  How was the process of actually then deciding what tree to put in and where to put it in?  Before we planned the tree, there is always like a big process of planning.  
**0:36:27-0:36:48:**  I've had lots of talking to different consultants, especially the company Trieperk from Witzen  Hausen.  They are giving me very much help for the arable system and helping me with the trees  
**0:36:48-0:37:07:**  planted already.  So for example, in the arable system, we were planning for, I think, three quarters of a  year before we even planted the tree.  
**0:37:07-0:37:43:**  We thought about where the wind is coming from and how the sun goes over the arable  land and how we would put the tree lines towards the sun and how we'd space the willow trees  next to the street, which is the opposed side of the paddock for the wind.  
**0:37:43-0:38:12:**  We always think about wind first, where to put trees to shelter off that, and then try  to use the sun perfectly as we put the allies of the trees in the north to south direction  to have no place next to the trees, which is always in the shade or always in the sun.  
**0:38:12-0:38:19:**  You understand?  Yeah, very well.  But did that conflict with, for example, the usual way machinery would move around in the  
**0:38:19-0:38:32:**  field because sometimes you have these principles, but then you have a field that just the shape  means that it's much more logical to plant if you had a rectangle, for example, in the  length.  
**0:38:32-0:38:43:**  Were you able to conciliate this kind of north-south light consideration with efficient movement  of machinery?  That's for sure.  
**0:38:43-0:39:11:**  The paddocks we already planted the trees on, we had the beneficial situation that the  most effective way to drive with the machines are those north-south directions.  Not perfectly, but nearly.  
**0:39:11-0:39:24:**  It's going to be a little bit different on other paddocks that we are definitely planning  to grow trees on as well.  I also see beneficials in that.  
**0:39:24-0:39:52:**  When we have these shade situations behind a tree line that's from east to west and a  place on the south where always is sun, we diversify our land again and create different  habitats for animals that then diversify our whole ecosystem.  
**0:39:52-0:40:09:**  I think there is the main key in diversifying.  Then in the choice of which plants to...  You mentioned, for example, chestnut orchards, how did you come about choosing what varieties  
**0:40:09-0:40:33:**  of plants to put in, what was most adapted or what you wanted to experiment with?  Staying at the chestnuts, for example, I figured there's going to be a problem or I think there's  going to be a problem in the future with the grains we are consuming, like very high-bred  
**0:40:33-0:40:50:**  weeds, for example, makes the consumers sometimes have these gluten intolerances.  The chestnut is a valuable calorie.  Carbohydrates.  
**0:40:50-0:41:17:**  Yeah, this could be an alternative to this mainly consumed weed products.  Also the trees are giving very nice and rich wood that's good for outside furniture or  the fence posts.  
**0:41:17-0:41:36:**  The leaves for the animals are easy to digest and give a lot of nutrients.  Then I talked about the shade and the wind reduction.  This is making the chestnut so interesting for me.  
**0:41:36-0:41:53:**  So that it's going to be hardy when the climate is going to be drier.  The varieties of chestnuts, were you able to source?  How did you go about?  
**0:41:53-0:42:03:**  Because I guess it's quite an unusual crop for where you are.  So where did you go and get the genetics or did you find any nurseries that you were able  to work with in Germany?  
**0:42:03-0:42:19:**  I did.  There is one guy in Witzenhausen, he likes to get interesting seeds from the whole world  to produce the small trees.  
**0:42:19-0:42:41:**  And he is doing some very interesting stuff that the root trainers of the trees are very  long like up to 90 centimeters.  And so the root of the chestnuts, the first root that's going down very straight, the  
**0:42:41-0:43:00:**  taproot, I didn't have the word, thank you.  Needs to be, or doesn't need to be cut or the tree cannot be transplanted and then get  into the orchard, something like that.  
**0:43:00-0:43:33:**  So he trains this taproot to be one and that gives the tree the beneficial situations in  more dry climates to get into deeper layers of the soil very fast.  And so that's how he treats his plants and he got influenced by the British agroforestry  
**0:43:33-0:43:55:**  mentor Martin Crawford.  He wrote quite a few very recommendable books I think.  So he has different varieties that fit very well to the northern Europe part.  
**0:43:55-0:44:13:**  I think we are kind of the same height.  So you also so far mentioned some fodder species, the veneer, the walnuts.  Is there any other notable choices that you've made in terms of species?  
**0:44:13-0:44:35:**  One very interesting variety to me is the mulberry and the fodder hedge, which has a  very interesting protein that is more digestible and has more protein in total than alfalfa,  for example.  
**0:44:35-0:44:59:**  So a very interesting plant, especially in the organic farming of dairy cows, where protein  is always quite expensive and getting a tree to bring that source into the farm is, I think,  very interesting to me.  
**0:44:59-0:45:18:**  Also I'd like to farm chickens in the future in these ecosystems and they would benefit  from the fruits as well.  I think this mulberry is giving us a lot of benefits in the future.  
**0:45:18-0:45:39:**  So I have a little bit of a focus on that.  On the other hand, we have six more varieties in the fodder hedge.  It's elder, it's hazel, chestnuts also, but not the grafted chestnuts, but the ones that  
**0:45:39-0:45:53:**  are just growing out of the nut.  They are very high in minerals and I think this is something that I'd like to get rid  of as buying mineral fodder for our animals.  
**0:45:53-0:46:24:**  So one bigger aspect of the whole dairy farming thing over here is getting rid of all the  deliverers that are bringing us food.  I figured in crises or in different situations it's more beneficial to be able to produce  
**0:46:24-0:46:39:**  everything on your own.  So moving on to a bit more like the day-to-day management, my first question might be, obviously  on a farm full of cows, how did you go about protecting the young trees?  
**0:46:39-0:47:10:**  We have to address quite a few animals to take care of the trees.  At first the mice in the ground, we try to get them away with garlic and mainly the more  valuable trees we put wire around the roots for them to develop in the early years.  
**0:47:10-0:47:29:**  During the time it's getting oxygenated, everybody knows what I wanted to say.  So it's going to vanish over the years and the roots are going to be free when they are  big enough to take care of the mice.  
**0:47:29-0:47:50:**  And we put places for hawks and predators from the air to sit and relax while hunting.  And also we put nestings in the trees for them to make the nesting easier.  So this is how we address the mice.  
**0:47:50-0:48:06:**  The walnuts actually don't need to be addressed for that.  The mice don't like the roots for everybody who wants to know about that.  I think that's the thing with the mice.  
**0:48:06-0:48:24:**  Then we have rabbits.  Those are a pain in the ass, I can tell.  We put wire cylinders around every tree of the fodder hatch, about 1,300.  
**0:48:24-0:48:36:**  Quite some work.  And it was 50 centimeters high.  That's not enough for rabbits, for our rabbits.  
**0:48:36-0:48:52:**  They took a few of the trees over that.  But the metal wire around it made the tree still live after that.  So they grow again.  
**0:48:52-0:49:25:**  But yes, that's something that needs to be addressed, that's for sure, over here.  And over that metal wire we put a bigger wire with about a height of two meters.  So at the single trees we address all deers and our cattle with those.  
**0:49:25-0:49:47:**  And the spreed we are having here, the Holstein cows, they are quite big.  I think they are the biggest dairy cows existing.  So it's necessary to protect the trees up to two meters high, which is quite expansive  
**0:49:47-0:49:58:**  and exhausting.  Yeah, I can imagine.  It's going to take a while until the trees are fine.  
**0:49:58-0:50:17:**  And I think the protection is one thing you've got to figure out, that's for sure.  On the silver arable land where we don't have the cows, it's way easier.  We just have these.  
**0:50:17-0:50:40:**  The protection against the deer, which is the protection against the rabbits as well.  So way less expensive and much more easy to set up.  So next to the animals we protect the trees against weeds, especially in the fodder hedge.  
**0:50:40-0:50:55:**  We have to take care of them a lot.  And what we do over there is I think quite interesting.  We started to grow vegetables.  
**0:50:55-0:51:16:**  And I think it gives the farm the beneficial situation of having more product for our customers.  And it makes the weeding process for the trees less expensive or you have a faster capital  income from the trees again.  
**0:51:16-0:51:30:**  You've got to weed them anyway.  So we started to grow garlic and celery in between the trees and the rows of the fodder  hedge.  
**0:51:30-0:51:43:**  And that worked pretty well.  We had some places where we didn't grow any vegetables and we were weeding I think two  to three times more in those places.  
**0:51:43-0:52:02:**  And they're still looking worse.  What I figured is the very best undercrop is the pumpkin.  We've had in the fodder hedge one big event of planting I think 50 plants last year and  
**0:52:02-0:52:19:**  mulching them with a material of manure and silage and lots of wood chips about 10 centimeters  thick.  And that was it for the year.  
**0:52:19-0:52:42:**  And they're still clean in the next autumn after the pumpkins being harvested and sold.  Yeah, I think.  Well yesterday we started the seeding of the next pumpkins and I said last year was 15.  
**0:52:42-0:52:52:**  It's going to be 200 this year.  Because I imagine you need something that's also like you know doesn't require too much  labor because obviously although the idea of growing vegetables in the tree line is  
**0:52:52-0:53:08:**  quite appealing in terms of piling up uses of the land and really intensifying production  like it's labor intensive enough to grow vegetables but then to do it like within a tree line  can be a bit more complicated logistically I assume.  
**0:53:08-0:53:22:**  Yeah, it is.  What I figured is really annoying is to always go through the fence to the trees.  Like I have to figure something out that we put like a gate or something but then like  
**0:53:22-0:53:39:**  we have these different paddocks where the cows are grazing and we have to let them in  to these paddocks so the fodder hedge is divided into different sections.  And I think to get access to all the different parts of the fodder hedge I would have to  
**0:53:39-0:53:54:**  put 13 different gates.  And yeah it's a pain in the ass to get there.  It's not too easy to not stamp on the trees when you weed inside.  
**0:53:54-0:54:15:**  So I think the pumpkin is the very best to get off this problem of weeding and getting  into there getting out of there and stuff like that.  What I also figured is at the moment we are feeding humans over the animals.  
**0:54:15-0:54:34:**  So we always feed our animals to get the humans fed.  And this is something I really dislike.  I think it's very more effective to grow like vegetables and get the food directly to the  
**0:54:34-0:54:57:**  gate to the humans.  And this is what the vegetable input is giving me of a good time over here to finally have  these plants that feed our customers directly.  
**0:54:57-0:55:14:**  But were you never tempted in terms of saving labor to put mats or putting something just  for the weeds and then having your separate vegetable garden?  The reason why I push this forward is because with Dimitri and Mazzy Farm we also have this  
**0:55:14-0:55:27:**  temptation at the beginning of wanting to add this on top of this on top of that.  But then it becomes very hard to make it work on a labor system especially in the current  farming model.  
**0:55:27-0:55:39:**  If you have a system where you have a lot of labor, I mean these systems are amazing.  But it's the compromise right?  Well at the moment it's working.  
**0:55:39-0:56:01:**  So me as managing all this next to the animals and the cropping and the gardening, I have  a team of mainly three other guys.  At the moment it's my dad Bert, a five-month intern Hannes from Eberswalde and Juan, an  
**0:56:01-0:56:15:**  employee from Chile who was part of this farm since April 21.  He was actually doing the most of the work in the agroforestry, mainly the weeding and  taking care of the pumpkins and the garlic and stuff like that.  
**0:56:15-0:56:30:**  So he got a lot of help from other interns that usually stayed up to two weeks or three  months in total.  I think we had 16 or 17 last year.  
**0:56:30-0:56:48:**  So this is basically our crew at the moment when it comes to the maintenance out in the  open taking care of the rest of the farm.  For planting of the pumpkins we had help from my mates from university I shared my flat  
**0:56:48-0:57:05:**  with and stuff like this.  So there's coming lots of people here and I always like to give opportunities with the  farm to get those people some interesting jobs and make them happy.  
**0:57:05-0:57:26:**  No kidding, they are happy working here, not somewhere else.  But somehow I feel like this project, this model works for the pioneers and the people  doing something exciting but somehow if we're going to change the whole of agriculture it's  
**0:57:26-0:57:44:**  going to be hard to scale if for every farm you need 20 friends.  It's going to work in certain contexts because you're probably able to sell some dream about  the agroforestry or also about to get some media attention and interns are applying but  
**0:57:44-0:57:51:**  somehow that's still quite exclusive to the first initial exciting pioneers, don't you  think?  Oh that's for sure.  
**0:57:51-0:58:21:**  I actually don't even think that it works for the whole scaling of my farm.  So at the moment we have like 6-10% of all our lands in agroforestry compared with vegetables  underneath the trees and there is no way that we would make this on all of our lands.  
**0:58:21-0:58:47:**  So not even just the management but the work effort is not doable I think.  What I think is with the growth of the trees, for example the fodder hatch, the trees need  maintenance for I think up to 3 years and then they can grow on their own without getting  
**0:58:47-0:59:01:**  weeded and we might be able to start next part of the fodder hatch and then skip to  machine work in the fodder hatch that is already older.  You know what I mean?  
**0:59:01-0:59:28:**  So we always have these very intense first 2-3 maybe 4 years of the agroforestry system  and then skip to a less labor version of the agroforestry during the time it grows older.  To understand the way you see it scaling on your farm is work by little bits.  
**0:59:28-0:59:39:**  It's like you always have a little bit that you're intensively managing and then that  kind of becomes independent a bit more and then you start a new plantation.  Is that how you visualize it through time?  
**0:59:39-0:59:51:**  A little bit.  I'm curious if it works.  We're not experienced with that so we will figure that out during the next years and  
**0:59:51-1:00:14:**  I always try to see different agroforestryers who were doing that before.  I'm not sure whether it's working out but that's why we didn't transfer the whole farm  into agroforestry at the beginning.  
**1:00:14-1:00:27:**  Learning successionally every time bits by bits.  That's interesting and you're giving yourself some options as well.  I quite liked what you were saying of the fodder hedge.  
**1:00:27-1:00:36:**  It's like yeah I don't know how I'm going to harvest it but at least I'm putting the  trees in and then we'll see in 7 or 8 years probably someone will have come up with something  interesting.  
**1:00:36-1:00:46:**  So yeah that's cool.  I can make plans for 60 years, 70 years in the future I think.  Who knows what's going to be?  
**1:00:46-1:01:08:**  Especially at these times where lots of change is happening in very short time.  The whole situation is so fast changing around us.  One thing I wanted to ask you though which I find really interesting is how did you bring  
**1:01:08-1:01:23:**  these innovative systems into the business?  And I mean of course there's uncertainty, it's highly innovative so it's a fairly high  risk for the farm to invest on something with such a long cash flow.  
**1:01:23-1:01:42:**  How did you fund these systems?  The first one we did on our own with a little bit of help of a foundation called Alfred  Tapferstiftung and the VRDstiftung for renewable energy.  
**1:01:42-1:01:59:**  So the first one gave us money for buying the trees and the other paid the bill of our  consultant that helped us planting the trees.  In 2020 we had a very good year with perfect weather for our animals and the grass to grow  
**1:01:59-1:02:14:**  so the budget for the first plantation was quite nice.  Was this schemes that existed and they usually give money to farmers or did you have to go  and seek these companies out and explain your project?  
**1:02:14-1:02:25:**  What kind of opportunity is it?  It came over the consultant.  He was like hey if you want to plant with me you should ask those guys about a cooperation.  
**1:02:25-1:02:52:**  They want to give you money for that and they want to have like more agroforestry systems  to fund and have in their system to advertise or something.  So those existed and are curious and interested about agroforestry and like to get themselves  
**1:02:52-1:02:59:**  in there.  Interesting.  Yeah it was very easy to get this done I think.  
**1:02:59-1:03:20:**  I didn't even have to write like a I don't know long texts or business plans or stuff.  Yeah no not needed.  It a little bit differently was the funding for the second agroforestry system.  
**1:03:20-1:03:46:**  So we weren't as lucky with the year.  It wasn't the best weather situations.  So the budget was lower but I and the farm knew much more people so far with this whole  
**1:03:46-1:04:03:**  agroforestry thing.  I was now raising 85,000 euros with three different institutions.  So we have the so-called active region that is supposed to distribute money from the EU  
**1:04:03-1:04:21:**  in innovative projects.  They will pay the maintenance cost in the first two years of the Walnut system.  So we can hire a person just for that and our farm which is quite relevant I think.  
**1:04:21-1:04:38:**  As I said the first two years are very intense.  The second was quite funny to read in the newspaper.  So our local parliament they wanted to distribute the money they got from the speeding tickets  
**1:04:38-1:04:48:**  into reforestation projects.  And I was like well it's not quite reforestation but let's let's hear what they think about  agroforestry.  
**1:04:48-1:05:01:**  I might be able to spread some knowledge as well.  So they were amazed by that and what I was calling them.  And yeah we got the funding from them.  
**1:05:01-1:05:23:**  And the third one was I guess I like it most.  There is a company so-called Deutschland Forsted Auf or like Germany Reforest.  They are working on connecting companies that search sustainable projects and those like  
**1:05:23-1:05:43:**  us or foresters who plant trees or do something similar.  In our case this cooperation led to a contract for sustainability.  A company called GVG Glassfather or like glass fiber company from Kiel about 10 kilometers  
**1:05:43-1:06:01:**  away it gives us money for our business of regeneration.  In return we provide percentages for their employees in our shop.  We provide the vegetables that aren't suitable for being sold and would be wasted instead.  
**1:06:01-1:06:15:**  The employees can take them for free if they want.  There is going to be a little bit of merchandise on social media for our goals and I will hold  some speeches about sustainability in our food chain.  
**1:06:15-1:06:32:**  Also we plan two hands-on days where their employees are coming for bigger work events  like planting the pumpkin or pruning or whatever is needed.  So I really focused on a contract where we can avoid greenwashing.  
**1:06:32-1:06:50:**  That's like kind of my biggest concern I was thinking about.  And yeah I find it as a very nice kind of symbiosis between the companies of us that  could be an example for more.  
**1:06:50-1:07:04:**  So we now limited the contract for one year but presumably we'll have another contract  next year.  I think what's interesting in the two later examples of funding you gave is that in both  
**1:07:04-1:07:12:**  cases it was also the opportunity for you to tell the agroforestry story and get the  message out.  And you know potentially beyond the money you received the fact that you were able to  
**1:07:12-1:07:26:**  make that case for agroforestry to your local parliament or I'm not exactly sure how you  called it and to a local company and the employees being involved on the farm.  I think potentially that's just interesting in itself you know.  
**1:07:26-1:07:39:**  Yeah actual financial opportunity.  I think like the main thing that we should focus about now is on education for sustainable  development.  
**1:07:39-1:07:56:**  That's what we are focusing on this farm.  That's for sure like with the kindergarten or the school kids coming here or we make  like field days for all the practitioners around us or yeah like these workers of these  
**1:07:56-1:08:19:**  companies that are interested in a sustainable lifestyle or a sustainable consumption.  And on this farm there is a lot of ongoing for the profits of sustainability and the  education of the...  
**1:08:19-1:08:28:**  Were there any constraints that came with this funding?  I'm thinking especially of the EU related funding.  I know that EU funding can be a bit bureaucratic.  
**1:08:28-1:08:37:**  In this case did they have any specific requirements or you know what were the conditions that  came with it?  Oh yeah they had a few.  
**1:08:37-1:09:02:**  It was a little bit of writing in the first hand but I think compared to others.  I'm not an expert in this but I figured like I spent five to six hours for that whole funding  of 50 000 euros and well I think that was worth it.  
**1:09:02-1:09:15:**  Yeah for sure.  It's interesting that they fund labor as well like I hadn't heard it yet.  I'd heard the EU schemes funding tree plantations and the trees and the protections but to actually  
**1:09:15-1:09:31:**  generate like an income for someone to take care of the agroforestry system I think is  quite interesting.  I don't know what was the problem but they were like ah we can't invest into ecological  
**1:09:31-1:09:53:**  anything so we can't buy the trees and we can't buy but the labor we could do.  So yeah whatever they thought about but that was the way we could cooperate in that situation.  Yeah maybe like taking this interview to an end I'd just like to hear your thoughts about  
**1:09:53-1:10:08:**  your plans for the future and kind of the big questions you're faced with today as you  think about your agroforestry systems.  So as I said I definitely want to scale the agroforestry on this farm.  
**1:10:08-1:10:34:**  I want to have the benefits of the trees on each paddock.  Maybe they are a little bit less labor-y but I think it's necessary to have like this impact  on climate change and get this resilience for climate change on the farm and then combined  
**1:10:34-1:10:51:**  with the hay drying system which is able to dry everything else like walnuts or chestnuts  or the different vegetables we are growing or maybe some mushrooms.  That's a future project for sure.  
**1:10:51-1:11:19:**  And yeah so this is the bigger infrastructure and I think the main path that we are already  going that's gonna stay I guess pretty much the same.  I never want to be how's it called dogmatic about something.  
**1:11:19-1:11:50:**  I always kind of try to get different perspectives of other people but I've had so many people  that told me and us that we are on the same path or on the right track towards the future  that these principles or these philosophies I think we have pretty much figured out and  
**1:11:50-1:12:19:**  I guess that's a little bit of the visionary thing.  These whole nutrient cycles and diversifying of our company branches I'd say they are getting  more complex and they are getting more into each other.  
**1:12:19-1:12:32:**  I find that beneficial so far and I think we can figure out here a little bit more about  that.  Felix thank you so much for taking the time to answer these questions and for sharing  
**1:12:32-1:12:47:**  your journey and all your knowledge.  Thank you Tien.  As I said I'm very honored to be part of your work and let's get agroforestry towards the  
**1:12:47-1:12:55:**  future.  Thank you for listening I hope you enjoyed the episode.  I'll include in the description all the relevant links.  
**1:12:55-1:12:59:**  Please feel free to get in touch with any questions or suggestions.  