---
title: #41 The transition to Regen Ag and Belgian alley cropping trials with Soil Capital Farming
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.

---

### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2022-06-16)  

**0:00:00-0:00:16:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:23-0:00:27:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry.  In order to find out how it can help us with these challenges, we'll be interviewing farmers,  
**0:00:35-0:00:40:**  scientists, and other experts to share with you their experiences, practical advice, and  scientific research.  Hello and welcome to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:00:48-0:00:52:**  I'm your host Dimitri and today we had the immense pleasure of interviewing Guillaume  and Thomas from Sol Capital Farming.  Sol Capital Farming offers farm management services and independent advice in the field  
**0:00:59-0:01:01:**  of regenerative agriculture.  They mostly operate in Europe but they have many projects running internationally.  They're experts in farm transitions from conventional to regenerative agriculture and with their  
**0:01:10-0:01:15:**  vast experience, their team has developed a unique transition approach with a deep consideration  and understanding of local contexts and farm economics.  The first part of this interview will focus on this approach and regenerative agriculture  
**0:01:23-0:01:24:**  in general.  In the second part, we'll talk about some fascinating work they're doing in alley cropping  systems.  
**0:01:29-0:01:34:**  Agroforestry is clearly becoming an increasingly important part of their work and we're excited  to share their story here.  This is quite a long information dense interview so make sure that you use the table of contents  
**0:01:40-0:01:44:**  we have prepared for you below to navigate to your favorite parts.  I hope you enjoy.  Guillaume, Thomas, welcome to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:01:48-0:01:54:**  It's really nice to have you here and yeah, I'm looking forward to this conversation.  Thank you Dimitri.  Thanks for having us.  
**0:01:56-0:01:57:**  Yeah, thanks Dimitri.  It's nice to see you today and to take part of this nice project.  Thank you very much for you guys accepting to come on and I know you're super busy traveling  
**0:02:07-0:02:14:**  around the world consulting and doing your work and actually that would be a good way  to start is to explain to our guests what is soil capital farming?  What do you guys do in your day to day?  
**0:02:22-0:02:25:**  What's your job and how do you interact with farmers?  Yeah, thanks.  Maybe to give a bit of background we can introduce a bit ourselves where you come from and how  
**0:02:35-0:02:41:**  we came to create this project and this company somehow.  So maybe I can start.  I'm Thomas LeCun, I'm an agronomist by training.  
**0:02:48-0:02:56:**  I actually grew up in a cattle ranch in Africa when I was a kid and I spent the first nine  or ten years in large scale livestock operations since my father was an agronomist and it quite  quickly immersed me into large scale farming activities and gave me the taste of continuing  
**0:03:12-0:03:15:**  to be in contact with such operations.  And when I finished my agronomy study in Belgium I quickly decided that I wanted to continue  having this type of experience and I've been working in Africa basically somehow following  
**0:03:32-0:03:38:**  a little bit the same tracks of my father because I've been working the same large scale  farming operation for five years which gave me the opportunity to be exposed to operations  like mob grazing and handling large herds of livestock for grass fed beef production.  
**0:03:56-0:04:02:**  And then I moved to another project for another five years when I was in charge of a large  scale crop farming operation which by the way is the project where we met with Guillaume.  We've been already traveling together by then and I will let Guillaume explain also maybe  
**0:04:15-0:04:25:**  this part of the project but this is how finally being a general manager of farming operations  in that crop farming business I was in charge of also the finance and the commercial aspects  and because we were managing farming operations together with financial reporting I quickly  
**0:04:38-0:04:43:**  understood how changing farming practices and looking at soil health has a direct impact  on the profitability of the business and I really wanted to continue making something  out of it and when we came back my wife and kids from Africa to Belgium in 2015 I joined  
**0:05:00-0:05:08:**  Soil Capital who was just freshly founded by a friend of mine and two other partners  Nicola, Chuck and Alex who are the original founders and this is now seven years ago and  I've been since then working in the business as an agronomist and then coordinating different  
**0:05:23-0:05:31:**  operations into farm management and advisory. That's a bit of my background Guillaume I  don't know if you were.  Thanks Thomas. Yeah on my side I'm also a Belgian agronomist based here. Originally  
**0:05:43-0:05:54:**  I grew up on a farm. My father was a farmer in the center of Belgium until my 14th probably  and then that actually and obviously led me to get fascinated about farming since I was  little so I always grew up on different farms on my father's side and father's sides and  
**0:06:08-0:06:16:**  then after my studies I also quickly went into some advisory here in Belgium working  for a small cooperative in the southern part of Belgium advising farmers on their operations  but more technically let's say regarding chemical application and fertilization and all those  
**0:06:28-0:06:34:**  kind of things and then after a couple of years I got a bit tired of the commercial  aspect of that profession so I wanted to divert a little bit my career into something that  is more independent in terms of selling stuff and then I decided to also take my backpack  
**0:06:54-0:07:04:**  and leave for Africa and I started working in 2007 in Cameroon and then moved to DRC  where I stayed for 10 years and I've been starting to work in DRC in perennial crops  plantations in central DRC in the middle of nowhere with my girlfriend at that time who  
**0:07:17-0:07:23:**  became my wife later and then as Thomas said we met on a project a couple of years later  when we collaborated on the management of a large scale farming operation and where  we really had the opportunity to test and implement a very interesting farming principle  
**0:07:38-0:07:46:**  on that farm and led us and let's say formed our DNA in terms of or transformed our DNA  in terms of agronomy I would say and that's also together with that experience what convinced  me throughout the years all these years that I'm talking about to really shift my mind  
**0:07:59-0:08:06:**  in terms of agronomy is the fact that I was trying to travel back to Belgium every year  to say hello to the family and when we were traveling it was during Christmas time or  New Year because it was end of the no no not New Year sorry but really end of the winter  
**0:08:19-0:08:24:**  time so more March something like that after the planting period and everything in Congo  and each time we were traveling back to Belgium I was seeing the farmland in Belgium that  was tilled and from the past autumn and left there without enough cover crops and without  
**0:08:37-0:08:45:**  enough you know soil coverage and throughout this year I could see really that the soil  was depleting and it's something that really struck me after 10 years when I came back  to Belgium and did a full year of farming advising or farming works in the family farms  
**0:08:58-0:09:04:**  that I understood that there was a really drop in organic matter around my area and  that led me really to get my agronomical DNA stronger in terms of how can we try to revert  the system and that also made me willing to join that company, soil capital at that time  
**0:09:28-0:09:33:**  where I met back when I came back from Congo where I met back Thomas and Nicolas and we  decided to work together and keep on advising and working with different clients around  Africa and Europe trying to really foster this kind of agronomy around and that's really  
**0:09:49-0:10:00:**  the emergence of the idea of another agronomy in my mind anyway and why that led me to be  what I am today anyway.  And I'm curious as to when you joined soil capital farming, when did that shift happen  
**0:10:11-0:10:16:**  when you started seeing things differently and thinking wow I need to change something  here?  Well it's actually, I started a little bit throughout all these years when I came back  
**0:10:22-0:10:33:**  from when I was in Congo and I was only coming back every year to say hi to the family and  really that shift to me was around I would say between 2008 and 2010, something like  that around those times where really that struck me a lot because we have this kind  
**0:10:47-0:10:52:**  of climate where it rains a lot during the winter and less and less during the spring  like we have this year.  We are in the middle of a drought in Belgium and you see these outstanding rainfalls in  
**0:11:00-0:11:06:**  the winter that are actually slacking the soil down and making that thick crust that  isn't allowing the water to penetrate anymore through the soil surface and that's striking  for an agronomist you know when you grew up in that region and you've seen the change  
**0:11:18-0:11:27:**  across those decades just by observation I would say that's really something and it's  being translated today through the figures when you talk to soil labs in this area they  confirm that there is a huge change across these decades, there has been a huge change  
**0:11:38-0:11:46:**  across these decades in soil organic matter and we know the reasons and we know also that  there are solutions but we need to design the pathways for these solutions so that's  my motivations today to work together with the team and to do what we do.  
**0:11:58-0:12:04:**  And that's what I imagine that's the problem that soil capital at the beginning and now  soil capital farming has set out to solve.  Yeah exactly so you just nailed one of the interesting topics.  
**0:12:12-0:12:17:**  Soil capital was and is still the original company which today really focusing on the  carbon programme for farmers in Europe and probably soon more globally and soil capital  farming is like a sister entity that we created now about a year and a half ago with the idea  
**0:12:33-0:12:42:**  to keep on proposing to farmers, landowners and other corporate farming entities solutions  in terms of services for farm management and advisory or technical support to help and  accompany farmers into a transition towards more regenerative practices.  
**0:12:59-0:13:07:**  So we clearly on a daily basis apply what we call today regenerative agriculture principles  that can also be compared to agroecology but I mean we have our definitions that we try  to stick to it and the idea is really to focus on soil health as the main driver to profitability  
**0:13:22-0:13:30:**  but also the main driver towards better impacts in terms of climate change mitigation, soil  erosion mitigation as well and all the rated positive impacts.  So that's the I would say the quick definition and what soil capital farming is doing more  
**0:13:42-0:13:53:**  concretely today so we are a team of five persons today in the business.  We are very much farmers oriented actually like Guillaume and Nicolas they both have  their own farming operations so they you know kind of have a skin in the game as well when  
**0:14:05-0:14:09:**  we advise farmers we somehow know where we come from.  And with a small team we deliver different services.  In Belgium what we do is really managing farmland on a daily basis and Guillaume is really in  
**0:14:20-0:14:28:**  charge of that he will probably explain better than I but then we also more remotely more  away from our home we provide consulting or advisory services.  We've been doing that quite a lot in Africa thanks to our network and then we shift a  
**0:14:38-0:14:46:**  bit we shifted a bit to Eastern Europe and then more recently to Latin America since  about four years now where we are quite involved especially in Argentina and probably now in  the neighboring countries like Uruguay or Chile where we engage with farmers and landowners  
**0:14:59-0:15:08:**  who are again willing to change their practices who believe in the role that farmlands play  in our today's societies challenge.  And it has been quite an amazing experience so far to see how far we can impact and accompany  
**0:15:24-0:15:29:**  these farming systems both in Europe and outside Europe to change.  Yeah and what's amazing also is to see the difference in speed you know and context because  obviously when Thomas is traveling over there or Nicolas and we meet back in Europe or in  
**0:15:41-0:15:47:**  Belgium to discuss our trip it's always very funny to and exciting to hear the stories  on how do we how do they do over there to meet these objectives and what are the nice  ideas that you guys have brought back to the table this time so that we can test new things  
**0:15:58-0:16:02:**  in Belgium and also the opposite I hope.  Yeah.  So that we can balance out a little bit our experience and get these movements somehow  
**0:16:11-0:16:17:**  going faster in the different programs that we have under our own responsibilities here  in Belgium and also abroad.  And to conclude on our operational experience I would say that the main difference between  
**0:16:29-0:16:40:**  what we were willing to have in our own company DNA is really the farmers aspects.  We want to stay farmers.  We have as Thomas said, two of us, myself and Nicolas and myself, we have a small farming  
**0:16:48-0:16:55:**  operation for our own but we also wanted to keep in the DNA of the company a real farming  experience on a daily basis and the only place where we could do that is in Belgium because  we are here.  
**0:17:02-0:17:10:**  We can take the care and be anywhere in less than an hour because Belgium is small obviously  and therefore we started designing and building up a network of relationship which slowly  led us to a list of customers who started being interested in our approach and gave  
**0:17:26-0:17:28:**  us the responsibility of their farm land.  So what we do here is that we are communicating and interacting with them on a very open,  transparent and regular basis so that they understood what are the plans and they can  
**0:17:41-0:17:43:**  rectify the objective if they want to.  And aside from that, based on the objective that we designed with these people is that  we also engage with contractors, mechanical contractors that are selected within the region  
**0:18:00-0:18:05:**  to realize the operation that we want to do and we have, I would say across the whole  farm land that we are managing here in Belgium, we have 40% that is inorganic and the rest  is unconventional but the whole area is managed under those regen practices I would say.  
**0:18:19-0:18:24:**  That's fascinating and you've got a unique experience of being able to accompany all  these farms and so many hectares through a regenerative transition and I mean I've got  way too many questions to ask you in order for it to be reasonable for an interview but  
**0:18:35-0:18:40:**  one of them that I'm going to have to select and I've been dying to ask somebody who can  give me a proper answer is, you know, often we say when you transition to regenerative  that's going to imply a reduction in yields and an increase in costs.  
**0:18:50-0:18:54:**  It's not necessarily, it's not something we hear everywhere but I think it's a belief  that many farmers carry with them and I'd like to ask you that question.  How does that play out in practice through the farm transitions in Belgium or abroad?  
**0:19:05-0:19:07:**  Well it's a good question, it's true.  It's something that we also hear very often.  Something that we are always keeping in our mind because it's very important to be able  
**0:19:17-0:19:26:**  to address this question with maximum of security and also with a maximum of credibility so  that the movement carries on, you know.  But what I'd like to say is that when we are willing to embark into a transition, the first  
**0:19:35-0:19:42:**  step is to design a pathway of that transition and that's what we try to do with the farmers  or with the landowners is to engineer the pathway that is split on the timeline which  may be from one to five years, one to ten years, one to fifteen years depending on the  
**0:19:55-0:19:59:**  context and the objectives.  First of all I would say that the baseline should be well understood for us to be able  to generate a sound scoring of the farming activity as it is at the start or the farmland  
**0:20:16-0:20:23:**  I would say and allowing us also to understand where are the weak and the better spots in  the farms that could be for example through yields, historical analysis, soil analysis  and everything.  
**0:20:32-0:20:38:**  And this enables us then to set up a reasonable milestone throughout that timeline so that  at least you don't rush into something that you have read on the paper or listened to  the radio but you actually design what you have read or seen into something that is more  
**0:20:48-0:20:56:**  adapted to your own context but also into a timeframe that is making sense regarding  to your own context in terms of farming perspective but also in terms of markets, in terms of  farmland fertility I would say, in terms of organic matter restoration and all these kind  
**0:21:07-0:21:09:**  of things.  And that's to us it's really a crucial point because if you don't do that and you start  rushing into no till or minimum tillage, let's say while your fields aren't ready for that,  
**0:21:22-0:21:27:**  it's true that you start experiencing these drops in yields and these high cost of production  and these kind of things but if you allow yourself to milestones your objectives and  give you enough time I would say that this enables the farmers to approach the project  
**0:21:39-0:21:47:**  carefully and maximise this chance of success and also reduce the risk of yield decrease  and cost of production increase.  In terms of profitability and the fear that farmers have by potentially losing profitability,  
**0:22:00-0:22:07:**  when you say lower yields, higher cost, it's not always the case from what we see, is that  what we try to do is keep the same levels of yield in general and we do that by also  increasing the diversity of the cropping systems.  
**0:22:18-0:22:24:**  Most of the farmers in conventional would go with two, three crops, four crops a year,  we try to increase the level of diversity when you have more diverse cropping system,  cropping rotation you have more resilience and basically it helps to keep on average  
**0:22:37-0:22:47:**  basis the yields stable and in terms of cost because we're going to try to reduce gradually  pesticide use but also synthetic fertiliser, I mean all these costs especially today in  the context of wars and the international challenge that everyone knows automatically  
**0:22:58-0:23:04:**  will not going to increase the cost, most of the time they reduce the cost.  So on the longer term, same yields, lower cost means better profitability.  It's sometimes easy to say like that but that's what we see in general.  
**0:23:16-0:23:22:**  And so the techniques that you usually, like the top three techniques or the first techniques  that you use when you go into a farm and you want to create a transition, you started mentioning  one of them that's diversity, so you're diversifying the crop, which is really interesting from  
**0:23:31-0:23:35:**  our perspective in terms of, as we're going to talk about later, agroforestry, which one  of the opportunities but challenges of agroforestry is diversifying the farm and that's an interesting  one.  
**0:23:41-0:23:42:**  Sure.  But then you've also got, I imagine that you're also working with cover crops as like one  of the top techniques, you just get in there as soon as possible, you know, tell me a bit  
**0:23:50-0:23:53:**  about those like initial steps for a farmer.  Yeah, I think the first thing to say is it depends a bit on the region or even the continent  where we work because the contexts are a bit different, even though we always end up using  
**0:24:05-0:24:10:**  the whole set of principles, the whole toolbox, I would say.  If I talk about Latin America, just to compare a bit with Europe and Belgium, in countries  like Argentina, most of the farmers are already using no-till techniques.  
**0:24:22-0:24:26:**  So the tillage is not so much of a problem.  And it's one of the main principles of regenerative agriculture is to reduce as much as possible  tillage.  
**0:24:33-0:24:38:**  So we don't need to start with tillage because it's already done and quite well managed,  I have to say.  In Europe, most of the farmers are using ploughing and deep tillage.  
**0:24:45-0:24:53:**  On the other hand, what we see missing in farming systems like Argentina or similar  countries is that the level of diversity in the conventional cropping system is very low.  And they would crop only spring crops, maize and soybean, most of the time based on GMO  
**0:25:05-0:25:11:**  techniques and technology, which means very low diversity and also most of the time very  low ground cover.  So they would not use cover crops all along the year.  
**0:25:17-0:25:24:**  We can see now there's a very interesting movement of people and farmers reintegrating  permanent covers and cover crops.  And we are trying to accompany that and convince farmers to use cover crops between the cash  
**0:25:32-0:25:39:**  crops and if possible, to have multi-species cover crops, which is a great opportunity  to increase the vegetal diversity in the farming system.  For Europe, it's a bit what we're going to do today is really complete the explanation  
**0:25:58-0:26:03:**  from one end of the world with what we see in Europe, let's say.  And our experience, I would say in Belgium is a bit different because of the reason Thomas  mentioned.  
**0:26:10-0:26:16:**  And here often what we've been experiencing with the farmers as a first step is actually  a phytochemical reduction, or I would say even optimisation.  Not only speaking about the numbers of litres per hectare that you're applying, but just  
**0:26:26-0:26:35:**  trying to focus on the environment of that chemical, which is the water, where it is  mixed with.  So working on the water quality is really something that is necessary to guarantee a  
**0:26:42-0:26:50:**  very good spraying operation so that you can actually put the chemical in an environment  that maximises its chance of success, just by working on buffering the water, trying  to adjust its pH, trying to adjust its calcium content, its temperature sometimes.  
**0:27:02-0:27:12:**  And it's pH, as I already said, so it's really something that allows the active ingredient  to be more performant.  And once you've started to solve these kinds of things, you can start being a bit more  
**0:27:21-0:27:25:**  accurate on the quantity that you're applying per hectare.  And then we've seen across some of the farms in Western Europe that we are engaged with,  is that a reduction of 20 to 30% of the chemical is quickly achievable just by adjusting those  
**0:27:45-0:27:49:**  first factors.  And then once you start discussing with the farmer, you just decide to reinvest that buffer  of money into cover crops into something that is more diverse because usually cover crops  
**0:28:03-0:28:14:**  are something that is quite routinely adopted here across Europe, but a better diverse cover  crop mix is something that is sometimes missing for economical reasons.  So let's say, okay, if you take some savings on your chemical side, just reinvest them  
**0:28:24-0:28:32:**  into cover crops and you start having denser cover crops with not necessarily plenty of  species, but more than three, four, you start having five, six different species and try  to resonate also the cost so it doesn't start costing a huge amount of money, I would say  
**0:28:44-0:28:50:**  around 40 to 60 euro per hectare in terms of seed mix.  And then once you start having these cover crops that are well developed, certainly well  established as well, you start to have better biomass, then you start having a better root  
**0:29:00-0:29:02:**  density into your soil profile.  And that's where you start having the discussion of how to approach tillage simplification  in my system because I see that my soil structure is better, I have better rooting system in  
**0:29:16-0:29:23:**  the top 20 centimeter, which would allow us to go for no till or minimum tillage and stop  actually ploughing because I can use the plants as a guarantee for my soil structure maximization.  It's a gradual transition, reducing costs, reinvesting that in seeds, gradually reducing  
**0:29:38-0:29:44:**  tillage, diversification of annual crops and of grain crops produced or cereals produced,  it doesn't necessarily require a radical shift in strategy by the farmer.  It's not like the farmer suddenly needs to do, you know, like selling through different  
**0:29:53-0:29:57:**  channels and, you know, invest in new machinery.  We're talking about something quite, you know, something where the status quo is a bit maintained.  Yeah, exactly, but that's why I was trying to explain with the transition that we try  
**0:30:09-0:30:18:**  to design and it's also nice for us, but for them as well, because they don't fear that  there is a huge workload to overcome a new workload on top of the ones that they already  have to overcome suddenly so that they can really aim for these kind of objectives.  
**0:30:31-0:30:40:**  It's really about gradual transition, incremental step by step transition, because it really  reflects with the nature of farming and agriculture, which is a long term process.  There's never something you can change in one or two years.  
**0:30:50-0:30:57:**  And especially in challenging farming environments, we see that the best, in general, the best  farmers are the ones who are proactive instead of being reactive.  The farmers who are proactive really are able at some point to set a vision at more than  
**0:31:07-0:31:10:**  maybe 10 years or even 30 years.  How do I want my farm to look at in 2050, for example?  These are really the questions that make the difference.  
**0:31:17-0:31:23:**  It doesn't mean that next year you will completely change it into the visions you see in 30 years.  But once you set the vision, then you can gradually, with taking into consideration  the various challenges and contexts of climate, of maybe political situations or economical  
**0:31:35-0:31:40:**  crisis, then you can follow a path.  That makes a difference in a quite safe way for the farmers.  Another aspect as well, I think, is that we constantly try to look at farms transition  
**0:31:52-0:31:58:**  in a very holistic approach, meaning that we mainly look at agronomical practices, of  course.  The majority of our systems are cropping systems, but we also work in livestock operations.  
**0:32:06-0:32:08:**  Now we do a bit of agroforestry.  We will probably discuss a bit about that.  We also look at other aspects of the farming operations, like human resources, organizations,  
**0:32:18-0:32:19:**  the financial aspects of a farm.  How can we sometimes better structure costs and revenue?  And this holistic approach, I think, is maybe one of our differences.  
**0:32:31-0:32:35:**  The way we like to work is to consider all the aspects, because they are crucial at some  point.  A farming system is a wall, something complex, and you cannot change one detail or you cannot  
**0:32:44-0:32:51:**  push in one level without affecting the other, so you need to understand that globally.  In Belgium, one more thing that needs to be added to that is the organization pressure,  the social pressure that is existing around the farms.  
**0:33:02-0:33:05:**  We have a huge population.  We are a dense populated country.  We have less and less farmers, but these farmers are all surrounded by houses, gardens, kids,  
**0:33:14-0:33:17:**  food, whatever.  And there is a strong split or a strong gap between what the farmers are living today,  the reality of their life, and what the people are understanding from the farmers and vice  
**0:33:28-0:33:29:**  versa.  And we need to rehabilitate that gap as well.  So considering that into a transition allows the landowners or the farmers to actually  
**0:33:38-0:33:48:**  build up slowly a story around their farms, a story that is making sense for the consumers.  So that means that at the end, you start reactivating a little bit this communication with the direct  neighbors and they start getting back, getting an interest back into what the farmers are  
**0:34:02-0:34:09:**  doing and stop saying, okay, the guy is polluting again or spraying stuff that I don't want  to see around my house.  So it's also something that is interesting.  
**0:34:14-0:34:20:**  Yeah, I can just imagine that being one of the big strengths of regenerative agriculture  and even more so about agroforestry because now it's become such a hype subject.  You hear it nearly, not in the news, but I mean, it's something that people are hearing  
**0:34:29-0:34:35:**  more and more about and everybody loves, you know, trees on landscape, it's for trees everywhere.  And it's, of course, this is not the case in all contexts.  I've already been in places where people said, I don't like trees so much because I like  
**0:34:41-0:34:42:**  to see far away.  And that was the cultural, that was the cultural.  And I think there's quite a few places like this.  
**0:34:47-0:34:54:**  I know two places actually in France, as a local subculture, but let's save agroforestry  chat for just a bit.  For me, one of the things that it's making me think about is, you know, you're presenting  
**0:35:06-0:35:12:**  a transition here, which is slow, gradual, which is, which seems to have less risk for  the farmer as compared to a radical change in practices, something that you can also,  we now have the knowledge to create this transition safely, thanks to companies like yours, et  
**0:35:26-0:35:27:**  cetera.  So what are the biggest challenges for the farmers to actually transition?  I mean, why are we not seeing more farmers transitioning, for example?  
**0:35:35-0:35:40:**  I mean, there is, of course, an increase, we're aware of this, but we're always trying  to think from the farmer's perspective here in the sense, what are farmers fearing?  What do they perceive as being an issue?  
**0:35:49-0:35:53:**  What kind of psychological barriers are you guys solving for them, for example?  Yeah, it's a good question, because that's often why we try to understand why it's not  taking a, you know, a faster rhythm into conversion.  
**0:36:03-0:36:09:**  But the first point that comes to my mind when I hear these questions is, and that's  an observation from what we can see in Western Europe anyway, elsewhere we need to see, but  in Western Europe, I would say in the farming systems is the family pressure and the neighbour  
**0:36:24-0:36:34:**  pressure, I would say, because the risk of seeing your neighbours starting to, you know,  discussing your new adoptions and trying to make you lose your confidence into what you  are trying to do.  
**0:36:45-0:36:50:**  And also the elders pressure, the grandfather and the father, they've always been doing  these kind of things that way.  But who are not taking their time to try to understand what the new generation wants to  
**0:36:57-0:37:01:**  put in place into the farming family business.  But at the same time, also, they are not leaving enough room to that younger generation who  is trying to, you know, open up a little bit the farming perspective on the family system  
**0:37:11-0:37:18:**  to shift a little bit or to redesign the farm into a new way of farming.  So I would say that's the problem number one.  But that can be solved through, you know, communication, education, knowledge and everything.  
**0:37:29-0:37:35:**  So knowledge would be probably the second point that is a limiting factor of the adoption  of this kind of system.  And that's what we try to also overcome based on the experience that we have in Belgium,  
**0:37:44-0:37:53:**  when we are traveling, is to try to initiate or stimulate the farmers to gather, to work  together because, you know, farmers are very independent in their job, in their responsibilities,  in their objectives.  
**0:38:02-0:38:08:**  Most of them are working alone and that's developing a mindset which is sometimes not  allowing them to easily gather, share experience, tell them, okay, I'm doing this, this, this  for that reason and also build up a system that is probably stronger together.  
**0:38:19-0:38:24:**  But that's one of the things that we have tried to do at Soil Capital.  So at Soil Capital we have participated at the set up of a farmers association, which  is today gathering 80 farmers in the southern area of Belgium.  
**0:38:43-0:38:50:**  We just wanted to meet that objective of trying to have these farmers meeting together, exchanging,  building up knowledge and communication so that it helps them exchange and also get them  more comfortable in their change or in their choices anyway.  
**0:39:04-0:39:12:**  And then the third one I would say is market for me, market access, which is also something  that's sometimes difficult.  Yeah, probably depending also on the region again and the geographies, but market access  
**0:39:21-0:39:25:**  can be a barrier to more regional adoptions.  And I think that's also why in every, almost of the project where we work, we try to raise  the awareness of the farmers to try to access or develop when they can new markets with  
**0:39:40-0:39:46:**  the more added value products that will help the farmers to keep more of the added value  of the margins that he is creating in the farm by his operation.  So we can see that somehow the wind is changing directions in Europe, in different continents,  
**0:40:02-0:40:09:**  the consumer wants something different, zero pesticides or also more looking at climate  change impact or zero carbon products.  And there are some interesting opportunities as well for farmers when they can pull together  
**0:40:19-0:40:26:**  and maybe sometimes co-invest into developing new value chains or new supply chains for  local markets, but also that are integrating new practices that will really differentiate  a product in the end in the hands of a consumer.  
**0:40:37-0:40:42:**  But that will also reward the farmers for the practices he's doing.  That's one of the opportunities.  It can be a barrier at some point, but that's the challenge now is to transform the problem  
**0:40:49-0:40:50:**  into a solution.  A sentence that we love is saying that stop thinking per tonne, but start thinking per  kg, per kilo, which when you start understanding or explaining what we mean behind that is  
**0:41:05-0:41:13:**  really when the farmers are regrouping themselves into small cooperative or small initiatives  anyway to gather higher volume of differentiated products, they can start, as Thomas was saying,  to keep the added value by themselves, start investing in a mill, start investing in a  
**0:41:24-0:41:32:**  press or whatever pieces of equipment that allows them to actually stop selling their  product per tonne to the local cooperative, but start selling per kilo direct to the consumer.  And that's where you keep the added value for yourself actually, and start building  
**0:41:44-0:41:49:**  up a little bit more and better the financial aspect of your operation.  I think this subject is one of the most important and fascinating subjects to talk about.  It seems to me that the food industry is not necessarily cooperating at the moment with  
**0:42:03-0:42:06:**  the scaling of the regenerative practices.  We're hearing stories here and there of certain multinationals that are starting to really,  at least you see it on the websites, starting to back RegenAg, Cargill, for example, et  
**0:42:17-0:42:18:**  cetera.  But it seems like it's a challenge for the farmers that are practicing these regenerative  agricultural practices to get a higher price for it.  
**0:42:25-0:42:29:**  I don't exactly understand the mechanisms behind it in the food industry, and it may  not be the right time to talk about this, but not all farmers will be necessarily interested  to or want to be starting to invest themselves in marketing.  
**0:42:42-0:42:48:**  And I don't know what feedback you provide from your experiences, personal and of your  clients.  No, no, it's a super interesting topic.  
**0:42:53-0:42:59:**  It's coming daily, a topic of discussion, basically, in farms and in different value  chains.  I think it's not super clear yet, but what we can see is that all these food and ag industries  
**0:43:09-0:43:14:**  are really now understanding they have a role to play.  They can bring interesting solutions also to farmers, and they are definitely part of  the games in terms of changing the practices.  
**0:43:23-0:43:30:**  I think there are interesting initiatives more and more that are coming on the sector,  where some companies now try to work with premiums for farmers when they agree to change  practices or to support, then transition into some specific guidelines of crop or livestock  
**0:43:43-0:43:45:**  production.  And these premiums or these systems are really, I think they are the initiation of something  that will really help more and more the farmers to get more value from what they're doing.  
**0:44:00-0:44:05:**  It's a super interesting topic to observe.  They have, as you said, a huge role to play because they have the whole marketing chain,  let's say distribution chain already set up.  
**0:44:17-0:44:23:**  They have the capacity to be able to create that, to create a transition there and to  be able to put pressure on the supermarkets, provide new concepts, new marketing, also  ideas to the customer.  
**0:44:33-0:44:39:**  It seems that we need them to be able to create solutions for the farmers.  Some farmers, as I said, will be happy to be able and have the capacity to do direct  selling whilst others will just not.  
**0:44:46-0:44:55:**  That's why most of the farmers, the best way to do that is really to gather farmers around  one initiative, one cooperative, for example, so that they can be together, share the story  together and try to build up one message for that cooperative that actually discuss with  
**0:45:11-0:45:20:**  the different parties of the supply chains that are interacting with these kinds of products.  Because small farmers that are alone in their regions, they don't always take the time to  address these major factors, why everybody is completely aware that it's something that  
**0:45:35-0:45:36:**  is necessary.  But when we are, it's the group effect anyway.  So that group effect will actually help you getting faster and better into these kinds  
**0:45:44-0:45:51:**  of communications and added value to your product.  And probably one of the last points that is probably keeping the farmers from transitioning  is the capital.  
**0:45:59-0:46:05:**  That's something that we hear as well sometimes, the capital requirements in terms of investment  into equipment and machinery and everything.  I say that, but I'm not convinced that it is a limiting factor.  
**0:46:16-0:46:21:**  We are just observing that it's often the subject that comes back into the table and  say, yeah, but I don't have the money to buy a direct seeder or to buy a specific hauler  or other type of equipment because my yard is equipped in such a way and I'm not going  
**0:46:33-0:46:34:**  to change anything.  So once again, these kinds of things are taken into account when we are designing the transition  pathway.  
**0:46:40-0:46:48:**  I say, okay, we're not going to ask you in two, five or 10 years to shift, two or five  years to shift all your equipment into something that is more specific, but we are going to  take our time to walk into your yard with you and try to see whether there isn't any  
**0:46:59-0:47:05:**  adjustment that is able to be done in the equipment that you have.  Or sometimes, and back to my point where I was explaining that we've participated to  the creation of a small non-profit association here in Belgium that is gathering farmers  
**0:47:18-0:47:21:**  around the region.  What that non-profit did is actually the non-profit bought the equipment and rented to the farmer  members that are part of the group at cost so that the farmers could start experiencing  
**0:47:33-0:47:40:**  with that planter, that hauler, that specific equipment, how to use it in my context, how  to use it in my cover crops, in my soil type and everything.  And they were able to take their time adjusting and testing different parameters and our adjustment  
**0:47:51-0:48:00:**  on the planters without spending too much money because it was just rented at a very  low cost per hectare.  What that non-profit is seeing now is that some of the farmers have actually stopped  
**0:48:07-0:48:14:**  renting it, but they both were convinced that that's the good machine, I know exactly how  to use it, I've been renting it for five to six years now, so okay, I've got the capital  requirements now after that period of time that allowed me to test it, test the technique,  
**0:48:28-0:48:32:**  let's just go for a new one.  Very interesting.  I'm going to throw one last question about the regenerative agriculture transition before  
**0:48:37-0:48:39:**  we shift to agroforestry.  We hear stories from farmers in the US for example, those are the stories that I've heard,  farmers that have been doing this for 20 years, practicing no-till, no-till organic at times,  
**0:48:49-0:48:56:**  and that have managed to reach a point where they have immensely reduced their fertilizer  inputs and their cost of production whilst maintaining yield, but especially whilst having  much healthier plants, plants that are much more resilient and resilient in the face of  
**0:49:09-0:49:12:**  illnesses, pests and diseases, but also climate change.  Is that something that you're expecting to happen or is that something that is more of,  is that just a story or is that something that you're expecting to see in the future?  
**0:49:22-0:49:27:**  I'm talking about this plan that Thomas, you suggested of farmers thinking about 30, 40,  50 years down the line.  Where do you expect this to go?  
**0:49:31-0:49:38:**  Well, I'm not sure he directly answered the question, but let's try to get to that.  But I think that there's a nice definition of what a farmer is, and that definition comes  from Duane Beck, which is a renowned researcher and farmer in the US.  
**0:49:53-0:49:59:**  And he said that the best definition of a farmer is someone who takes sunlight, water  and carbon dioxide and turn them into products that can be sold.  And the more efficient you are in using all these sources of input, I would say, being  
**0:50:11-0:50:16:**  sunlight, water or carbon, the more efficient would be your system.  And when you look at, again, the next 50 years ahead of us in terms of farming operation,  well, the farms that will really get through it and be more efficient will be the ones  
**0:50:29-0:50:37:**  who are efficient in nutrient cycling, who store carbon more than they emit, who are  energy positive as well.  You know, when you make kind of a balance of the calories that are going out in the  
**0:50:44-0:50:50:**  system, it's a nice point of perspective, a point of view, but also efficiency in terms  of water, water storage and harvesting in a farm.  Then we also mentioned here the ability of soils to store water, the water sequestration  
**0:51:03-0:51:05:**  capacity of soils.  And then the last two aspects, I think, are zero synthetic pesticides into the systems.  It's clearly also a big trend today in Europe.  
**0:51:18-0:51:24:**  I think each year there are more than 10 or 20 active ingredients that are canceled and  removed from the market.  So it's a never ending, I would say, race, like we say in French, towards zero pesticide  
**0:51:35-0:51:36:**  situation.  It's quite clear in 15 years from now, 20 years from now, there will be more and more  farmers who don't use pesticide at all.  
**0:51:45-0:51:48:**  So we start to think about it right now.  And then the last topic is maximizing the ecosystem services because it's clear that  the farmers will, they will bear the cost of the externalities of their system.  
**0:52:02-0:52:06:**  You can have positive externalities, which means a revenue from them.  If they store carbon into their system, it means they can probably monetize that and  transform that into a positive externalities.  
**0:52:14-0:52:21:**  But there are also negative externalities, can be pollution, can be soil erosion.  And unfortunately, these negative externalities are a cost to farmers.  So they need to be aware of that and make things happen so that they can avoid these  
**0:52:34-0:52:39:**  negative externalities by maximizing the ecosystem services, increasing the biodiversity.  It's really not anymore only about cropping the fields of corn or potatoes.  It's really about understanding and managing a complex system that has many, many impacts.  
**0:52:50-0:52:53:**  When you're talking about this, it's not anymore looking at a field.  It's looking about the farmers, a holistic system, as you mentioned earlier on.  How does agroforestry fit into that?  
**0:53:00-0:53:06:**  What's the role that you see agroforestry play in order to solve some of these, the  problems that the farmers are facing?  I think, as you know, as we all know, trees are definitely part forest as an advanced  
**0:53:19-0:53:26:**  biodiverse ecosystem and a farm can be a biodiverse ecosystem as well.  So trees serve multiple ecosystem services such as windbreaks for crops and livestock.  They protect as well from pesticide drift.  
**0:53:37-0:53:46:**  They can be used as new ecological habitats for biodiversity island, for wildlife, also  for livestock.  They provide flowers for pollinators.  
**0:53:51-0:53:59:**  They interact at root level in the soils, helping to recycle nutrients, improve water  dynamics.  I mean, there's plenty of positive reasons why we should use more trees in farming systems.  
**0:54:07-0:54:09:**  Again, it's very easy to say.  The question is, how do you really make that happen in a profitable way?  There's different approach.  
**0:54:16-0:54:22:**  We have this small scale trial of agroforestry here in Belgium.  I will let Guillaume present that a bit more in detail.  But I think, you know, if we take a bit, a little step back, something that I really  
**0:54:36-0:54:43:**  like about trees in a cropping system or trees in a farm is that at the moment you, at the  moment a farmer or a farm manager start integrating trees, planting trees, taking care of the  trees, pruning, fertilizing, of course, a tree is about long term, is about minimum  
**0:54:56-0:54:58:**  20 or 30 years.  So at the moment you integrate that into an annual cropping system, you directly really  help changing the mindset of the farmers who start thinking long term, because now from  
**0:55:10-0:55:17:**  one day to the other, he has some living organism that will be there for the next 30 years.  So it's a very interesting, I think, way to encourage farmers to start setting a long  term vision for the farming system for whom most of the farmers sometimes are thinking  
**0:55:29-0:55:30:**  year by year.  This year I do some weeds, let's see what next year will bring.  And I don't know yet when you have a tree, you cannot do that.  
**0:55:36-0:55:37:**  You have to think long term.  And it's a nice way to, I think, to help that transition.  And to complement on your point, Thomas, I would say that it's also an opportunity for  
**0:55:47-0:55:53:**  the farmer to allow complexity in the system, because if you want, one of the definitions  that we could also try to play with is the definition of a region ag farmer.  And that's a tough one, actually, but if we try to tell it or to get the definition on  
**0:56:10-0:56:18:**  a piece of paper, we could say that it's a manager that is ready to adopt or integrate  or manage complexity, first of all.  And that can be through different types of diverse, more rotational system into his farmland,  
**0:56:34-0:56:41:**  through better cover crops, to less soil disturbance, lower input usage, but also through the fact  that that manager is ready to host more complexity into a system.  And trees are bringing complexity, because it's slowly shifting towards, like we used  
**0:56:57-0:57:03:**  to say, a 3D farming, because you're adding one dimension into your system.  And it's becoming an extra dimension from the one that you used to see, because you  are trying to play in a system that is expanding a bit higher, and that has the potential to  
**0:57:21-0:57:27:**  go and fetch nutrient deeper in the soil.  But that has also the potential to come and compete with your crops, so you need to be  aware of that right from the start and try to address that issue.  
**0:57:37-0:57:47:**  So the fact that we are integrating either agroforestry or just a patch of tree or hedgerows,  for example, in the surrounding of your fields is actually another complexity that is entering  into your business and that you will need to grow and to get educated about, because  
**0:58:03-0:58:10:**  it's a new technology, a new system that you need to integrate and new mechanisms also  that you need to put in your mind and in your management system.  Do you think that you absolutely need to integrate agroforestry in order to be able to call yourself  
**0:58:24-0:58:29:**  a regenerative farmer, taking into account that it's very complex to define regenerative  and maybe nobody here is actually regenerative, it's a pathway rather than an end goal, but  is it, you know, do we absolutely need it?  
**0:58:38-0:58:49:**  Agroforestry is not a must, but it's a principle, it's a tool, let's say, and if we agree together  that complexity is a must, you need to become a region ag farmer or region ag manager, you  need to understand how you will bring complexity in your system, because complex systems are  
**0:59:01-0:59:09:**  systems that are more resilient and that will be more prone to, you know, to find again  disease or drought, all bunch of different stress that can act into your cropping system  and the farmers or the managers in this transition pathway needs to choose from in the toolbox  
**0:59:25-0:59:31:**  what kind of tool you want to use to bring more complexity into your system, because  that will solve your system and will help you meet the objectives.  And I would say that agroforestry is one of them, but it can be something else.  
**0:59:41-0:59:46:**  I can hear the thoughts of Thomas saying it's context dependent.  Exactly.  With a little bit in mind, it's exactly that, it's really context dependent.  
**0:59:56-1:00:03:**  There are farms where it's obvious that you can start with agroforestry directly and others  when you understand that you would probably have to work on soils and other aspects before  reaching the situation where you integrate trees actually.  
**1:00:15-1:00:19:**  So yeah, it depends.  I'm going to share some feedback that we had from or some thoughts that was shared to us  by Rowan Reed from an interview that we did focusing on, you know, trees on farms, etc.  
**1:00:32-1:00:37:**  And he was saying that the problem with agroforestry and especially alley cropping systems is that  it really reduces the flexibility of the farmer, the ability of the farmer to say, you know,  oh, this year I'm going to do this and next year the market says that, so I'm going to  
**1:00:44-1:00:46:**  use this crop.  You know, in the sense it limits you because, you know, not all crops are tolerant to shading,  at least later on in the system when the trees have grown.  
**1:00:55-1:00:59:**  And you know, you're limited mechanically, it's much more limiting.  But I really like your perspective as well, which is like, you know, actually agroforestry  pushes the farmer to be looking beyond the short term and to be starting to think strategically  
**1:01:10-1:01:11:**  over 30, 40, 50 years.  And start to have a plan, an agroecological transition plan over that time.  So it's, I see that as two kind of different thoughts, different approaches.  
**1:01:20-1:01:22:**  Yeah, yeah, sure.  It's really about that.  It's really about a point of view that can be different from one family to another.  
**1:01:29-1:01:35:**  We think that agroforestry or more specifically alley cropping, since you were mentioning  that, can be limiting a few of the operations, but really when it is well structured, well  planned in advance, and I think every alley cropping with tree planting with crops needs  
**1:01:50-1:01:53:**  to be well designed thinking about long term.  When it is well designed, it's not so much limiting the options in the end, because like  I was like Guillaume was saying, you know, in opposition to annual crops, trees are exploring  
**1:02:04-1:02:07:**  additional space above and below the soil surface.  So you start really farming three dimension, which means you can have like a constant double  cropping operations if you do fruit trees production, for instance, walnut.  
**1:02:22-1:02:26:**  That's when the trees are producing, you have a constant annual cropping operations together  with walnut, which means you are probably more flexible also in terms of market opportunities  when the cereals are less interesting, you still have the walnuts and you can continue  
**1:02:39-1:02:45:**  increasing the complexity as well by adding other species maybe or looking at other ways  to integrate trees.  But it's really like a point of view in the end, who's more flexible, who's more restricted.  
**1:02:54-1:03:00:**  Yeah, I don't think it's that simple to say.  Of course, of course, very interesting.  Maybe it's a good time for Guillaume for you to describe a bit the five hectare trial,  
**1:03:08-1:03:14:**  alley cropping trial that you've set up in Belgium.  Maybe it's understand what was the objective, why did you decide to do this experiment?  What's the objective of the project?  
**1:03:22-1:03:35:**  It's a plot that is located in central Belgium, south of Brussels.  It's a block of land that was managed under conservation agriculture since probably 15  to 20 years, so no till and cover crops and lots of organic manure.  
**1:03:48-1:03:58:**  And then in 2016, we decided to shift this block into organic farming, organic agriculture.  So today it's fully converted and it's producing organic crops.  Globally, it's a system that is, I would say, 80% low in terms of soil quality.  
**1:04:12-1:04:13:**  So it's quite rich soil.  We have 2%, 2.5% organic matter.  And the reason why we wanted to go to agroforestry there is one of the reasons is that we just  
**1:04:25-1:04:30:**  wanted to bring back complexity into that zone.  It's a middle of an open field, a huge open field of several hundred or even thousand  hectares where you see roughly no trees, no hedgerows.  
**1:04:40-1:04:47:**  It's slightly undulating and the landscape is a bit, you know, disappointed anyway.  So what we just wanted to do, first of all, our first thought was to replant hedgerows  across around the field or around the plots.  
**1:04:58-1:05:05:**  So in 2019, was it, we started replanting double row hedgerow around the fields, around  the whole surface of the field so that we could have some edges from the drift of the  neighbors that are operating conventionally because there is also a risk of drift from,  
**1:05:21-1:05:29:**  you know, from the chemicals that the neighbors may be spraying in some windy conditions that  drift into your organic crops and then you don't get the certificate for that specific  year and you cannot sell your crops.  
**1:05:36-1:05:38:**  So that was our goal.  First of all, put hedgerows down so that we can protect ourselves from the neighbors and  then it's going to be also nice looking.  
**1:05:45-1:05:51:**  And so the hedgerows first, we started designing them by maximizing the biodiversity of the  species.  So we have 11 species in the hedgerows.  
**1:05:55-1:06:03:**  So all bunch of different species that were selected based on pollinators on the fact  that we would like to host some herds of animals at some time so that they can come and graze  but they can also graze the hedgerows to feed from the leaves, the buds and the different  
**1:06:20-1:06:27:**  pieces of small woods that they can fresh wood, green wood that they can get.  And then after that, we wanted to push the second gear and let's say, okay, let's start  talking about agroforestry.  
**1:06:36-1:06:37:**  What can we do?  Is it feasible?  Is it not feasible?  
**1:06:39-1:06:44:**  We hesitated for a long time simply because the fact that this plot of land is connected  to a concrete road, a small country road, and that's the only road that you can use  to access that farmland.  
**1:06:55-1:07:01:**  And we said, okay, but if we want to put agroforestry down, we should try to aim for north to south  alignment so that we are equal and well balanced in terms of sunlight on the crops that keeps  on growing between the alley.  
**1:07:11-1:07:15:**  And you say, yeah, but if we do that, we are parallel to the road.  So that means that we need to recreate a road inside to access all these little plots that  we will create in between the alley.  
**1:07:23-1:07:28:**  So we were losing land, you know, and the land in Belgium, it's not like the land in  terms of value and elsewhere.  So it's quite expensive.  
**1:07:33-1:07:37:**  So we wanted to stay rational about that.  So we said, okay, forget about that north to south axis that everybody is strongly advising  and that is completely understandable and turn it into an opportunity.  
**1:07:49-1:07:57:**  Let's say that in 15 years, we will have more and more heat stress, sunlight stress, dry  spell, all these kind of things, maybe it will become an opportunity because we will  shade the crop.  
**1:08:05-1:08:10:**  Who knows whether we are right, whether we are wrong, we don't know, but we actually,  we have a northeast to southwest alignment, so it's not perfect, but we'll see what's  the impact in terms of shade.  
**1:08:19-1:08:27:**  But we did it anyway because otherwise that was a criteria to just unselect the option  and go for something else.  So that's what we did.  
**1:08:31-1:08:37:**  And then we started playing with a whole bunch of different ideas in terms of species.  Do we go for fresh fruit, do we go for dry fruit, do we go for wood, do we go for biomass,  do we go for different other options?  
**1:08:45-1:08:53:**  And in our network, we knew a guy that is 10 kilometers away from us and that's got  40 hectares in walnut, orchard walnut with pasture underneath that are being grazed by  animals.  
**1:09:06-1:09:14:**  And we met him a couple of times and the relationship was quite nice, we were exchanging a whole  bunch of ideas, discussions on different topics and everything.  And he said, listen guys, if you guys want to put walnuts there, do it.  
**1:09:23-1:09:29:**  My harvester is five kilometers away, when you need it, I can just rent it to you and  then I will build up facilities also to sort, to dry, to break the shell, all these kinds  of things so that we can maximize the output of the production in terms of added value.  
**1:09:44-1:09:53:**  And then we started going down that option of planting walnuts in our block.  And then came the question of the variety, what kind of walnuts do we plant?  Where do we find these young seedlings and everything?  
**1:10:03-1:10:12:**  So we started studying a little bit the market and France is producing grafted walnuts that  are quite well suited to our areas in terms of climatic conditions, because we are way  north from the main walnut production centers of France, which are Grenoble and the other  
**1:10:30-1:10:32:**  side, the Atlantic side.  So I started discussing with these guys and with the different nurseries there and we  identified one variety that could shoot us.  
**1:10:46-1:10:53:**  And we bought 200 trees of that variety, plus the pollinators that need to pollinate the  main varieties that were selected.  And the pollinators, it was a bit of a difficulty here because we don't know really the variety  
**1:11:02-1:11:08:**  reaction of these seedlings or grafted seedlings in our context.  So I took three different pollinators that have been planted on the western side of the  tree line so that they are on top of the prevailing winds so they can blow their pollen all through  
**1:11:23-1:11:32:**  down the line and pollinate all the crops, the main variety that are on the rest of the  line.  And we took three different pollinators that are starting to, supposed to start flowering  
**1:11:37-1:11:43:**  in I think it's on the 15th of April until the 15th of May.  And that's roughly coinciding with the main variety that we chose.  So that's really the story and how we came to identify exactly what we wanted in terms  
**1:11:54-1:12:06:**  of diversity complexity, what do we choose, which species and which variety as well.  Just as a quick wrap-up, what's interesting here is again, like we said previously, the  importance of identifying local value chain or supply chain that can absorb the market.  
**1:12:17-1:12:24:**  Going into an agroforestry production, just make sure that there is market and logistical  capabilities in the area to evacuate the production.  Exactly.  
**1:12:30-1:12:36:**  It's a huge help to have that, the local farmer five kilometres away.  Well, exactly.  And he was actually, we understood afterwards that the guy is actually passing pretty much  
**1:12:42-1:12:47:**  in front of our block because he's harvesting the walnuts of another farmer that is five  kilometres on the other side.  So actually he's getting close to our field every year.  
**1:12:55-1:13:00:**  But he's not going to come to our field for the next two to three years anyway, because  we are expecting the production to start only in a couple of years and full production in  15 to 20 years from now.  
**1:13:07-1:13:09:**  So it's 10 to 15 years from now.  So it's going to take time.  But yeah, it's true that it's something that needs to be well sawed ahead.  
**1:13:16-1:13:21:**  And today the walnut market in organic is quite strong.  The demand is strong, the prices are quite high.  So it's even more interesting for us to start integrating our production into storage facilities  
**1:13:35-1:13:42:**  so that, and handling facilities so that we can get the most out of the production and  start selling fresh nuts.  So that's the end goal of it.  
**1:13:49-1:13:56:**  The production is supposed to be, I think it's going to be 25 kg per tree per year on  full production.  So you multiply that by 200, you've got the tonnage that we'll have on a yearly basis.  
**1:14:03-1:14:09:**  So it's not going to be a whole silo of walnut, but anyway, it's sufficient for us to acquire  experience to be able to test the system and to be good at advising the type of varieties  that we need because we are now building up our experience into pruning, into disease,  
**1:14:28-1:14:33:**  also monitoring because that's something that needs to be addressed.  This year it's quite dry, so we don't have any issues, but maybe next year it will be  foggy and more moist so you can start having coletotrichum, problems of bacteria, all these  
**1:14:43-1:14:45:**  kinds of things.  That variety has been selected for its natural resistance also or tolerance to these kinds  of diseases.  
**1:14:54-1:14:58:**  This is interesting to look at the diseases in pests and how do you expect farmers to  really, I'm thinking now about scaling the system, right?  So thinking about you doing this as a demonstration and to gain experience to advise others, how  
**1:15:06-1:15:11:**  do you expect farmers to react to the issue of like, okay, I'm focused on grain farming.  This is my job.  This is where my knowledge is and now I need to diversify or I want to diversify to implement  
**1:15:16-1:15:20:**  agroforestry and I need to learn how to be a tree farmer now.  I need to learn how to observe the tree illnesses, how to treat the tree illnesses.  How do you think that's going to sit with farmers?  
**1:15:27-1:15:31:**  Because when we're looking at complexity, it's a huge topic that we're really passionate  about with Etienne and it's about, we understand the value of adding complexity to farms, but  often that comes with huge costs and challenges, especially around knowledge and infrastructure  
**1:15:44-1:15:46:**  as well, which is what you've said right now.  But in terms of this knowledge to learn to manage a new crop, how do you see that?  What I would advise is to start small by just planting a couple of trees like that in a  
**1:16:01-1:16:09:**  pasture where you, that are next to your place and observe these kind of trees, the behavior  of these trees into your context so that you can start building up an eye that is different  than the arable eye that the farmer may have more routinely and try to build up a knowledge  
**1:16:23-1:16:30:**  that is sufficient so that you can address the investment that you would make on a later  stage to a larger area.  And also it's, there are more and more support that are becoming available locally by groups  
**1:16:43-1:16:51:**  of farmers or small technical groups that are trying to assist farmers, advising farmers  independently also to shift their system into everything, all the principles that we're  talking about.  
**1:17:00-1:17:08:**  And some of them are, some associations are really willing to see more and more trees  into the system.  So are delivering together with the rest of the technical assistance, a permanent assistance  
**1:17:15-1:17:21:**  that can help farmers being alerted about the different pests and disease that needs  to be followed and monitored throughout the season.  Yeah, and maybe to complete another way to fill the gap of this knowledge, lax, if I  
**1:17:39-1:17:46:**  can say, is the other way to say that is one of the best ways to convince the farmers to  do something or change their practices is when the neighbor is doing it.  So again, exchange between farmers, associations, et cetera, are one of the best ways also to  
**1:17:57-1:18:03:**  slowly convince and raise the awareness of the farmers towards new practices that are  not so complex in the end, when you're already a farmer, you could understand how a tree  grows and what he needs to do to plan them.  
**1:18:13-1:18:21:**  And then probably one additional information is to go back to our plot of land, Dimitri,  is the way we designed the system, because I haven't, we haven't said anything on that  yet.  
**1:18:27-1:18:34:**  It's so it's, I just said it's 200 trees, but you don't know which, how it's planted.  It's actually, we decided to plan the trees that, if I, you know, the axle now it's north,  east, south, west, roughly.  
**1:18:42-1:18:50:**  And then you have in between the alleys, you have 34 meters and in the alleys, you have  one tree every eight meters.  And obviously that's another difficulty also, because you need to take into account the  
**1:19:02-1:19:08:**  fact that we are inorganic and that we have all bunch of equipment that are activated  for making mechanical weeding.  And whether you are under cereal grains or in chicory or in sugar beets or in whatever,  
**1:19:19-1:19:24:**  because we are farming all these kinds of crops on that small plot, you need to adapt  the width of your planting, the width of the distance between the alley to the width of  this equipment.  
**1:19:33-1:19:41:**  So we are expecting the canopy of the walnut to grow five meters on the right and five  meters on the left from the trunk of the tree.  So we will lose 10 meters in the distance of, in that space of 24 meters.  
**1:19:56-1:20:04:**  So at the end, we will be left with 24 meters that will be used for arable crops.  And that corresponds to two times 12, which is the width of the mechanical arrow that  we use there and that also fits in terms of hoeing, also fits in terms of sugar beet planting  
**1:20:20-1:20:24:**  or chicory planting, maize planting, planters, etc.  So it's really playing with the numbers at the start to see what is the width that you  need and today you put 34, okay, that's not ideal because today we are farming 33, obviously.  
**1:20:40-1:20:48:**  But as the years pass on, we will start reducing down to 24, but you need every year to adjust  a little bit your system to the space reduction and also to add some permanent crops or permanent  pasture underneath the canopy so that you can keep your system clean from any weed and  
**1:21:08-1:21:13:**  also adapt it to a mechanical harvester, walnut harvester that will come and actually harvest  the walnut that may be present on the ground.  So it's really playing with the numbers and understanding what you have in terms of equipment  
**1:21:26-1:21:37:**  or what the contractors that are making the mechanical work has got.  It's really interesting to see with intercropping, imagine doing this at scale on a 100 hectare  farm for example, or field, a variety of fields, but let's say on 100 hectares, it seems to  
**1:21:50-1:21:58:**  be difficult to be able to justify the costs that are incurred and the reduction in plantation  area without having a crop that produces walnuts, for example, like a nut, a high value cash  crop, which we'll produce every year.  
**1:22:08-1:22:12:**  Because what we're seeing, for example, in the experiments in Southern France, as you're  very familiar, they've been testing this with black locust, with robinia absurdoacacia.  And so the harvest happens in 20, 25 years.  
**1:22:23-1:22:29:**  So for 20, 25 years, little by little, you're reducing what you get out of the land in order  to cash crop, in order to get your cash back in 25 years.  And that seems to be really challenging for farmers to accept.  
**1:22:35-1:22:38:**  And that's what's also really interesting with your system of looking at how we can  work with the crop that produces every year.  If you stick to a fresh fruit, I think it's possible to keep on reducing that part of  
**1:22:49-1:22:59:**  the unfarmable portion of land that grows under the canopy because it depends also on  your pruning system, what you want to have in terms of fruiting system.  Here you must imagine a walnut, it needs to grow tall and wide so that you maximize the  
**1:23:13-1:23:21:**  production, the flowering capacity and the global production on a yearly basis.  Now if you have pears or apples, you can keep your tree down, not as much as possible, but  to a reasonable size so that you minimize the loss of farmland and you can minimize  
**1:23:35-1:23:42:**  also the potential loss in terms of revenue from your arable production.  It really, for next year, we will have another, we'll open up another project that will be  on 20 hectares.  
**1:23:51-1:23:52:**  Agroforestry?  Well, hopefully, not hopefully, but agroforestry, either dry nut or probably and hopefully fresh  fruits or apples.  
**1:24:04-1:24:11:**  There's Stephen Briggs in the UK that has been working like this with the apple system  and he's got an interesting approach where he says he's not an apple grower and he struggles,  he doesn't think he has the nicest apples, but because he's decided to invest in transforming  
**1:24:21-1:24:27:**  into juice, he doesn't need to have big beautiful apples without any marks on it because he's  juicing them.  And so he's playing with the processing in order to fix his problem of not wanting to  
**1:24:34-1:24:36:**  become an expert apple grower.  Yeah, we know Stephen quite well.  We've been to his farm several times.  
**1:24:40-1:24:41:**  Very nice.  Yeah, he's been there as well.  So yeah, he's a great farmer, very innovative and super inspiring.  
**1:24:48-1:24:53:**  Is there anything else that you wanted to share about the intercropping, alley cropping  system that you've set up in Belgium here?  An interesting question that comes often is who is founting these kind of initiatives.  
**1:25:10-1:25:14:**  We see different possibilities.  What we've seen in one part of Belgium is on one project what I've heard is crowdfunding,  so people that are gathering together to help the farming investing into that project.  
**1:25:26-1:25:34:**  I don't know whether that was successful or not, but it's something that I've heard already.  Otherwise, what we can get in our region in the southern part of Belgium is regional subsidies  for tree lines.  
**1:25:45-1:25:53:**  So you're subsidized partly for the cost of the investment or it's just being funded by  the farmers.  So in terms of cost, it's really depending on what you have, but in our system, because  
**1:26:05-1:26:16:**  we bought the one that in France, they are grafted, they were certified by the local  authorities in terms of origin and genetics.  So it's CTEFL who certified this type of tree production.  
**1:26:26-1:26:33:**  The one that itself cost us 20 euro or 19.8 per tree.  But when we did the calculation and the planting cost and everything, we ended up with pretty  much 35 euro per tree.  
**1:26:42-1:26:46:**  All included, all planted, labor included and everything.  The subsidy that we can get here in Walloon area is 6 euro per tree, roughly.  That's for an investment.  
**1:26:59-1:27:04:**  One shot.  The yearly cost roughly per tree when it will be in production or a couple of years before  is expected to be around 42 euro in terms of pruning, in terms of labor.  
**1:27:19-1:27:28:**  That's one threat that I see is the access to labor in large agroforestry systems.  But we can talk about that later.  So fertilization in organic is an issue because you need at the early stage of the walnut,  
**1:27:36-1:27:38:**  you need massive amount of nitrogen.  So that's massive, I'm not going to exaggerate, but you need a good amount of nitrogen to  stimulate the crop so that you can expect a production to be fairly reasonable as soon  
**1:27:53-1:27:56:**  as possible.  So that's the cost per year, per tree.  And the expected revenue per tree per year is around 140.  
**1:28:05-1:28:11:**  Because you take 25 kg, I said, on your own, times four, times six, that's the cost per  kg of organic walnut.  So around year 12, you start paying back your investment.  
**1:28:20-1:28:24:**  You brought up a really interesting aspect, the labor one.  And that's something that in the region we're working here, they've got olives now and everybody's  shifting towards super intensive olives because they've worked out techniques to just need  
**1:28:35-1:28:39:**  hardly any labor to manage.  Every four or five years, you need some labor to come in with a chainsaw to prune the trees  because the mechanical pruning, the tree needs to be aerated and needs to be chosen in a  
**1:28:52-1:28:57:**  more specific way, selecting, removing whole branches instead of just topping and creating  a hedge.  But that's very unique to the olive tree that's a hedge.  
**1:29:01-1:29:05:**  It's like, I mean, in a sense, it's a bush, sorry.  And so, but it's enabled them to really scale their systems here and to be able to, and  many farmers are now implementing this and are planting these systems.  
**1:29:16-1:29:18:**  Farmers that were previously doing, for example, cattle and stuff.  So it's enabling the system to be scaled and farmers to actually diversify within a super  intensive system, of course.  
**1:29:25-1:29:30:**  But how do you plan to solve that issue in the future when you, for example, scale to  20 hectare apple?  And I've worked in apple, which is seven months, two years ago, and it was so much work.  
**1:29:38-1:29:39:**  It was scary.  It's a question and I'm going to answer by a question because we don't have the solution.  We will see today for our small plot, it's just a question of a couple of hours with  
**1:29:53-1:29:55:**  one or two colleagues.  And we do that on a Sunday, you know.  But it's true that it needs to be scaled, it needs to be explained, it needs to be considered  
**1:30:03-1:30:16:**  into a project because you cannot be just an outsider from that big need in terms of  labor for picking.  But it's for picking, it's also for pruning, it's also for fertilization, it can be for  
**1:30:22-1:30:25:**  anything, you know.  So it needs to be addressed.  We have large orchids in northern Belgium and they used to suffer from labor lack.  
**1:30:37-1:30:44:**  These days it seems to be solved because they are convincing people to come back into the  agricultural sector to work.  So I think there will be solutions, it just needs to be adapted also, it needs to be fairly  
**1:30:56-1:31:06:**  reasonable in terms of intensity of work, in terms of design and difficulties.  If it's a very high tree, it's dangerous because you need to climb up some ladders or whatever  and that's putting people at risk.  
**1:31:15-1:31:21:**  If it's a lower tree like I was explaining for fruits, that's less risky so people will  probably become easier.  That's really depending on the fact.  
**1:31:26-1:31:32:**  And they could have some couple of kg of walnuts at the end of the day.  That's something that is interesting as well.  Anyway, that's something that we are taking into consideration when we are discussing  
**1:31:40-1:31:44:**  with people who want to implement this kind of project.  Okay, that's good.  Very interesting idea but are you comfortable with the labor approach?  
**1:31:51-1:31:53:**  Do you see solutions in the region?  And if we see that it's not a limiting factor, we can consider it.  It really seems like it's a transition because, for example, a pioneer starting without the  
**1:32:03-1:32:10:**  infrastructure will need to find solutions and possibly invest in infrastructure himself  or herself.  But once you already have, imagine we have a landscape or like what's happening here,  
**1:32:18-1:32:23:**  let's not imagine in Portugal here, there's more and more olives, super intensive olives.  The machines are there to be rented easily.  And also they have teams that come in and that do training, do pruning, training of  
**1:32:34-1:32:35:**  the trees.  They come in, they do pruning.  I mean, in the sense it's all organized.  
**1:32:39-1:32:43:**  There's a whole industry there that's set up and so it's very easy for farmers to think,  okay, I'm going to diversify now.  And of course it could be done in a way that's planting olive trees on a riparian area to  
**1:32:49-1:32:50:**  be able to diversify.  It doesn't necessarily need to be done in the way that it's being done now because we're  actually designing systems like this here where the infrastructure is set up and the  
**1:32:58-1:33:00:**  industry is already very developed here.  And so the answers are easier.  Whereas, for example, in your situation there, the pioneer was already here, the local farmer  
**1:33:09-1:33:11:**  with the 30 hectares.  He's going to be investing in infrastructure and it's going to help a lot.  But the transition, as we're coming back to what we're saying, Elron, about going regenerative  
**1:33:18-1:33:19:**  takes time.  It's slow and it's about organizing ourselves little by little to create rural areas that  can have the capacity to manage, process tree crops and to integrate agroforestry, to develop  
**1:33:30-1:33:34:**  knowledge, communities of farmers that connect with each other and share experiences.  And I think that's a pattern we're seeing everywhere.  It takes time.  
**1:33:38-1:33:54:**  We need to understand that it's a slow process that is slower than what we are usually seeing  around and that needs to be addressed with sound decision.  The flip side of the coin is to do it at a certain scale.  
**1:34:07-1:34:15:**  So for example, imagine a project coming in and setting up a walnut orchard at a solid,  I'm talking about maybe doing it on 50 hectares or agroforestry with wide spacing, possibly  on even more hectares.  
**1:34:24-1:34:30:**  And then there is the investment in there and the investment in technicians, in consultants,  but also infrastructure to be able to carry out all of these different needs by the farmer  or by the project itself.  
**1:34:41-1:34:46:**  And that would be another approach to doing it, to reach those economies of scale, to  be able to invest, to be able to bring in teams of pruners, to have the capital and  to have the revenue in order to do so.  
**1:34:54-1:34:59:**  I don't know what you think about that, but we're seeing now with the work of companies  like Propagate Ventures, which are really organizing and professionalizing tree crop  and agroforestry systems that they will go maybe at a point where we can start to implement  
**1:35:10-1:35:13:**  these systems at a much larger scale.  But I'd love to know your point of view on that.  We must keep in mind the definition of agroforestry where actually the tree or the crop is there  
**1:35:24-1:35:27:**  to help the crop or the tree.  So once the revenue is a little bit outside of the expected results in terms of tree,  you can count on the crops to buffer it back to better levels and the opposite as well.  
**1:35:47-1:35:55:**  So I think it's also important to consider these kinds of things, that it's a system  that is diversifying the revenue of the farming operation.  And that is also helping the fact that on less profitable years, you have the other  
**1:36:09-1:36:16:**  crop that is there to take the relay on the global revenue.  So that's something that is interesting.  And what we have kept on doing in that specific plot that we were talking about here is just  
**1:36:26-1:36:38:**  common annual cropping organic, under-organized organic system like weed, like spelt, like  chicory, like sugar beet, temporary pasture, all bunch of crops that some of these crops  are really interesting in terms of revenue as well.  
**1:36:49-1:36:55:**  And they are compensating the fact that the world is not producing anything today yet.  And in a couple of years, the world will actually generate, maybe not on our case, but on the  example that you're taking, which seems to be way larger, that the expected revenue from  
**1:37:08-1:37:15:**  the world would be way more important, would be way more important compensating the fact  that you would probably lose a little bit of farmland and revenue from your crop.  And I think it's an important one as well.  
**1:37:23-1:37:30:**  And one little thing that we did also to try to even the production of the tree across  the year, because it's the bet that you are doing also is the fact that you are planting  a tree in the middle of a winter and expected that tree in five to 10 years to grow in terms  
**1:37:45-1:37:49:**  of production at a steady rate across these years.  And what we've seen since a couple of years now is severe dry spell in the spring.  And that can impact quite seriously the fact that the tree can start actually decreasing  
**1:38:03-1:38:08:**  its trend of production across the first year.  So a small trick that I wanted to share, and that's why I say it here, because I will forget  afterwards is that when we were digging the hole, it's a 40 centimeter auger that was  
**1:38:20-1:38:26:**  traveling on a straight line that was defined by an RTK tractor that ran in front of the  auger.  And that auger was digging every 8 meters, as I said.  
**1:38:32-1:38:41:**  So before planting the trees, we took a drainage pipe that we bought to a local retailer here,  and we cut section of one and a half to two meter, and we actually put that down the hole  and then put the trees and then backfill with the soil so that when it's becoming dry, like  
**1:38:52-1:38:59:**  this year probably in two, three weeks, if we don't have rain, we'll go with the tank.  And here we get directly at the root system.  So that's a system because you're just going to pour a couple of liters of water down the  
**1:39:07-1:39:14:**  pipe and it will feed directly into the rooting system and get the efficiency of the irrigation  way better than what you could get if you put it on the top.  And that's really helping the tree to guarantee a steady progression into its development  
**1:39:24-1:39:29:**  and then to meet the full production capacity as early as possible.  And then that will probably mitigate a little bit the risk in terms of overnures you were  asking.  
**1:39:34-1:39:36:**  Thomas, you wanted to add something?  Yeah, because I was thinking about your comment on the scalability of agroforestry, which  is for sure interesting and a real challenge.  
**1:39:48-1:39:56:**  I think what's also important to take into consideration is the overall heterogeneity  of farmlands and how a redesign of these farms will somehow accept or will be aligned with  agroforestry.  
**1:40:06-1:40:14:**  And in other words, when you start small scale in general, you focus on the best areas where  you're quite sure that the trees will grow and you will have a revenue out of it.  When you want to scale, you need to take, the more you scale, the more you go wide,  
**1:40:24-1:40:34:**  the more you need to take into consideration other aspects of farming, such as the overall  topography, drainage problems, soils, probably irrigation because of slopes and hills.  And I think it's also interesting to, I mean, I see two points here.  
**1:40:49-1:40:59:**  First to take, to keep the best places that are most suitable for trees production and  agroforestry and probably give the other one to focus on crop production when there's a  clear difference to be made so that you still have a diverse system that are maximizing  
**1:41:09-1:41:13:**  the production on both sides.  And on the other hand, when farmers want to scale, it's sometimes relevant to first start  with a more global redesign of the farm as well.  
**1:41:26-1:41:33:**  Design or redesign, taking into consideration all the aspects of the, again, geology, water  infrastructures, to be sure that the end product or the end design of the farm will be the  best suited.  
**1:41:43-1:41:48:**  What do you mean by global redesign?  It's something we do probably less in Europe because in Europe, like Guillaume was saying,  especially Belgium, there is a high density of population.  
**1:41:57-1:42:06:**  So the fields are really quite small and already quite scattered and already quite, you don't  have a lot of freedom to redesign.  That's what I say in Europe.  
**1:42:10-1:42:16:**  In countries where agriculture is more rangeland and large scale, like Latin America, they  have much more liberty to think out the box and to rethink about optimizing the redesign.  And that's what we do quite a lot in Argentina, for example, where we focus on aspects like  
**1:42:30-1:42:36:**  topography, drainage, irrigation.  And we try to follow these principles of key lines we design, which is a principle that  is based on a series of principles of coordinated principles and systems where the different  
**1:42:51-1:42:57:**  components of the fields are designed and organized with functional and logic areas  and purposes of the farms.  And we follow what we call the scale of permanence that starts very high level going down to  
**1:43:09-1:43:11:**  the detailed level, if I can say.  And you start with, first, you look at the climate, you understand the global context,  and then you get down to topographical aspects of the farm or maybe the geology as well.  
**1:43:24-1:43:32:**  So we would use some high precision topographical survey to generate accurate digital elevation  map to understand how the land is shaped, where the water cores are going, where are  the water accumulations area where the farms might lack water.  
**1:43:44-1:43:49:**  And then you take into consideration roads in the farms because they're already set,  you're not going to change that much the road, you can adapt but not completely change.  And then you get down to the trees, natural trees or forests that are already present.  
**1:43:59-1:44:05:**  And there you go, more details, infrastructure, constructions, then the fences, and in the  end, you look at farm practices.  I think that's an interesting strategy to follow, this scale of permanence, applying  
**1:44:16-1:44:20:**  the key lines redesign, which we do in large-scale farms in Argentina.  So the key lines principle is basically you use the control lines from your topographical  survey and you try to reach the optimised or ideal control lines in between them to  
**1:44:33-1:44:39:**  minimise the slope, but still keeping a natural slope.  And these key lines that you redesign in the farms will help you basically draw future  lines of irrigations or future roads into your farming systems in the middle of which  
**1:44:51-1:44:55:**  you will then start to say, okay, this is where I can put trees, this is where I can  really better integrate my pastures with trees or my cropping system with trees.  And it's just another step, I would say, backwards into thinking about growth for us, too, is  
**1:45:11-1:45:19:**  also to start with a more global redesign thinking instead of, I mean, before going  into the agroforestry design itself.  It's very interesting that you mentioned the difference between the European context and  
**1:45:30-1:45:35:**  as you mentioned now the South American context, because the landscape that we have is different  and it forces us to play with agroforestry in this case in a different way.  We have to be interacting with it in a different way.  
**1:45:43-1:45:47:**  Yeah, this is something that we've, it's very interesting in our interviews because we're  interviewing people from all around the place.  And you can see that the context is like the organisation of the land and ownership of  
**1:45:56-1:46:01:**  land as well, which is another huge topic, which I don't think we shouldn't go into this  because I've already taken too much of your time.  But it has such big influence on the type of system that can be implemented.  
**1:46:10-1:46:12:**  And again, we go back to the same thing.  This is so context dependent.  Yeah, exactly.  
**1:46:15-1:46:16:**  Yeah.  And agroforestry again is a large definition.  What we do or try to do in Latin America is not exactly what I like cropping.  
**1:46:25-1:46:27:**  It's not alley cropping what we're doing.  It's more like building biodiversity islands or using trees as natural fences or windbreaks.  But always with the idea to build complexity and biodiversity.  
**1:46:42-1:46:51:**  For instance, we've been planting a lot of willow and poplar trees into lowlands, where  there's accumulation of water, because they are trees totally adapted to these humid areas.  But also they are quick growing, I mean, high biomass production trees.  
**1:47:03-1:47:08:**  So they can be used at some point also for biomass production, if it makes sense.  And then we try to mix these species with other local species like gum tree, eucalyptus,  acacia or others.  
**1:47:17-1:47:27:**  And what's interesting also is the nursery story in this context, because trees and agroforestry  is really far from being mainstream in countries like Argentina.  It's very the beginning.  
**1:47:33-1:47:42:**  So when you want to plant large amount of trees, you are struggling a bit finding seedlings  or cuttings.  And what we did in both of the farms where we are working is we've been basically starting  
**1:47:51-1:47:56:**  from scratch creating a nursery with irrigation so that the farm the farms can already have  their own seedlings and cuttings production themselves on the farms.  It really reduced the cost of investment on the medium terms before long term.  
**1:48:08-1:48:13:**  And the interesting story is that when you have a nursery, then you are sure you're going  to be planting like every year because you renew the nursery, you've invested with irrigation  and everything.  
**1:48:19-1:48:24:**  And then you also create somehow a potential source of revenue because you can start selling  seedlings and cuttings to neighbor farms because you have the infrastructure.  So that's also an interesting story I wanted to share is that when you have the scale and  
**1:48:34-1:48:41:**  the size and you want to go agroforestry, then it's probably worth it to have your own  nursery at some point.  And you get the knowledge because yes, exactly.  
**1:48:47-1:48:52:**  And you can make more mistakes easily because you can start much, you can test much more  species on your nursery.  It costs way less and quickly you say, okay, that species, that variety basically does  
**1:48:59-1:49:00:**  not grow.  I can see that.  So I quickly remove it and you do your own selection and you adapt your system in terms  
**1:49:07-1:49:10:**  of variety to your context.  At Massey Farm in Greece, we save thousands by planting our own nursery, even though we  made so many mistakes by having sometimes trays of trees that had half full, you know,  
**1:49:23-1:49:28:**  maybe we lost whole trays, but still it was worth it because it was such a huge saving.  And that's fascinating.  And it shows the potential of agroforestry or let's say of, there's a lot of creativity  
**1:49:36-1:49:43:**  and a lot of different opportunities for farmers there in terms of diversifying.  And yeah, and very interesting that you're, I would love to hear so much more about these  experiences in South America, but I think we're reaching at a point now where it's quite,  
**1:49:53-1:49:58:**  I've taken a lot of your time and I don't want to take much more.  I want to be respectful.  And maybe that's an opportunity for a conversation in the future to come back on and to talk  
**1:50:07-1:50:13:**  to this time shift, get some more feedback as to what's happening in Belgium in your  plot, but also understand what's happening in the projects that you've been working internationally.  And I think there's a lot of interesting stuff that you're going to be able to share with  
**1:50:23-1:50:24:**  us.  It's always a pleasure.  It's fascinating sharing experience and ideas and yeah, congrats again for the podcast.  
**1:50:32-1:50:36:**  It's super exciting listening to all these stories and feedbacks.  So yeah, keep on doing that longterm again and happy to reconnect again.  We'll reach some, once we reach the fruit production, for example, in Walnut trees.  
**1:50:49-1:50:50:**  Yeah.  Thank you so much for making it this far.  I hope you enjoyed the interview as much as we did.  
**1:50:56-1:50:59:**  If you want to find out more about sole capital, the links are all below, get in touch with  them and we'll see you next time.  