---
title: 45 Rethinking The Agricultural Status Quo By Mimicking Natural Ecosystems With Mark Shepard
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2022-09-16)  

**0:00:00-0:00:16:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:23-0:00:27:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  these challenges.  
**0:00:33-0:00:38:**  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Hello and welcome to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:00:50-0:00:55:**  I'm your host Dimitri and today we have the immense pleasure of hosting Mark Shepherd  on the show.  For those that don't know Mark, he is the CEO of Forest Agriculture Enterprises, the  
**0:01:01-0:01:07:**  founder of Restoration Agriculture Development and the author of Restoration Agriculture  as well as Water for Any Farm.  He is also the founder and farmer of New Forest Farm, a 106 acre perennial agricultural savanna.  
**0:01:16-0:01:21:**  In this interview, we're going to talk a lot about Mark's radically different approach  to farming, one which is based on deep biomimicry, based in the context of his farm in Wisconsin,  USA, which is as I said, New Forest Farm.  
**0:01:31-0:01:37:**  So we had a fascinating talk here, delving into subjects that we don't usually delve  into into the show.  So I really, really hope you enjoy it.  
**0:01:41-0:01:44:**  Don't hesitate if you would like to complement some of the things we discussed with some  visual representations.  Mark has lots of content online.  
**0:01:48-0:01:49:**  Please check it out.  Maybe it gives you a bit of a more tangible idea of what we discussed today.  Thank you so much and I hope you enjoy.  
**0:01:55-0:01:58:**  Hello Mark and welcome on the podcast.  Greetings Dimitri.  So we usually start with our guests by explaining a bit of your story and how you got to where  
**0:02:08-0:02:16:**  you are now in your path of agriculture and agroforestry.  You got 30 years.  I suppose it kind of all started right around the early 1970s.  
**0:02:27-0:02:31:**  I grew up in what became an industrial wasteland.  It was all mostly manufacturing, both light and heavy manufacturing and it was when the  US adopted tax policies to deliberately encourage companies to leave the US and set up camp  
**0:02:43-0:02:47:**  in other countries around the world because it was lower cost and good for the economy  and all that kind of stuff.  The manufacturing sector collapsed.  
**0:02:52-0:02:57:**  My dad went from having one good manufacturing job to having four jobs that sucked and not  being enough.  We ended up having a really large garden in order to supposedly feed ourselves and yet  
**0:03:04-0:03:07:**  we had to constantly go to the store to buy food.  Why was it that we had an acre garden and we couldn't even feed ourselves?  We had to buy our staple foods, meat, bread, milk and that sort of thing.  
**0:03:16-0:03:25:**  It also coincided with the oil embargo when crude supplies to the US were cut off by the  OPEC nations and there were gas lines, miles and miles longs.  I decided that I didn't want to live that way.  
**0:03:33-0:03:38:**  I wanted to escape somehow.  Because I had the experience of gardening, my dad went to a lot of gardening groups.  We hung out with a lot of the people who were like some of the pioneers in the organic movement.  
**0:03:50-0:03:57:**  Prior to the current or the most recent flourishing of organic, when I first remember my dad going  to organic growers meetings, there was a different name over the door of the library of where  we were supposed to go meeting.  
**0:04:04-0:04:10:**  I said, but dad, it was like eight or 10 or whatever, aren't we supposed to go to the  library, he puts his hand over my mouth because back then if you said the word organic, you  could get arrested for being a socialist and lose your job.  
**0:04:18-0:04:22:**  And then boy how things have changed.  So it was like Heinz Grotzky was a greenhouse grower.  John and Helen Philbrick ran the Biodynamic Association near us and they were big mentors  
**0:04:33-0:04:37:**  of my dad's.  Robert Rodale, my dad knew Robert Rodale, we went to meetings with them.  Scott and Helen Nearing, homesteaders extraordinaire that wrote all kinds of books about homesteading.  
**0:04:47-0:04:50:**  So those are some of my early, early influences.  And then I just naturally gravitated toward that when I finally managed to escape the  industrial wasteland.  
**0:04:58-0:05:10:**  And part of my whole perspective on the agroforestry take is that there's somewhat of a myth out  there that there's all these young people that want to get into farming.  That's not true for one, but for two is if you get into farming for the cash flows from  
**0:05:22-0:05:25:**  farming, you'll probably fail.  If you get into farming as a way to manage your real estate asset of which you are an  investor, that's a different story.  
**0:05:34-0:05:42:**  And so in order for me to escape the industrial suburbs, I started taking a bunch of get rich  quick real estate seminars and became a real estate finder for somebody where I would find  a property, get an accepted offer and then hand it over to them and I'd just get a check  
**0:05:54-0:05:57:**  for finding them a piece of property that they would take over.  So I learned about how to purchase real estate when I was still like 17 or 18 maybe at the  earliest.  
**0:06:05-0:06:15:**  It was about that time that J. Russell Smith's book Tree Crops was reissued with the introduction  by Wendell Berry who was also one of my big inspirations back then.  And it just dawned on me.  
**0:06:22-0:06:25:**  Here I'd been living at home with my parents.  We had one of the biggest gardens of anybody I knew and it still didn't produce all of  our food.  
**0:06:29-0:06:33:**  And anybody who's ever had a garden knows that you got to go out, either till the soil  or mulch it deeply.  And there was this lady who lived up the road from us called Ruth Stout.  
**0:06:38-0:06:42:**  She started writing all these books about deep mulch and stuff like that.  Even that was a ridiculous amount of work.  Tilling the ground was a lot of work.  
**0:06:46-0:06:48:**  Gathering mulch was a lot of work.  And your garden has to be out in full sun.  So it's hot.  
**0:06:52-0:06:53:**  It's wet.  And you're trying to hoe weeds and all this kind of stuff and getting covered with dirt  and mud that's running down you.  
**0:06:59-0:07:00:**  There's tests and diseases to deal with.  It was just a real lot of work for a bunch of carrots that you throw in the soup.  It doesn't really feed the family.  
**0:07:07-0:07:14:**  And so whenever I'd be done with my responsibilities as a kid, I'd go run off into the woods and  just explore and play.  And there were hazelnuts, chestnuts, but hickory nuts, and grapes and blueberries and winter  
**0:07:25-0:07:30:**  green berries and all kinds of stuff out in the woods to eat for free.  And nobody took care of it at all.  And I was sitting on the edge of the woods where I was the primary forest manager.  
**0:07:39-0:07:44:**  By the time I was a teenager, the oil embargo kind of stimulated my parents to get a wood  stove.  They were burning wood as a supplemental heat for the house.  
**0:07:49-0:07:53:**  I was sitting on a rock reading tree crops by J. Russell Smith.  He's talking about planting trees to produce seed for livestock feed.  And then we would grow our own human food underneath in this two-story agriculture.  
**0:08:04-0:08:05:**  And I could easily see it.  There's the garden right over there out in the open.  And here's the forest over here.  
**0:08:09-0:08:13:**  Why not reach over here, grab the garden, pull it in under the forest, and let's reach  over there and grab the forest and put it on top of the garden.  We now have twice as much going on over all of our land base instead of this is here and  
**0:08:22-0:08:24:**  that's here and this is here and that's here.  And that kind of just dawned on me that, oh my gosh, this is brilliant to have both trees  and, you know, farm crops, garden crops, livestock grazing.  
**0:08:34-0:08:41:**  We had goats and pigs as a kid for livestock just for supplemental food and all that kind  of stuff and the goats for brush clearing.  And it was in part because I was exposed to agroforestry within a somewhat natural forest  
**0:08:53-0:09:01:**  context and not necessarily an orchard context that to me, why would I just plant an orchard  because there were orchards, apple orchards near us.  Why would I plant an orchard with only apples when they have to go out and they got to spray  
**0:09:08-0:09:10:**  75,000 times a week.  They got to do this and that and the other thing and then they whine about the fact that  at the end of the day, they don't have enough money to cover all their costs.  
**0:09:17-0:09:22:**  It's like, well, wait a minute, I get perfectly good apples out here and nobody did anything  to them.  And so those two things kind of combined, it's like, well, if I'm going to do it, I'm  
**0:09:28-0:09:35:**  going to mimic natural ecosystems and manage natural ecosystems to produce food fuels medicines,  fiber, not just carrots or celery, but a full complete diet by managing an ecosystem.  And that's really the foundation of restoration agriculture, right?  
**0:09:46-0:09:53:**  Which is the, let's say the type of agriculture which you have created throughout these years.  Correct me if I'm wrong in the way that I'm explaining it, but maybe you could then explain  to us or refine the definition for our listeners of what is restoration agriculture, which  
**0:10:05-0:10:09:**  I would also advise our listeners to check out your book, which I have read.  And as a disclaimer, also say that I've done a course with you to our listeners when I  started off in this whole path five years ago.  
**0:10:19-0:10:23:**  And so I have a bit of an idea of a better idea of what it is.  And I really look forward to delving into some of the details with you and some of the  questions that I've been wanting to ask you for many years, I guess.  
**0:10:30-0:10:31:**  Good.  But maybe, yeah, for our listeners then, could you just give a bit of a summary as to what  is restoration agriculture based on, of course, the last sentences that you've said, which  
**0:10:43-0:10:44:**  are fundamental.  So I deliberately chose the name restoration and agriculture to address two different parts  of a polarity that really doesn't and shouldn't exist.  
**0:10:58-0:11:04:**  There's ecological restorationists that, you know, because I went on to college, went back  for ecology and got into doing some ecological restoration.  Ecological restoration meant and still does to a large extent, trying to replicate an  
**0:11:16-0:11:21:**  ecological form that was existing at one point in time that somebody wrote down a long time  ago and then arrest it there.  And if those plants didn't exist there back then, we got to get rid of them now with herbicide.  
**0:11:28-0:11:33:**  And if they don't, plants don't exist there now, we go plant them at another expense.  So ecological restoration is 100% all expense, unless you're playing conservation easements  game and selling development rights, which we won't get into, that the act of ecological  
**0:11:44-0:11:46:**  restoration is all expense.  Well, then agriculture was like, oh, we got to get rid of nature, get rid of everything  that was here to plant our crop, which is a limited number of species that we put in  
**0:11:58-0:11:59:**  the ground.  Well, when you eliminate nature, you eliminate all of the ecosystem services that nature  provides for itself.  
**0:12:07-0:12:12:**  And you as a farmer or an orchardist, you now have to supply those inputs.  You have to manage fertility, which nature takes care of on its own.  You have to manage pest control, which nature takes care of on its own, disease control.  
**0:12:21-0:12:25:**  You have to manage the breeding and the genetic selection.  You have to manage the whole entire thing.  And then you wonder why it's expensive.  
**0:12:31-0:12:42:**  Both of those forms, I think, are bastardizations of something that actually is amazingly powerful,  which is nature itself.  As far as we know, nature itself has been operating just fine since the beginning of  
**0:12:51-0:12:57:**  when it actually started, whether it was 6,000 years ago or 4 billion years ago, depending  on what reference material you're looking at.  It's been operating just fine, thank you very much, without us having to manage it and add  
**0:13:05-0:13:08:**  inputs to it.  It's managed during volcanic cataclysms, ice ages, slammed by asteroids.  There's been huge massive extinctions.  
**0:13:17-0:13:20:**  Think about the last massive extinction before this prior one.  They said like 75, 80% or something like that of all life on Earth disappeared.  And when that asteroid hit the Yucatan, probably a wall of heat, some 8,000 degrees, roars  
**0:13:34-0:13:35:**  around the planet.  Stuff burns to a crisp.  And yet look what came out of it.  
**0:13:38-0:13:41:**  The most amazingly fertile soils that we've ever experienced.  A huge diversity of animals all over the place and plant life, rain forests and arctic tundra  and boreal forests.  
**0:13:50-0:13:52:**  And it did it all.  It increased the fertility of soils and had this amazing proliferation of life with zero  help from us, period.  
**0:14:01-0:14:05:**  That is an unstoppable force of nature.  And I happen to invest in that and I trust that 100,000 times more than I trust something  from a bottle that you put with water and spray all over everything.  
**0:14:16-0:14:20:**  So back to the definition.  Restoration agriculture is ecological restoration of a particular kind.  We do ecological restoration.  
**0:14:28-0:14:34:**  We mimic the regionally adapted plant community types.  And then we cherry pick out of that a selection of species that provide food, fuels, medicines  or fibers.  
**0:14:41-0:14:48:**  Then we strive to manage that ecosystem with the same types of disturbance regime that  it would have been managed naturally during its whole entire life cycle.  And so what I have found is the fact that my input costs have almost disappeared.  
**0:15:04-0:15:11:**  Yields per individual crop have gone down below what the chemical people are getting.  But it doesn't matter because the input costs have gone so far down that the spread between  inputs and actual yields is bigger.  
**0:15:22-0:15:26:**  And it may not pay me $85 million a year salary.  But what it does, and this is key to the whole thing, is there is enough of a cash flow coming  off of that system, one, to feed the family that is there, to supply a surplus of food  
**0:15:36-0:15:38:**  going out into the market.  And I have sold all of the produce that we have grown here wholesale and I have done  it on purpose.  
**0:15:43-0:15:48:**  Because this is not a niche specialty market that only wealthy people can afford.  This is wholesale quantities and wholesale price for the products that have come off  this farm.  
**0:15:54-0:16:01:**  It will supply wholesale markets, feed the family or families that are managing the property,  and most importantly actually is it's paying for all of the different investments that  we are doing on the property.  
**0:16:09-0:16:21:**  This land right here was maybe 30% abandoned corn fields when we got here, 50% or so percent,  60% pasture that was overgrazed, like small, short as a golf course green, and a little  patch of woods that they had totally logged over so it was like stump sprouts and trees  
**0:16:33-0:16:36:**  that were about 3 inch diameter when we took over.  No buildings, no well, no nothing, all of the infrastructure that you see, the building  that we are in, notice those boards back there, those are milled from trees that I planted.  
**0:16:48-0:16:54:**  So restoration agriculture goes to a site and if you buy a degraded site, it's below  market value as far as real estate is concerned.  Then we use the agriculture, we use restoration agriculture to develop the asset, to plant  
**0:17:03-0:17:09:**  all these trees, to build all the buildings, drill the wells, etc. etc.  So the gain that we get is disproportionately greater than somebody else.  If you buy a beautiful farm, fertile soils and well watered and all this kind of beautiful  
**0:17:19-0:17:21:**  stuff about this farm, you are paying top dollar for it.  And if you expect to go ahead and cash flow with your agriculture to pay for all of that,  you are hallucinating.  
**0:17:28-0:17:30:**  That's very interesting.  Just to get a sense of the economics and the cash flow that you are able to generate, let's  just start with one detail.  
**0:17:37-0:17:38:**  What's the size of your farm?  The farm is 106 acres US, so what's that, 45 hectare plus.  Yeah, approximately.  
**0:17:45-0:17:55:**  Okay, so we've got on about 45 hectares and that is able, that amount of land and the  way that you've planted it, which we're going to go into in a bit, that's able to supply  the cash flow needs, the cash needs of a family.  
**0:18:06-0:18:07:**  Correct.  Or more.  Correct.  
**0:18:09-0:18:10:**  Right?  So that would be enough for one family.  It's enough for more.  
**0:18:12-0:18:16:**  And the reason why I know it's enough for more is because I only do what I need.  And there's plenty of other stuff going on here.  And through the years we've had couples and individuals that have come on, this is part  
**0:18:24-0:18:29:**  of our training program, you come here, we work together side by side, you learn how  the system works, but you have your own revenue stream.  You're doing something different than I'm doing.  
**0:18:34-0:18:38:**  And I don't know how many total human niches there would be available because we've never  really pushed it.  Okay, but there's a lot of potential to just keep adding layers of complexity and of biodiversity  
**0:18:48-0:18:49:**  and of income.  I haven't commercially harvested berries in years.  I haven't.  
**0:18:53-0:18:56:**  I haven't sold any apple cider in years.  There's lots of things that I don't do.  Not because I can't, it's just that I don't need to anymore.  
**0:19:03-0:19:07:**  I do things that I don't, I don't want to pick cucumbers anymore.  Okay.  And so one of the other things that's making me think about is, you know, you're talking  
**0:19:12-0:19:14:**  about a low input system.  And so I'm imagining that that's also means, you know, high inputs, high fertilizer, a  lot of fertilizers means trees grow very fast and income is generated sooner.  
**0:19:25-0:19:29:**  So on your system with low inputs, you are generating income a bit later.  Is that correct?  So when would you start to pay for...  
**0:19:32-0:19:37:**  So there's a whole bunch of stuff in there I just want to shoot right out of the water.  So all of this, you know, the high input and the fertility stuff, nature has never put  in an external input.  
**0:19:46-0:19:50:**  It's all internally recycled and recirculated.  One of the keys to the fertility management here is animals.  They're a part of the system.  
**0:19:55-0:19:58:**  They're amazing that the fertility inputs that they are.  I don't consider that an input.  I consider that that's a yield.  
**0:20:02-0:20:06:**  I harvest whatever I'm selling, whether it's pork or beef or whatever.  Well then to say that, oh, if you go ahead and you use fertilizers, your yields, you  know, you'll get your yields sooner.  
**0:20:12-0:20:17:**  It's like, show me, show me and show me the numbers and show me that it works.  And who says that these aren't producing early because one of the key things that we do,  this is where the human element is critical in a system like this.  
**0:20:26-0:20:29:**  I'm not talking about pure nature run wild.  I'm talking about an ecosystem that the human inhabitants have a direct personal relationship  with and we apply all of our intellectual and our labor knowledge that we possibly can  
**0:20:41-0:20:49:**  to it, which includes a knowledge of how nature has selected for the species that are the  most adapted to a particular site.  So plant breeding, animal breeding is a critical component of this.  
**0:20:57-0:21:03:**  And with the trees and shrubs that we're using, when I first purchased trees, brought them  to the property, first criteria was you will produce, you know, nuts or fruit within three  years of me planting you or you're out the door.  
**0:21:13-0:21:20:**  And the ones that I did plant on the site, I take apples for example, I originally brought  in 249 different varieties of apples.  You will now survive all by yourself with zero inputs period.  
**0:21:27-0:21:32:**  And if you disappear, good riddance because I don't want to waste time babying a tree  that can't take care of itself in a semi-natural environment.  So the varieties get whittled away, well then how many of you people have actually saved  
**0:21:42-0:21:45:**  your apple seeds from the ones that went through that process?  Go ahead and let 90% of the plants that you put in the ground die.  That's a victory if you're looking at the genetics of an ecological system.  
**0:21:53-0:21:57:**  They are not adapted to this place, they don't belong here.  Then of the ones that do survive, they reproduce really early.  Now I'm looking for the ones that reproduce the most.  
**0:22:03-0:22:06:**  Then I, you know, they have the most fruit and the most nuts.  Then I save those seeds and put them in the ground.  And if you just keep continuing that process through the years, you end up with a population  
**0:22:15-0:22:21:**  of plants and animals that just keeps getting better and better and better as we interact  with it with that goal in mind.  And as far as hazelnuts are concerned, you can go to the Upper Midwest Hazelnut Development  
**0:22:28-0:22:31:**  Initiative to their websites.  They have all, they've been researching yields off of a number of different hazelnut growers  at sites.  
**0:22:36-0:22:43:**  And I actually have at least a 10 year track record that they have kept track of continually  increasing the yields from our hazelnuts and the diameter of the nuts from the hazelnuts.  I believe the nut diameter of the kernel itself increase has been 4 millimeters in like 15  
**0:22:56-0:22:57:**  years.  And if you do 4 millimeters, the volume is cubed.  It's a dramatic increase of yield just by doing this process.  
**0:23:05-0:23:11:**  Now what will happen is eventually you'll find one plant that's like super incredible.  Well then you can go ahead and clone that.  And so a cultivar is part of our program, but it's not the backbone of it.  
**0:23:19-0:23:22:**  We're taking care of the whole entire herd.  And then what we are doing is we're bringing in superior genetics from outside, letting  them join the gene pool.  
**0:23:29-0:23:36:**  But you've reached a 4 millimeter increase in size of the nuts plus the increases in  yield.  You've reached that not by adding in extra genetics, by selecting the best producing,  
**0:23:43-0:23:47:**  in this case, let's talk about hazelnuts, the best producing hazelnuts that you had.  You've taken out all the ones that weren't producing a lot and that weren't producing  beautiful nuts.  
**0:23:52-0:23:53:**  And this is just through selection.  Correct.  Correct.  
**0:23:55-0:24:00:**  And how is the word the regeneration taking place through your management?  That's one of the things I love how you used that word because the word regeneration or  regenerative has been used by natural resource managers starting in Germany like 400 years  
**0:24:10-0:24:11:**  ago.  It has had a very specific meaning until it was stolen by people who want to certify farmers  and charge them for it and by people who want to market products.  
**0:24:21-0:24:28:**  And what regenerative means in the ecological natural context is that an individual or a  population or a system has the ability to regenerate and expand its population without  any external input period and it can survive anything that that place throws at it.  
**0:24:40-0:24:41:**  That's regenerative.  So I stand by the ecological definition of what regenerative is.  This is a regenerative system.  
**0:24:48-0:24:57:**  In part we know this is true because, embarrassment moment here, my systems are expanding onto  neighboring properties all by themselves.  All by themselves.  
**0:25:02-0:25:04:**  I've got one neighbor.  There's nothing he can do about it.  But he just he has to put extra spray down on his property line next to me because my  
**0:25:11-0:25:13:**  trees keep taking over.  And it makes sense because you've selected trees that are adapted to that area.  You're imitating the local biome.  
**0:25:20-0:25:26:**  So they're just adapted to the fields next door if they're pioneers, right?  Right exactly.  In this one particular fence he keeps putting fertilizer on and in those trees there's a  
**0:25:31-0:25:34:**  row of hickories with chestnuts and hazelnuts in there.  But these hickories are just like sucking it up.  I've never seen hickories that have had so many nuts in the world before.  
**0:25:40-0:25:49:**  So if I'm adding fertilizer to get those increased yields, what is the cost benefit of that?  How much can I afford to spend at what price of what analysis in order to get what yield  and will that give me an extra benefit in the marketplace?  
**0:25:57-0:25:59:**  If I did that, that's a big unknown.  I don't know.  If, however, my plants are sitting next to my neighbor and he's just pumping them full  
**0:26:04-0:26:07:**  of fertilizer, I get the benefit from his expense.  That's interesting.  I wanted to just go back a bit to the precocity of yields, which is something that's, and  
**0:26:15-0:26:18:**  I'm coming from the perspective, I mean I've just spent the last four months going around  and talking to basically consultants and a lot of farmers that went conventional agriculture.  And I really enjoyed that because I can really bring that perspective in a way to the conversation  
**0:26:26-0:26:32:**  because I have an understanding, I've gained an understanding of how they're thinking.  And this precocity of yield is something that is extremely important for them.  So I just want you to confirm something in case some farmers that are listening to us  
**0:26:40-0:26:45:**  are really concerned about this and I would actually include myself in there.  So you're saying that with your, through your system of planting high density, many crops  and then selecting them, you're managing to have the same precocity of yields than other,  
**0:26:58-0:27:02:**  let's use the hazelnut example, hazelnut growers inside this association that you mentioned,  or are you reaching precocity of yields through other crops because you also mentioned animals.  So maybe you're using, for example, in the first year, lots of pigs and you're harvesting  
**0:27:10-0:27:15:**  them obviously after a year, you know, talk to me a bit about your precocity of yields,  but also the precocity of cashflow maybe.  Precocity of yields, if you want to compare like hazelnuts to hazelnuts with somebody  
**0:27:24-0:27:31:**  else, for one, nobody has bothered, no third party disinterested, you know, university,  nonprofit, whatever has bothered to measure yields here with that in mind.  I'm willing to bet though that plant comparison to plant comparison, my yields are much lower.  
**0:27:45-0:27:50:**  One of the things on the precocity of yields with hazelnut, the forest ag nursery, which,  you know, I run that nursery forestag.com, the controlled cross plants that we have in  that for sale, about 80-85% of those produce nuts the very second year.  
**0:28:04-0:28:10:**  Now, if you've got a hundred foot row of these plants that have nuts the second year, if  you go harvest that row, you might get a cup, cup and a half for how much work to actually  go get those nuts.  
**0:28:17-0:28:23:**  It's not necessarily economic worth it, economically worth it, if you looked at that as an individual  standalone crop all by itself.  However, it's critical to the overall functioning of the system because I want to increase the  
**0:28:34-0:28:39:**  frequency of early reproduction and heavy reproduction and that's how I do it.  I can get the generational turnover because I have this amazing hyper precocity.  I've got three different family lines of chestnut that right out of the seed they go to flower.  
**0:28:51-0:28:55:**  Well, think about what happens for this little tree if it comes up and it puts so many of  its resources, it partitions so many of its resources into flowering, it may make really  weak wood or it might not store enough to survive the winter.  
**0:29:04-0:29:09:**  So I have to pay attention to those really hyper precocious ones, grab that seed and  make sure that that plant stays alive somehow because that's my surrogate uterus.  I've got to have that for the fast turnover of the generations.  
**0:29:21-0:29:30:**  So back to yield, the yield in this system, I don't look at individual crops from the  perspective that an orchard is wood.  I'm not growing hazelnuts to make money from hazelnuts.  
**0:29:35-0:29:42:**  I'm growing hazelnuts as part of an ecological system that includes them in it and instead  of managing the hazelnuts with expenses, I'm managing an ecosystem and a part of how I  manage that ecosystem is with yields and I'll use cattle as one example is those cattle  
**0:29:54-0:29:56:**  are my lawn mowers.  So now I don't have to do weed control.  They are my fertility inputs, 35 gallons a year in a day and I don't know how many dozen  
**0:30:03-0:30:08:**  cow patties a day on every single acre of ground.  And then they also do a lot of disease control.  A lot of people don't really realize how useful cattle can be.  
**0:30:17-0:30:22:**  Those are especially helpful in the apples because they'll prune all the branches away  from down low.  So now I've got like apple trees that have no branches below five feet and you want to  
**0:30:28-0:30:33:**  see apple scab disappear as a problem, have no branches in the lower five feet.  Most fungal diseases in my apples just go away once those trees are stripped from five  foot on down.  
**0:30:39-0:30:45:**  So these super high density mini dwarf plantings, you're creating the perfect conditions for  apple scab to proliferate.  Well no wonder you have to spray X times a week.  
**0:30:49-0:30:56:**  So the benefits of managing it as a system instead of thinking of it as individual crops,  that's where the magic is.  That's really, really interesting.  
**0:30:58-0:31:04:**  So okay, we've talked for half an hour and haven't actually described the system, which  I mean some people will probably be really annoyed about and maybe in the intro I'll  tell people go to minute 30 to listen to how the system works and then go back 20 minutes.  
**0:31:15-0:31:19:**  But maybe it's time for us to give a quick intro, a quick description of what the system  looks like, the tree lines, a minimum of idea of how you've mixed it all up and the spacing  and then I'll guide you step by step into the next descriptions of your farm.  
**0:31:29-0:31:34:**  Okay so the first order of business was to do a little research and find out what this  place has been for the previous 95 million years.  And for the most part, this part of Wisconsin was oak savannah but we're just at the southern  
**0:31:44-0:31:51:**  fringe of the northern hardwoods then where it goes off into boreal forest.  So we're at a nice little intersection but this was pretty much the semi-open oak savannah.  Much of Europe has been that way as well.  
**0:32:00-0:32:07:**  It's one of the more widespread plant community types that's around.  And in that plant community, the tall trees were oak, chestnut or beech.  Now beech is a shade tolerant so it would be a late successional 300 plus years down  
**0:32:19-0:32:21:**  the line before beech was able to come in.  So an overstory of oak, chestnut or beech, all those produce nuts.  Chestnut conveniently produces them every single year.  
**0:32:30-0:32:36:**  Medium-sized trees, they can be up in the upper story with the taller trees but there's  also a diversity of species that goes downward and that's the prunuses from tall cherries  to medium cherries to wild plum which are more shrubby to things like beech plum that  
**0:32:51-0:32:53:**  kind of crawl along the ground.  So we have all these different layers represented by prunus but want to stop here and start  counting the crops.  
**0:33:00-0:33:07:**  We've got chestnuts, oaks, beech nuts, cherries, plums, two different kinds of plums, bush  cherries.  So there's seven different crops right there already.  
**0:33:11-0:33:21:**  One of the understory trees were malice, apples, and their cousins, the pears and the haws  and what's slow, sladorn.  Those are all cousins of the apples.  
**0:33:29-0:33:32:**  So there's, I'll just stick apple and forget about the other ones for this but I've got  pears.  And then shrubs were hazelnut and then shade tolerant plants were things such as currant  
**0:33:40-0:33:45:**  and gooseberry, cane fruits such as raspberry and blackberry.  You're making me hungry.  There's grass all the way around the outside, grass and flowers and all that kind of stuff.  
**0:33:51-0:33:54:**  Then there's vines which here were grapes.  So I don't know how many different things I listed right there.  Yeah, some up to 15.  
**0:34:00-0:34:03:**  And then the animals because now the animal, oh, the animals.  So I've got cattle, hogs, poultry, and then what decomposes all this organic matter are  fungi.  
**0:34:13-0:34:17:**  Every single thing that I listed right there in that plant community type is edible by  me or you can feed it to an animal or you can sell it to somebody else.  A hundred percent of it is edible somehow and for sale.  
**0:34:28-0:34:37:**  And it exists naturally and it has done so for 95 million years without any cash flow  outlay.  I mean, you don't need to spend anything on pest control, disease control, et cetera,  
**0:34:44-0:34:45:**  et cetera.  And it goes through natural processes.  Will I get the same yields as 300 bushel an acre corn?  
**0:34:50-0:34:51:**  No.  So I get, and this is where the agroforester's land equivalent ratio comes in handy.  If I plant only corn, I'll get a hundred percent corn for a land equivalent ratio of one.  
**0:35:03-0:35:11:**  But if I plant say 80% of that is corn and then just 20% of it is walnuts because the  rows would be wider spaced, I can put them closer together.  I can get a 50% stocking density of walnut.  
**0:35:17-0:35:22:**  I've got a 0.8 yield out of my corn, a 0.5 yield out of my walnuts.  That's a 1.3 yield.  Now let's throw in animals.  
**0:35:26-0:35:29:**  Let's throw in all these different other kinds of things.  The opportunities of polyculture systems, we don't really know where they can go yet.  In part, in part because let's take it here.  
**0:35:38-0:35:44:**  One guy right here, I also didn't want to have swarms of volunteers or slaves working  for me.  I wanted this to be like the independent American farmer, which is the way we're supposed to  
**0:35:49-0:35:50:**  be, right?  Well, what can one guy do?  If I'm here full time and working in the system, the most I could really keep track of was  
**0:36:00-0:36:09:**  like three above ground plants and three species of animals and then four or five row crops.  That was about all I could handle.  It's just too crazy busy.  
**0:36:11-0:36:16:**  Well, then as time has gone on and my woody plants are producing more and more, I can  drop off some of the things that I didn't appreciate as much.  Now the succession kind of evolves and so does your business also goes through succession.  
**0:36:25-0:36:26:**  Correct.  That's another thing people like, yeah, but what are your yields?  Show me the economics.  
**0:36:31-0:36:34:**  They're different every year, absolutely different every year.  You've listed all these different species.  Do you plant them on the same rows?  
**0:36:39-0:36:42:**  In the sense, I'm thinking about how you're gaining certain types of efficiencies for  harvesting, et cetera.  How did you organize them together?  
**0:36:46-0:36:47:**  Is it single row species?  That's a great question.  You got to go back to 1995 when I got started on this property right here.  
**0:36:53-0:36:55:**  There was no such thing as an internet.  There was not even such thing as dial up internet back then and phone.  If you were to call somebody out of town, that would be a $5 phone call.  
**0:37:07-0:37:11:**  Who was writing books on this stuff back in the 80s and 90s?  Nobody.  I had zero real input on how can I go about doing this.  
**0:37:17-0:37:20:**  Very few examples of what would work.  I did a lot of experimenting with different layouts and configurations.  Starting with the basic simple formula of doing agroforestry systems, most specifically  
**0:37:32-0:37:37:**  alley cropping, silver wearable, where you have rows of trees in an alley with some sort  of crop.  Well, if your crop happens to be grass or hay, then you graze animals on it.  
**0:37:43-0:37:45:**  That's silver pasture.  So those two agroforestry practices were my most commonly done.  So I would start with fairly wide spaces.  
**0:37:55-0:37:57:**  Some I did single species.  Some I did multiple species with over under type configuration.  So I'd have this one row that I was just out there this morning.  
**0:38:06-0:38:14:**  I had pine nuts, chestnuts, hazelnuts, and currants all in the same row.  You plant them all at the same time and as they grow, they just grow to their different  heights.  
**0:38:19-0:38:21:**  That was one particular place.  There's other places that I did like a two story within the row.  I'm thinking right now after I left that place, I had to go buy this other one and it was  
**0:38:29-0:38:32:**  chestnuts over currants.  Then in the middles of the alley, after I was finished, once the trees got big enough  and it interfered with cropping in the alley, I then planted the quote unquote weeds that  
**0:38:43-0:38:47:**  showed up in my system, which were mulberry, elderberry, grapes, and raspberry.  So I'd plant them right down the middle.  That particular area happens to be home base for my pigs is that that is the main pasture  
**0:38:56-0:38:57:**  where they go.  From June until the end of October, they're 100% totally on wild food.  They feed themselves.  
**0:39:05-0:39:09:**  It takes them six months instead of five to grow up to market weight, but they can feed  themselves.  I never feed them any more than what would keep a 30 pound piglet alive.  
**0:39:15-0:39:19:**  So it's about a cup and a half of grain feed per day.  The reason why I do that is it's bait.  I go ahead and I whistle them in.  
**0:39:23-0:39:24:**  They hear the sound.  They come and they get a little snack.  Last 30 days, I feed them on a trailer and the morning that they go on a ride, all they  
**0:39:32-0:39:33:**  have to do is just shut the door.  There's no squeeze shoots and trauma.  So that configuration, the multiple species, that's probably my favorite area because I've  
**0:39:43-0:39:48:**  got fairly wide spaces on the chestnuts and then I get a separate system right down the  middle and that's what the mulberries and the elderberries, raspberries and grapes and  so on.  
**0:39:53-0:39:54:**  That's fascinating.  Okay, that's really interesting.  So you must have a big mix of layouts and etc.  
**0:40:01-0:40:06:**  But do you do any mechanical harvesting of your hazelnuts, for example?  How do you work with harvesting?  The later plantings are planted so that I can do mechanical harvesting, but because  
**0:40:16-0:40:22:**  this has become more of a seed production breeding operation as time has gone by, I'm  having fewer and fewer sales of nuts for people to eat and more sales of seedlings, which  are the offspring of these seeds.  
**0:40:31-0:40:36:**  So we're individually hand harvesting the majority of our hazelnuts, even though we  could use a machine if we wanted to.  The reason why the machine harvesting isn't as efficient here is because I've got so many  
**0:40:44-0:40:50:**  gaps in the row because as soon as I realize that this plant isn't going to meet my criteria,  I cut it down.  This is just what has just happened.  
**0:40:56-0:40:59:**  I got back from a working trip and all that kind of stuff.  I hit the ground running.  We immediately go out and this year the selection is nut diameter.  
**0:41:07-0:41:12:**  A year ago it was total overall per plant yield.  So this year we're doing a diameter increase and we're bumping things up 30%, which is  a really, really aggressive boost.  
**0:41:22-0:41:27:**  I don't know if we're going to have enough seed to satisfy our nursery demands.  I think we are.  So what's going to happen is now we've marked all the ones that we're going to harvest for  
**0:41:32-0:41:33:**  seed.  So we'll go through and pick those first.  Then we'll go ahead and pick the rest of the population.  
**0:41:38-0:41:45:**  And then after everything is harvested this fall, if I've got enough seed from the big  diameter jump trees, then I'll just chip everything else down.  Before I chip it all down, I grab a bag of wine cap, strafaria spawn, I spread it all  
**0:41:55-0:42:01:**  over the place, then I chip it and next year we'll have wine caps up the wazoo.  Growing wild.  Amazing.  
**0:42:04-0:42:10:**  To understand a bit more about some practical elements, when you implemented this system,  without going into the details of how you planted, etc, because I want to take this  conversation into another direction, but did you do any, you didn't fertilize at all.  
**0:42:18-0:42:27:**  So you started with a degraded corn and soy rotation field and you didn't put any, just  to confirm, you didn't put any fertilizer.  With asparagus, I did.  
**0:42:33-0:42:38:**  Asparagus isn't adapted to the native soil here.  It'll do okay, but it wouldn't do as well as I needed it to and that was going to be  a significant part of my cashflow.  
**0:42:43-0:42:46:**  So what I did is I didn't amend the whole field.  I have a band applied right in the row.  And so on the asparagus, probably every three years I did a little tweak to it and it was  
**0:42:55-0:42:57:**  all certified organic products.  Most of it was calcium and phosphorus, which around here, that's the big shortage we're  on dolomite limestone and years and years of cropping have taken away much of the calcium  
**0:43:08-0:43:13:**  and then they just keep applying regular limestone, which regular limestone around here means  dolomite.  So the magnesium stays behind, they keep shipping the calcium away and you end up having this  
**0:43:20-0:43:25:**  calcium magnesium ratio that's out of whack and it makes a really, really hard sticky  soil.  And so for the asparagus, I wanted to make sure that was amended because it's somewhat  
**0:43:33-0:43:34:**  of a sissy of a plant.  I didn't grow any really fancy produce crops.  I grew really rugged, tough things like cucumbers, green peppers, winter squash, pumpkins, those  
**0:43:45-0:43:47:**  are really rough and tough plants.  And then in most of the pastures and next to the rows of trees that I planted, I used  a single shank subsoiler for years and years to help break up compaction and get water  
**0:43:59-0:44:05:**  to infiltrate and then lots of seed to just reseed to establish the pasture plants that  I want to have.  So I think what's done the most has been the water management and the deep ripping in the  
**0:44:13-0:44:14:**  early years.  I haven't used the subsoiler in years now, I don't have to.  Interesting.  
**0:44:18-0:44:21:**  And so the tree rows didn't have any fertilizer.  Correct.  You didn't put, oh that's fascinating.  
**0:44:25-0:44:27:**  And so they started in some really tough conditions.  They did, yeah.  So you were selecting trees that were adapted to corn and soy toxic.  
**0:44:33-0:44:34:**  Correct.  And actually we grew squash.  I've been a part of the Organic Valley Cooperative and so that's where my produce will go.  
**0:44:44-0:44:50:**  And every grower who grew squash had to get their soil tested for, I forgot what the compound  was, but it's one of the bad, like the really persistent insecticides.  And my soil here tested hot for seven years and so I couldn't, my squash couldn't be included  
**0:45:04-0:45:08:**  in the lots that went for baby food.  But then after seven years went by, whatever, it's either it got metabolized or broken down  or shipped off to Whole Foods in a cucumber or something like that.  
**0:45:17-0:45:25:**  But then once seven years went by, the chemical contamination in the soil was gone.  That's crazy.  And in terms of your management of this system, based on what you're saying, I guess you're  
**0:45:33-0:45:35:**  not doing a lot of pruning to your trees.  You're definitely not fertilizing them nor irrigating them.  Grazing animals through the system and grazing animals are pooping and peeing.  
**0:45:46-0:45:47:**  That's called fertilizer.  So it's not that the system's going unfertilized.  I put clover seed down almost every single year, not over the whole property, but somewhere  
**0:45:54-0:45:58:**  is getting clover if that population is going down.  So if you're seeing clovers somewhere, that's nitrogen.  I was going to use a curse word, but yellow blossom sweet clover, that's putting down  
**0:46:07-0:46:10:**  90 plus pounds of nitrogen per acre.  That's fertilizer.  And then you add cows on top of that, that's fertilizer.  
**0:46:15-0:46:17:**  So don't give me this no fertilizer crap.  It's a fertilized system.  But what was I arguing about?  
**0:46:21-0:46:24:**  Yeah, I wanted to talk about pruning because that's significant.  If I'm driving by this young little tree and it's got a branch that now sticks out, because  say I'm cutting hay or I'm cultivating a squash field, and if the branch hits the tractor  
**0:46:37-0:46:41:**  or hits me and it bends and it goes by, I don't cut it.  Then if the branch is big enough that I can go like this and get it up and over the top  of the roll cage, I don't cut it.  
**0:46:47-0:46:51:**  If I go like this and it tries to poke me and lance me and push me off the back of the  horse, well then, boom, down it goes.  This time of year right now, and now that more of the trees are larger, I travel with  
**0:46:59-0:47:00:**  the chainsaw right between my feet.  I get to the head of a row.  I run down that row and I cut everything that sticks out into the row, you know, eight feet  
**0:47:07-0:47:08:**  and down.  It gets cut off.  I lay it crosswise to the path, spread the stapharia, and I chip it with a heavy duty  
**0:47:15-0:47:17:**  orchard mower.  And so now we're ready to harvest because we have a nice clean mowed place and we'll  have mushrooms next year.  
**0:47:26-0:47:34:**  So most of my management is mowing, chainsaw mowing, and that's mowing.  It really is.  It doesn't mimic fire perfectly because you don't have the heat and with fire you're losing  
**0:47:45-0:47:46:**  a lot of those calories.  I like the idea that I'm converting the 4800 BTU of energy in a thousand pounds of wood,  I'm converting that into biomass, which is now soil fertility and all that kind of stuff.  
**0:48:00-0:48:07:**  But one of the things I have toyed with, especially in the hazelnuts, is if I have a propane weed  burner pulled straight behind me and then a roller to immediately snuff the fire as  I go out, that is actually fire.  
**0:48:16-0:48:18:**  It's not mimicking fire, it is fire.  And so how would they perform differently?  That would now be an added cost for the propane and the roller and the equipment and all that  
**0:48:25-0:48:26:**  kind of stuff.  And I haven't done it yet.  A couple of times I've lit places on fire in part because what's really interesting,  
**0:48:34-0:48:38:**  we've got several different spots on the farm where all these different prairie plants started  to sprout and grow.  I've got this patch of big bluestem, it's like eight foot tall, it's just taken over  
**0:48:45-0:48:50:**  in this one area because I manage it like a savannah.  And we have all kinds of endangered species, rare and endangered species that are out here,  not because I've intentionally done something to help them, but because this is actually  
**0:49:02-0:49:05:**  providing ideal habitat for them.  One of them is the massasagua rattlesnake, which is a little problematic.  You know, I got rattlesnakes all over the place that never used to be here and they  
**0:49:12-0:49:14:**  aren't in a cornfield.  How did biodiversity get there?  How did they access your farm?  
**0:49:17-0:49:20:**  I've seen aerial pictures and it seems like...  That's mind-blowing to me and the one that really kind of really flips me out is snapping  turtles.  
**0:49:26-0:49:30:**  I've got like 40 little pocket ponds all over the place and it was like three years ago,  maybe four years ago, there was this little snapping turtle about this big in one of my  ponds.  
**0:49:35-0:49:42:**  Now we're at least a mile and a half, maybe two miles from the nearest surface water around.  So that thing had to come a long way or get dropped by a bird and snapping turtles have  one of the highest mortality rates of any terrestrial organism that's out there.  
**0:49:51-0:49:55:**  It's like one out of 300 young actually grows to adulthood.  So how on earth did this thing get here?  And then the frogs is at least seven species of frogs that are here.  
**0:50:02-0:50:04:**  They had to hop a long ways.  Now toads, I can understand.  Toads are a little bit more terrestrial.  
**0:50:06-0:50:09:**  They'll be in your yard and your garden.  But things like green frogs, green frogs require perennial water for at least two years.  It's like, where did they come from?  
**0:50:18-0:50:19:**  Good question.  I have no idea.  That's fascinating.  
**0:50:21-0:50:23:**  And we don't necessarily need to understand this.  What's beautiful about this is that you've created and you've mimicked a natural ecosystem.  You've created opportunities and habitats, niches available for biodiversity and it came.  
**0:50:35-0:50:41:**  I'm a niche guy instead of a niche guy, but that's okay.  And one of the things that it's a common question that I get from people will be walking by.  We do quite a bit of, quite a few farm tours right now, which the guy across the street  
**0:50:51-0:50:57:**  who has like 400 acres of corn, nobody wants to go walk around his place and pay to go  on a tour.  Well, people do want to come here.  
**0:50:59-0:51:02:**  They want to pay in camp out or stay in a cabin, that kind of stuff.  He can't do that because he's got this cornfield.  Well, we'll be walking along on a tour and somebody sees this tree that's just like riddled  
**0:51:09-0:51:13:**  with some kind of horrible disease and it looks like heck.  And they say, oh my gosh, what's wrong with this tree?  And I say, who cares?  
**0:51:18-0:51:19:**  Who cares?  I don't care what that disease is because my trees that don't get it are resistant to  it somehow.  
**0:51:24-0:51:26:**  Do I need to know how they're resistant?  Nope.  I just want yields.  
**0:51:29-0:51:33:**  Then there's also a thing that happens that I'll have these really hyper precocious.  I'm thinking of one particular individual chestnut that it will grow like two or three  years in it on a little plant that has a footprint of about one meter of green as it grows up.  
**0:51:46-0:51:49:**  It probably has close to a pound of chestnuts on it.  I think partly because it produces so much that it doesn't really have the resources  to keep going or to resist too many diseases.  
**0:51:58-0:52:02:**  And then partly because it's got to have American genetics in there somehow because it just  grows straight up and it gets the blight, but it keeps resprouting.  And every year I get a dog on anywhere between a half a pound and a pound of nuts.  
**0:52:12-0:52:15:**  And so if you were to say, oh, you can't have an orchard that way.  It looks like somebody bombed it out, but that's one of my most highly productive plants.  And if I had a whole acre of these things that look like heck, any orchardist would  
**0:52:27-0:52:32:**  probably throw up because it's so offensive to what they're taught, especially if they're  Dutch.  Oh my gosh, the Dutch would totally flip out if they saw that.  
**0:52:37-0:52:38:**  It's a mess.  I have another California walnut.  If you're familiar with California walnuts, USDA growing zone eight, they don't grow around  
**0:52:44-0:52:45:**  here.  Well, you plant about a thousand of them per year, year after year after year, not all  of them die.  
**0:52:51-0:52:55:**  I've got two that are about a hundred feet apart from one another in the same row and  I'll take tours by it and the first one has three stems laying on the ground that through  the years it's grown up to a certain height and blown over because the wood is so weak.  
**0:53:05-0:53:08:**  It just falls apart.  And right now it's going like, eh, it's trying to survive.  It's got a million little stems.  
**0:53:11-0:53:13:**  It just looks really ugly.  And I ask, do you like this plant?  Is this a good plant to have if you want to have a walnut orchard?  
**0:53:19-0:53:23:**  And most people say, no, look at all the different criteria of that being a good plant.  It fails.  They don't see the criteria that I see.  
**0:53:26-0:53:30:**  Well, then we go down to the one a hundred feet down below and there's this big beautiful  tree.  You know, it's like easily one foot in diameter.  
**0:53:34-0:53:39:**  I haven't seen any spot of any disease that affects that tree at all.  Hardly any insects.  There's maybe two or three holes in the foliage of it.  
**0:53:42-0:53:46:**  It's just a beautiful, spectacular tree.  Everybody agrees.  Oh yeah, that's the tree to have.  
**0:53:48-0:53:49:**  That's what you want.  That's a perfect, beautiful tree.  That tree, that big beautiful tree has never had a nut.  
**0:53:55-0:53:56:**  It's never flowered.  And it's like 18 years old.  That is a waste of space.  
**0:53:59-0:54:03:**  Where's that little one that falls over is the mother of nations.  It survives 40 below zero almost every single winter.  And the seed that I've gotten from that have populated the rest of the farm.  
**0:54:12-0:54:18:**  And so we have to, we have to like let go of our concepts of what we think should be  and learn how to work with what actually is.  And we find out that it's actually quite brilliant how it's all designed and how it works together.  
**0:54:26-0:54:29:**  Nature is amazingly successful.  You know, it's something that's coming to my mind is that, you know, as you're describing  your farm and the way that you manage it, it's actually pretty intensive.  
**0:54:40-0:54:45:**  You don't give a lot in the sense, non-intensive in the conventional way that we think of intensive  through lots of irrigation, lots of fertilization, but intensive in terms of, you know, you're  really selecting intensively for, you know, productivity yields and lots of different  
**0:54:57-0:55:01:**  parameters adapted to the sites, et cetera, you're selecting for.  You're also, you know, intensively mixing lots of species together, getting animals  involved.  
**0:55:06-0:55:09:**  This is quite an intensive, let's say space.  I think it's information intense.  Yes.  
**0:55:12-0:55:14:**  It's very intensive of the information.  If you look at a natural system, if you've got a hundred different species going on,  a hundred times a hundred is how many different possible permutations of this affecting that.  
**0:55:23-0:55:27:**  So yeah, that's massively intense, but I don't have to do it.  With the selecting, think about this.  Do I have to tell you to go to an apple orchard?  
**0:55:32-0:55:34:**  Here's an apple orchard that somebody's abandoned.  I want you to go pick an apple that you want to eat.  You'll naturally go get like this big juicy, you know, if you like red ones or whatever,  
**0:55:42-0:55:45:**  no bugs, no diseases, et cetera.  We know as human beings what it is that we actually want from a system.  So I just wander through and it's like, wow, I want that one, that one, that one, that  
**0:55:52-0:55:53:**  one.  So I harvest all those for my seed.  That's not really all that intense.  
**0:55:56-0:55:59:**  A four year old can go pick the apple that they want to eat.  They can do genetic selection as long as we save the seed and keep it going on.  And then as far as the intensive, it's not labor intensive.  
**0:56:09-0:56:12:**  Every farmer is going to have to harvest.  So we all share that.  I have more harvests at different periods of time because they have more crops that  
**0:56:20-0:56:21:**  are growing.  But I have large periods of time that I don't have to be here.  I was just on the road working and vacationing from July 12th until last week, not doing  
**0:56:33-0:56:34:**  anything.  So then I come back here.  Now I'm getting ready for hazelnut harvest.  
**0:56:37-0:56:41:**  Well, by getting ready for hazelnut harvest, it's getting me ready for apple harvest, which  is getting me ready for chestnut harvest, which gets it all set to send the livestock  to the slaughterhouse.  
**0:56:49-0:56:56:**  If you're doing like annual produce or row crops, if I'm doing a weed control in my corn  that's next to my walnuts, for example, it's taking care of the weed control for the walnuts.  But I'm focusing on this cash crop because this is my corn or my vegetables, but it's  
**0:57:07-0:57:08:**  taking care of that.  So by taking care of this, it naturally takes care of that, which takes care of that, which  takes care of that.  
**0:57:14-0:57:18:**  And if I just walk away, it does okay.  This is a natural system.  It's been here for 94 million years.  
**0:57:23-0:57:24:**  That's very interesting.  I wanted to go a bit into the one aspect that I find curious to understand is you started  planting a hundred species, let's say, or a hundred, not species, a hundred specimen  
**0:57:41-0:57:42:**  of one species.  And out of those 100, after your thinning, when you would consider the system to be more  mature, let's say at maybe 20, 25 years, how many of those 100, let's use hazelnuts again,  
**0:57:55-0:58:00:**  because we've been using this example, how many of those 100 would you have at the end  of it?  Because if they make it through all my criteria.  
**0:58:06-0:58:10:**  But typically in your system, what kind of have you seen this?  Now, how you phrase that question, this is not your fault, shows how most people are  trained.  
**0:58:18-0:58:20:**  Nature doesn't work that way.  It doesn't work that way.  This individual grows and it does really well for a period of time.  
**0:58:25-0:58:28:**  And then the climate is different.  The CO2 levels in the atmosphere are different.  A new pest comes through, a new disease comes through.  
**0:58:32-0:58:36:**  Now it's susceptible when it wasn't, it used to be the best variety in the world, but now  it's not.  And so now it drops out.  
**0:58:38-0:58:44:**  So when you ask nature, well, gee whiz nature, which one of your species was the best?  That's an irrelevant question.  It's a relevant question.  
**0:58:47-0:58:55:**  What's here is here and it changes and it adapts with reality as reality changes.  And if you're looking for an easy mathematical number to track that, there ain't one.  There's not one.  
**0:59:02-0:59:03:**  Of course.  Oh, it would be extremely dependent on, as you said, of course the years and it makes  sense, but also on the species, on the place where they're planted, on a variety of aspects.  
**0:59:11-0:59:16:**  But what I was trying to maybe understand and I'll elaborate a bit more is I'm trying  to understand if in order for a person to set up a system like this, to start a system  like this, they're going to need to have a pretty good deal with the nurseries.  
**0:59:25-0:59:29:**  Because if we're buying, for example, and that's what I would expect.  So please correct me and tell me how you go around that problem.  But let's say I'm planting here around here, the chestnuts would cost about 12 euros a  
**0:59:37-0:59:38:**  tree.  I'm trying to think about the trees that are similar to yours.  There's more olives and almonds, et cetera, but almonds would be three and a half years  
**0:59:47-0:59:48:**  a tree.  So if you're planting a hundred of them and at the end you're expecting to keep, you're  going to be thinning them gradually as they just don't perform.  
**0:59:55-0:59:57:**  How do you go about that?  How do you just kind of manage that huge cost, which is a very significant cost at the start  of an operation in terms of buying the genetics?  
**1:00:04-1:00:10:**  Now here is where I'm going to defer to the agroforesters that have all the Excel spreadsheets.  And if you go do the Excel spreadsheets and you look at the number of plants that you  put in or the price of the plants that you put in, and then you give it, they run it  
**1:00:18-1:00:21:**  and they amortize it over 24 years or whatever like that, it disappears.  It's a non-existent cost.  It really doesn't matter how many you put in per acre as far as the overall performance  
**1:00:27-1:00:29:**  of the system over 24 years.  However, that's not my point.  My point is, and see how you just said that, it's like, well, each plant costs 25 euros  
**1:00:37-1:00:41:**  or 10 euros because I can do tens, easy to do tens.  So if everything costs me 10 to put it in, you know what an equation is, right?  An equation is an equal sign, which means this side equals that side.  
**1:00:52-1:00:58:**  If you're looking at the equation of a thousand trees equals 10,000 euros, you're looking  at it from the wrong side.  It's still 10,000 trees, your thousand trees equals 10,000 euros, but you're on the expense  
**1:01:06-1:01:08:**  side instead of on the profit side.  A nursery grows these trees from seed, sells them and it marks them up at a profit.  So why not set up your own nursery?  
**1:01:17-1:01:21:**  You buy bulk wholesale, split them up and sell them to other people and the profits  from you marking them up and selling to other people pay for your plants to go on the ground.  Then once upon a time, you'll start to have your own seed coming in or you're buying seed  
**1:01:30-1:01:31:**  from somewhere else.  You grow those plants out and you sell some.  Planting trees on your farm is a profitable venture.  
**1:01:40-1:01:44:**  If it's not a profitable venture, you're doing it wrong.  Now wrong doesn't mean you're a bad person.  It just means that you're not doing it in a way that's profitable.  
**1:01:50-1:01:55:**  You do it in a way that's profitable by buying more than you need at wholesale bulk prices  and selling enough off to cover your expenses or you're growing your own and selling them  at a markup.  
**1:02:03-1:02:04:**  If you want...  That would require getting the nursery license, getting inspected by the state.  It's called running a successful business.  
**1:02:11-1:02:17:**  If you want to run a successful business, the way to not do it is to spend more money  than you earn.  I just showed you right there.  
**1:02:21-1:02:24:**  That is a huge secret to success right there.  Every tree goes in at a profit, period.  That's very interesting.  
**1:02:29-1:02:37:**  That would require the person to have knowledge about nursery, about growing trees and planting  seed and scarification of seeds, et cetera.  Not at all.  
**1:02:41-1:02:42:**  Not at all.  Not at all.  All right.  
**1:02:44-1:02:49:**  Go to whatever your favorite nursery is and look at their price per plant.  What if you buy 500?  What if you buy 1,000?  
**1:02:51-1:02:52:**  The price goes down.  You just do the math and say, oh, and this is what I did with apples at first.  That's when it dawned on me.  
**1:02:57-1:03:00:**  I wanted 100 apple trees.  I looked at the price catalogs back then.  You use paper and you read the catalog.  
**1:03:04-1:03:09:**  At that price, it was going to cost me, let's say, $5 a plant.  Well, if I got 500 of them, it would only cost me $4 a plant.  So I went to an orchardist down the road and said, hey, Mike, you want some plants?  
**1:03:18-1:03:20:**  You want 400 apple trees?  Well, did they have these?  I says, yeah.  
**1:03:23-1:03:24:**  He says, okay, then I'll buy them.  So he bought them.  He was expecting to pay his 100 rate because he was only getting 400.  
**1:03:32-1:03:36:**  Well, I was able to get them a little bit better rate, but I can mark it up enough to  pay for my trees.  So I go to the catalog and I'm about to call the company.  
**1:03:40-1:03:45:**  Then I noticed that if I bought 1,000 trees, it would only cost me an extra 100 bucks.  So I bought 1,000 trees.  Mike paid for 500 of them.  
**1:03:50-1:03:55:**  Now I got these 500 trees left over that only cost me like 10 cents apiece.  Now I got to sell them.  Well, I couldn't sell them all.  
**1:03:59-1:04:01:**  So I planted them here.  And so it required no knowledge of stratification processes of seeds, no knowledge about how  to run a nursery bed and this and that and the other thing.  
**1:04:08-1:04:11:**  I just bought stuff, broke it apart, resold it.  Interesting.  So then you need to have a good network and be able to sell those off.  
**1:04:18-1:04:20:**  But that's an interesting approach.  Not when you start.  When you start, you have nothing.  
**1:04:23-1:04:24:**  Get over it.  You start with where you are and you build that over time.  You develop the business.  
**1:04:29-1:04:31:**  You create this business.  And here's the easy way to do it is if we got all these different, let's say, 50-hectare  farms all over the place, you now buy this farm.  
**1:04:39-1:04:42:**  Okay, now the nursery license is under your name.  You go ahead and you do all this kind of stuff after you're fully planted five years from  now.  
**1:04:46-1:04:48:**  You pass it off to somebody else.  And how many acres of open ground are there on this planet?  We can do this.  
**1:04:54-1:04:55:**  It's not a Ponzi scheme at all.  We can do this for hundreds of years and never fill all the space that could use trees on  this planet.  
**1:05:01-1:05:07:**  We can revegetate the entire planet in 15 years at a profit if we actually get off our  asses and do it.  So now let's go back to economics and say, okay, now let's look at the economics of chestnut,  
**1:05:14-1:05:15:**  for example.  And you kind of pencil it all out.  It's a 24-year return on your investment, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  
**1:05:19-1:05:20:**  And it takes all these different inputs.  Well, my inputs all go away.  And then the initial planting stock is put in at a profit.  
**1:05:27-1:05:30:**  So I now have a nursery business that's profitable.  I have a cattle business that's profitable.  You know, the hogs are profitable and the trees are profitable in part because I don't  
**1:05:37-1:05:38:**  do a darn thing to it.  Oh, but your pests and diseases go through the roof.  Yes, they do.  
**1:05:42-1:05:46:**  But I'm now doing genetic selection to select against the ones that are susceptible.  So now I have all this surplus wood that I've got to somehow get rid of.  So I either make it into boards behind me, burn it in a wood stove to keep me warm in  
**1:05:54-1:05:59:**  the wintertime, or turn it into mushrooms that I can eat, feed the pigs, or sell to  people.  It's like, and you wonder why somebody just can't make it pencil out when they're trying  
**1:06:04-1:06:09:**  to look at one crop and see that that one crop pays for absolutely everything and you  need the tractor, the sprayer, the this tool, that tool, and all that kind of stuff.  That is the wrong way to do it like an ecosystem.  
**1:06:19-1:06:26:**  The value in your business is really the interactions, the recycling, right?  In the sense that's what you were explaining earlier on, the fact that you can just make  a chestnut, for example, thin it, and you can create mushrooms with it, or you can feed  
**1:06:35-1:06:36:**  an animal with it.  And you do that on so many interactions on so many different levels.  This is what builds the resilience, the low costs, and therefore the high relative profitability.  
**1:06:45-1:06:49:**  Yeah, it's the whole system that is the most significant.  And there's a lot of people say, oh, show me somebody who's done your systems.  Like, well, there really aren't very many people who've done the whole system.  
**1:06:55-1:06:59:**  People go in and they'll cherry pick and then they'll look, oh, chestnut, look.  And they go get fixated on chestnuts and then they go extra heavy on chestnuts.  Well then they don't get all of the synergistic benefits of managing a system because they  
**1:07:08-1:07:09:**  don't have a system.  Or they do raspberries because your turnaround is like in three years, you're massively profitable  in three years, but you're a chemical or at least an organic spray oriented raspberry  
**1:07:19-1:07:21:**  business.  Why do you think that's the case that there's not many people that have applied the whole  system as one?  
**1:07:26-1:07:29:**  What's your opinion on that?  My current working opinion, which is subject to change once new information comes along,  is I think that what it is, and you've already demonstrated this several times, is you don't  
**1:07:40-1:07:41:**  believe it.  That can't be possible.  It can't be true.  
**1:07:43-1:07:44:**  No way.  And then you look at my place and it looks to most people would look like a mess.  There's no way that that thing can pay its bills.  
**1:07:50-1:07:52:**  It's like, yeah, it can.  Nature works.  It has always worked.  
**1:07:55-1:08:00:**  And all we have to do is figure out how to interact with it the way it works.  And then we just extract the actual yield from it.  The ecologically produced surplus.  
**1:08:07-1:08:09:**  And I'm going to cough a bit.  Let's just use in the US, Eastern US, white pine is a pretty common standard tree species.  And if you're doing a reforestation project, I'm going to buy a piece of real estate, plant  
**1:08:23-1:08:31:**  a white pine plantation and harvest it in 50 years, I'll make an approximate 7% return  on my investment without doing anything.  So we've got numbers for certain specific things that are useful and valuable numbers,  
**1:08:42-1:08:46:**  but it's way more than that, way better than that when we run a whole system.  But the only thing is we have to interact with it.  And I guess, as you said, like when you said, like, you know, I've expressed a few times  
**1:08:55-1:09:02:**  in the sense, not this belief at all, because I do believe and I do trust the things that  you're saying, but I guess that it requires quite a different take on how to fund and  very different to what we see, what we learn and what we study, what we do.  
**1:09:15-1:09:21:**  And so it does require quite a big change in mentality and an approach and also somehow  faith.  Because, I mean, you see what I mean?  
**1:09:23-1:09:27:**  If you're planting all these chestnuts, for example, and you're thinking, wow, but what  if something comes along and just decimates them and then, you know, can I really, will  I really manage to select the right ones?  
**1:09:34-1:09:36:**  I mean, there's lots of questions there.  And that's why most people don't believe it.  They say it's not, they just get to the end of all of their thinking, the way that they  
**1:09:45-1:09:46:**  were trained to think.  And it's like, I don't believe it.  It can't work.  
**1:09:49-1:09:51:**  It can't work.  And then the whole, our industry is set up this way.  Our universities is set up this way to get you thinking in nice little monocrop pigeon  
**1:10:00-1:10:02:**  holes that this is the only way to do it.  There's actually, I haven't done it yet, but I'm going to.  One of the local universities has done, and there's a nonprofit who's also done it, this  
**1:10:11-1:10:15:**  analysis on how to grow hazelnuts, and they've proven over and over and over again that if  you're growing hazelnuts in the upper Midwest, it's not profitable.  They conclude because we don't have the cultivars that will give us the yields that will make  
**1:10:25-1:10:26:**  it profitable.  They're looking for a cultivar or several cultivars of one species that will then produce  so many nuts that it will pay for all the expenses that you need to do.  
**1:10:40-1:10:41:**  And they have it outlined.  You need this equipment, this spray, this fertilizer, this weed control, that kind of  stuff.  
**1:10:46-1:10:48:**  I'm going to go through using their data.  Say, okay, here's your data.  This is why you say it's not profitable.  
**1:10:52-1:10:58:**  I'll show you that what you're doing and how you're doing it is the wrong way to grow that  crop profitably.  If you want to grow that crop profitably, that's not the way to do it.  
**1:11:06-1:11:12:**  And so there, I just dared myself in public to write that article.  I like that a lot.  That's very good.  
**1:11:16-1:11:23:**  It seems like one of the keys to a successful start is to find the right genetics.  So I guess, tell me a bit about the importance in the logic of restoration agriculture and  the system that you've described to us of bringing into your farm and doing the research  
**1:11:34-1:11:39:**  of finding the right genetics that are, nowadays we have cultivars of, I'm more familiar with  Mediterranean climate, but we have cultivars of almonds that have been really pushed to  and bred within a system of high intensive inputs.  
**1:11:48-1:11:54:**  And so if I take some of these cultivars, it may not necessarily be doing myself a favor  and I may be setting myself back as compared to if I was to find the rustic cultivars.  So how would you advise people on that?  
**1:12:02-1:12:08:**  The mass selection process has a very specific protocol and you do all the research that  you can to find all the characteristics in that almond that you're looking for.  Don't disregard the modern varieties because they have serious hardcore genetics that are  
**1:12:19-1:12:21:**  really, really useful.  They've just been bred in a context that isn't nature.  Well, mass selection starts with grabbing genetics from all over the place.  
**1:12:30-1:12:33:**  You bring it together and then you go ahead and you plant them together.  Well then what I've done and what natural planting would do if you're just going out  and reforesting something is you just put them in there and you ignore them.  
**1:12:43-1:12:47:**  That's what the strategic total utter neglect, STUN, that's what that means.  Get them established for a year or two and then ignore them and if they die, you're not  interested.  
**1:12:52-1:12:58:**  But if you're going, like say three years, I bet you if you planted 250 different almond  varieties you're going to have a handful that flower next year.  Those are the ones that you now focus on.  
**1:13:04-1:13:09:**  You get those cross pollinated and you start your own breeding program.  We don't know the ideal genetics.  Go to somebody who has already been doing mass selection breeding like the Forest Agriculture  
**1:13:17-1:13:19:**  Nursery.  You know that they have been mass selected breeding.  They have cultivars but that's not the point.  
**1:13:27-1:13:30:**  It's the population that matters, not the individual.  And so go to somebody who's already doing mass selection breeding, start there and then  bring in everything else from everywhere else.  
**1:13:37-1:13:41:**  There's actually two of my apple varieties are more modern apple varieties that were  bred at Purdue with one pollen grain and one flower and bagged and you pray for 10 years  and look at it and that's Priscilla and Liberty.  
**1:13:49-1:13:53:**  Those are incredible apple trees hardly anything bothers.  The other things, the other ones are ones that I've discovered.  Some are heritage, some are modern and four of them are varieties that I selected myself  
**1:14:02-1:14:04:**  from my own seedlings.  So if I were close to you, if I were let's say 50 miles from your place, could I just  rely on your genetics?  
**1:14:11-1:14:15:**  Could I just say, oh he's already selected them so I'm just going to use Mark's genetics  or should I go through the process of again of getting a wide variety because this is  also, I mean some people can be a bit overwhelmed by the amount of work that that would entail  
**1:14:26-1:14:31:**  and the amount of, again finding all these things and knowing where to look and etc.  This can be something quite challenging for somebody.  So could we just rely on you?  
**1:14:36-1:14:41:**  So what you just, the way you just asked that question, that's a classic landowner and that's  the reason why most of the people that I've worked with don't have a complete system planted  because they're like yeah but I'm not going to do the whole thing.  
**1:14:49-1:14:51:**  So you go do part of the thing.  Well nature itself as a whole complete system requires nothing from us whatsoever.  Once you start to make decisions and I'm not going to do the whole system, you will now  
**1:15:02-1:15:04:**  have inputs which is fine.  There's actually an organic apple grower up the road who started with this organic orchard,  orchard style and you know poo-pooed my work for years and years and years until he finally  
**1:15:15-1:15:17:**  said, well hang on a second.  You're onto something.  So we started experimenting with polycultures and now it's a certified organic polyculture  
**1:15:23-1:15:25:**  you know beautiful wild place.  He's got extra enterprises that have started on the farm and he has a regular spray regimen.  And so there's going to be all these different halfway between this and that.  
**1:15:37-1:15:44:**  So would I recommend you rely entirely on forest ag for your genetics?  For the genetics?  No.  
**1:15:46-1:15:47:**  For the plants?  Yes.  We'll give you a deal on that and we'll source the other plants for you.  
**1:15:50-1:15:55:**  You just say what you want because we buy bulk wholesale from other nurseries and we'll  split them up and send them your way.  So yeah come to forestag.com order your trees, except we can't ship to Europe.  
**1:16:02-1:16:04:**  We have actually so many listeners from the US.  Many people will be actually pretty close to you and that would be relevant.  But I'm going to do that idea that you said and do that genetic work.  
**1:16:12-1:16:13:**  There you go.  I think that with almonds because I love almonds and I think that would be really, really interesting.  You mentioned now something that I wanted to talk about and that is, let's say that  
**1:16:22-1:16:27:**  the compromise is between a full system but still using a polyculture.  And so maybe we could, you already explained that you would probably have more inputs.  Maybe we can just break that down a bit more.  
**1:16:35-1:16:38:**  If we have somebody coming here and says, yeah, okay, that's all great, but I only want  to use three species.  He'll still do, he or she, sorry, will still do the whole work of sourcing lots of genetics  
**1:16:46-1:16:50:**  and from many different places and putting them together and thinning, etc.  He or she still follows that process, but it's only three species.  What can we expect from that?  
**1:16:58-1:17:02:**  What kind of performance can we expect from a more simplified system like this?  That it'll do better over time as that selection process continues.  That's what you're doing is you're selecting for the ones that are doing well on your property  
**1:17:12-1:17:15:**  and you will continue to improve the yields from that system.  The fact that there's only, let's say two or three species doesn't really matter because  you've mentioned you have 15 species there.  
**1:17:22-1:17:26:**  Well, I won't say, yeah, I won't say it doesn't matter.  I'm just saying that once you start doing that breeding work within those particular  three species, that system's going to do better through time.  
**1:17:34-1:17:37:**  Will it have all of the things involved with it to help it to do everything?  We don't know.  One of the things also that does matter is scale.  
**1:17:42-1:17:48:**  We'll use it for pest control, for example, and it matters for breeding.  If I have cucumbers, for example, I'm growing cucumbers.  If I've got cucumber beetles that come into my population, this is what happened with  
**1:17:57-1:18:02:**  me at about year three or year four, finally cucumber beetles started to be really, really,  really an economic hassle and I'm not going to spray.  I'm not going to spray.  
**1:18:07-1:18:12:**  Then it was like year four to five, all of a sudden their populations dropped way, way,  way, way, way, way down.  Think about a pest population.  
**1:18:16-1:18:20:**  If you're planting only cucumbers, the cucumber beetles, squash beetles are going to just  do this.  Well, if you spray, they're back here again and then they're going to do this and then  
**1:18:25-1:18:28:**  you spray, whether you're using a chemical or organic.  Well, if you do this, now all of a sudden you're up here, way more cucumber beetles.  Now you have enough food to support the critters that eat them and you have enough conditions  
**1:18:39-1:18:44:**  that are such that they're overpopulated and they get diseases and then they fall away.  You won't get into the control phase until you go through the catastrophic loss phase.  That's simple population dynamics and there's math for just about everything.  
**1:18:54-1:19:03:**  If you do that in a suburban lot, you've got a 20-foot diameter patch of cucumbers, you'll  never be able to break through into that level where you have enough to feed the diseases  and the other things that come to eat it.  
**1:19:11-1:19:16:**  What you've created is a refuge for all these pests to come to because you're not spraying  anything.  There needs to be a certain scale for ecological processes to really kick in and they're different  
**1:19:24-1:19:26:**  from a fruit fly to a redwood.  There's different time scales involved with that.  Also with genetics, there's a couple of different seed companies in the US that have networked  
**1:19:35-1:19:38:**  growers that are growing vegetable seed and you're growing it here and there and here  and there.  They work with small growers and they pride themselves in the fact that they're working  
**1:19:42-1:19:43:**  with small growers.  Acorn squash is a crop that I'm really familiar with.  I grew it for 25 years commercially.  
**1:19:49-1:19:56:**  In order to get all of the genes to express in acorn squash, you need approximately 40  acres of acorn squash to get all those genes to express.  Then you go through and you select the ones that are the type that you want.  
**1:20:05-1:20:11:**  Then they also get many of these off types because that's a critical part of that whole  gene pool and then they bring that back in.  If you have a five acre plot and you're saving your seed for acorn squash, for example, and  
**1:20:20-1:20:22:**  then this person over here grew the same variety.  Let's use table ace was my favorite variety.  You're growing table ace on five acres and 20 other growers are growing table ace on  
**1:20:28-1:20:29:**  five acres.  Now, years down the line, your table ace looks different than mine.  How is that possible?  
**1:20:34-1:20:39:**  Because we didn't have enough in one area to express all of those genes and we lost  traits.  Very interesting.  
**1:20:41-1:20:46:**  What you're saying, it kind of reminds me of the importance for anybody that's going  to go into this system to have studied ecology.  Not studied, I'm not saying necessarily at university.  
**1:20:52-1:20:57:**  I'm just saying to have an understanding of ecology because you're basically really working  with ecological patterns and ecological knowledge instead of knowledge of how to spray, how  to fertilize, which is, I mean, I've got so many books up there about how to fertilize.  
**1:21:09-1:21:10:**  I've got some about ecology.  Dorian, I've got your book there as well.  They're always inspiring, but it seems like the basis of the knowledge that one would  
**1:21:16-1:21:21:**  need to get involved with this kind of agricultural approach.  A basic ecological understanding, if you're to do it and steer it successfully, is important.  One way to get it is to go to restoringagriculture.com and sign up for my beta course.  
**1:21:34-1:21:39:**  It was a series of 80 or so webinars that I did.  What it is, it's a college level ecology curriculum cherry picked to pick the things that a farmer  would need to know and want to know.  
**1:21:49-1:21:56:**  Going from how to get started to genetic selection to managing succession through time.  There's special things in there and how I've done asparagus and how to mulch 40 acres all  at once.  
**1:22:07-1:22:08:**  Restoringagriculture.com.  Restoringagriculture.com, perfect.  We're going to put that in the notes below for people to have easy access to.  
**1:22:18-1:22:19:**  That's interesting.  I want to just pull that logic of the polyculture one step further.  Imagine I'm very interested in walnuts and I'm going to follow your approach in terms  
**1:22:28-1:22:34:**  of the breeding and in terms of planting densely, selecting and thinning, but I just want walnuts.  Is that something that, what's the value in that?  What would you expect would happen if I just had an alley cropping system with my grains  
**1:22:42-1:22:43:**  in between or my animals?  Maybe it would be a silver partial system and I would just go full on with walnuts and  walnut selection.  
**1:22:50-1:22:51:**  Is that worth it?  Your walnuts will be different than somebody else's walnuts because you're putting them  in a very specific set of conditions to which the gene pool adapts and it changes through  
**1:23:03-1:23:04:**  time.  Actually, what's interesting is there are certain species that actually form pure stands  in nature.  
**1:23:10-1:23:11:**  Beech is one of them.  Beech will go in and it will exclude almost everything else.  It's used to pure stands.  
**1:23:15-1:23:20:**  Walnuts is another one, at least here in North America, it will form thickets that carpet  the ground for miles in certain places.  There are some species that are actually more appropriate to have those in more reduced  
**1:23:30-1:23:31:**  systems.  Sugar cane, believe it or not, is another one.  Sugar cane is like this grass with rhizomes that takes over your lawn.  
**1:23:39-1:23:43:**  Walnuts is one of these kind of 50-50 because it has the jugulones in the roots.  It excludes a lot of species.  It is a less biodiverse system to begin with, so it's not as bad doing just straight walnuts.  
**1:23:53-1:24:00:**  I was actually walking through my butternut and my heart nut planting today and I was  kind of thinking the same thought.  Is this diverse enough or can I go ahead and remove these things and make it less diverse?  
**1:24:08-1:24:10:**  Do I have the answers to that?  No, but you know how I learn those answers?  I go do something and I accept feedback.  
**1:24:16-1:24:21:**  If it knocks things back, it's like well, I'll re-increase the diversity.  Once you've got the system up and running, there's not one individual plant that I'm  depending on for my income.  
**1:24:27-1:24:28:**  It's the whole system that works.  If one all of a sudden drops way down because I screwed up, something else will compensate  or I can shift an emphasis to something I don't do anymore like cut flowers.  
**1:24:38-1:24:42:**  I don't harvest and sell cut flowers anymore because I don't have to.  Did the flowers go away?  No, they're all over the place.  
**1:24:44-1:24:46:**  I'm looking at like two or three acres of them.  They're beautiful.  So I can go back to doing something that I used to do.  
**1:24:51-1:24:57:**  I've got the ability to adapt and adjust just wired into the system.  A common scenario is a farmer that currently has a system set up, maybe an orchard set  up, and let's imagine a case of a walnut orchard planted eight by eight or nine by nine, and  
**1:25:11-1:25:16:**  is looking to start to incorporate alternative methods because this farmer is noticing that  there's some issues with the current system.  Have you had any cases or how would you advise a farmer going through a transition towards  
**1:25:27-1:25:32:**  the type of agriculture that we've been talking about now, restoration agriculture?  Would you advise to diversify that orchard, cut everything, start again?  How do we go about a transition?  
**1:25:37-1:25:41:**  That's actually most of the work that I do as restoration agriculture development is  helping farmers to transition from where they are now to where they want to go with it.  It ends up being fairly custom designed per operator.  
**1:25:51-1:25:55:**  It depends on a lot of things that we don't even have time to get into, but if it's walnut,  first thing to know is, well, what's the plant community type?  What are the different species that like to be with walnuts?  
**1:26:05-1:26:11:**  Just offhand, all your prunuses, your cherries and plums, raspberries and grapes.  Actually how I got started doing my walnuts this way is I was at this tri-state forestry  workshop is what it was.  
**1:26:19-1:26:22:**  I went to this one workshop on how to get rid of raspberries in your walnuts.  Another workshop, how to get rid of grapes in your walnuts.  Another one, how to get rid of wild cherry in your walnuts, how to get rid of elderberries  
**1:26:28-1:26:29:**  in your walnuts.  So, well, if you have a certain way of managing your system, if you've got rows or you're  treating them like individual trees, if they're like individual trees, you can plant right  
**1:26:39-1:26:44:**  at the base of the tree with something that's adapted to that plant community type and it'll  do okay.  What do you have invested in it?  
**1:26:47-1:26:52:**  Say you've got 100 walnut trees, maybe I'm going to get 200 plants.  That means I'll buy 500 plants and sell 300 of them.  These plants go into their profit.  
**1:26:56-1:26:57:**  I put them in the ground.  I don't have anything to lose.  They're going to grow with walnut.  
**1:27:00-1:27:06:**  Some will do better than others and I start my genetic selection from there.  But cherries and grapes, any prunus, cherries, grapes, elderberries, raspberries, currants,  gooseberries will all do well with walnut.  
**1:27:21-1:27:24:**  Planting them online so you could continue to harvest mechanically.  Either in the row, around the base of the tree, whatever fits into your system, around  the edges, people have center pivot irrigation doing the corners.  
**1:27:33-1:27:37:**  It's going to be custom designed to what your operation is like.  Very interesting.  There's something else that I was, as we were talking about genetics and about looking at  
**1:27:42-1:27:51:**  the past and plant communities that have been there for, you suggested 94, was it a million  that you were saying those communities have been there?  The oaks here in North America, they say 95 million years.  
**1:27:55-1:27:57:**  95 million, okay.  And so now we're seeing a situation of rapid climate change and how do we apply this logic  of, you know, bio mimicking but taking into account a climate that's going to be, that's  
**1:28:11-1:28:15:**  changing and that's providing new disturbance regimes.  So how do we adapt to that and how do we model this system around the big issue of climate  change?  
**1:28:22-1:28:29:**  Well, the first thing of course is to go right into the active live onsite breeding of all  of the different perennial species that got on the farm.  That's first and foremost.  
**1:28:33-1:28:39:**  Well then another one is to look at analogs of systems that this might be projected to  be.  This farm right here, we didn't have all this climate research out there but I decided to  
**1:28:43-1:28:45:**  plan for it anyways.  On the northeastern part of the property, I've got a number of different Arctic and  high elevation species and on the southwestern side of it, I have all kinds of American desert  
**1:28:56-1:28:58:**  southwest species that are there.  And so as things shift and change through time, I've got genetic experiments that are  ongoing with those particular plants.  
**1:29:08-1:29:13:**  And one of the things that I keep looking at is when I get concerned about drought,  I just look at you guys in the Mediterranean, it's like how the heck have these trees survived  as long as they have in the Mediterranean?  
**1:29:20-1:29:24:**  Then as soon as I get scared that oh my gosh, the Mediterranean is going to run into trouble.  Well then you go to just, wow, how about like monsoon season type African species?  It's like you're just going to have to do some assisted migration ahead of time and  
**1:29:34-1:29:37:**  what happens when you do the assisted migration ahead of time, you're going to have higher  losses because the plants aren't adapted to now.  They might be adapted to 20 years from now, 30 years from now but start the process right  
**1:29:44-1:29:45:**  now.  So this is the process that I've started on and believe it or not, here I am in a part  of North America where we regularly get to minus 40.  
**1:29:56-1:30:01:**  Minus 40 is the same whether it's Fahrenheit or Celsius.  My two favorite breeding projects right now, coffee and chocolate.  You planted those on your farm?  
**1:30:09-1:30:14:**  I have planted them in areas where I'm rapidly accelerating the selection process to get  them to be more cold hardy.  Am I doing it with one pollen grain and one flower?  
**1:30:19-1:30:20:**  No, it's mass selection.  You're planting seeds or you're planting seeds I guess?  Correct.  
**1:30:25-1:30:26:**  Seeds and seedlings.  Phenomenal.  I mean this conversation has been so based around breeding and planting and selection  
**1:30:32-1:30:38:**  but I guess that's like the main knowledge necessary to make this work is around this,  it's around ecology of course we've discussed that but it's around breeding.  And here you go back to the simplified view of reality whereas there's got to be one pillar,  
**1:30:47-1:30:50:**  there's a pillar, there's a central pillar.  Nature is a system of cyclical interacting cycles.  There is no one thing that's going to make it work.  
**1:30:59-1:31:02:**  If there is one thing that's going to make it work is water and we haven't even touched  on water.  If you aren't managing the water that comes out of the sky and lands on your property,  
**1:31:08-1:31:11:**  that's the fundamental thing because that's the one thing that we know that plants on  planet earth can't live without water.  So there is no one central pillar.  
**1:31:17-1:31:18:**  There isn't.  Breeding is very important.  I have to take that back but basically when I think about this I don't think about one  
**1:31:25-1:31:30:**  pillar holding onto everything, I'm just thinking about the difference between the conventional  approach and the approach that you are demonstrating in your farm and the breeding work is one  of the fundamentals where as a conventional farmer you export that to universities and  
**1:31:46-1:31:48:**  you export that to somebody else but you are actually practicing that.  So that's the way I would rephrase it and I would say it.  I'm not saying that it's obviously this conversation has demonstrated the ability to use the complexity  
**1:31:58-1:32:02:**  of nature to create resilience in different ways and I hope that listeners have understood  that correctly and I'm sure that they have.  And like I said with the genetic selection, it's as difficult that a four year old can  
**1:32:10-1:32:11:**  figure it out.  It's just how human beings have interacted with their plants since the dawn of time.  The time has come that we have to stop exporting our knowledge and our skill and our expertise  
**1:32:21-1:32:26:**  as farmers and giving that power to experts.  It's not theirs.  They have no idea.  
**1:32:28-1:32:32:**  Their math, and this is what drives me nuts about a lot of these people doing all these  equations, look see the math works right and as long as you go ahead and say oh yeah the  math works right, see we're right and we have PhDs and you don't.  
**1:32:39-1:32:41:**  It's like yeah but you know what?  Your math is so incredibly accurate.  You're exactly right and you have no f***ing idea what you're doing.  
**1:32:47-1:32:51:**  You have no idea how to grow this plant, to live with this plant, to manage this ecosystem  through time.  You're too busy doing math.  
**1:32:54-1:33:03:**  I'm not saying that that's wrong or we shouldn't do it, it's that that is not the answer.  Nature is a compounded system of systems within systems and it is a, there are so many variables  involved that you won't be able to do the math that's so complex.  
**1:33:14-1:33:20:**  Yet a four year old can do the genetic work of all these universities and researches just  by picking the fruit that he wants to eat or she wants to eat or they want to eat.  