---
title: #46 How can regenerative agriculture be scaled into the food industry supply chain?
---

### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2022-09-26)  

**0:00:00-0:00:16:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:23-0:00:27:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  these challenges.  
**0:00:33-0:00:38:**  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Hello and welcome to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:00:46-0:00:51:**  I'm your host Dimitri and today we have a special episode for you.  Two weeks ago we attended the Regenerative Agriculture and Food Systems Summit organized  by Kiasco Research to catalyze a regenerative transition in the food industry.  
**0:01:01-0:01:05:**  The event was attended by large corporations such as Nestlé, Unilever and Yara as well  as numerous companies and organizations that work actively with Regen Ag on the ground.  We attended the conference as media partners as part of our mission to explore the different  
**0:01:15-0:01:22:**  dimensions of regenerative agriculture, producing many interviews with a variety of summit attendees.  The objective of this episode is to try and understand the value of the strategies being  implemented by large corporations as well as the way in which technical and specialized  
**0:01:30-0:01:33:**  companies are working to scale Regen Ag.  Whilst many of you who work actively in this space may not feel aligned with some of the  companies we have interviewed, we believe in the value of having open and objective  
**0:01:42-0:01:49:**  conversations with all players in the field in order for us to form our own opinions.  We believe that the food corporations, whether we like it or not, are hugely influential  in the food system today and must be considered if we are to rapidly scale regenerative agriculture.  
**0:02:00-0:02:04:**  So we had a fantastic time at the conference and we would like to thank everybody who took  time to talk to us and we really hope that you enjoy the episode.  Hello Anne-Sophie, thanks for talking to us today.  
**0:02:12-0:02:14:**  Maybe you could tell us a bit about what's Spreur Proger.  Yes, Spreur Proger is a big up.  We were founded in 2008 and we are a project developer involved in nature-based solution  
**0:02:23-0:02:30:**  projects, agroforestry, regenerative agriculture and we work directly with the farming communities  inside companies' supply chain.  And our main focus is to address key corporate commitments such as SBTI while delivering  
**0:02:41-0:02:48:**  a positive impact on the field regarding carbon, biodiversity, soil, water, but also human  life and how we produce the food we need.  Okay, amazing, that's really interesting.  
**0:02:55-0:03:00:**  And when we were talking earlier on in the hallway you were telling us a bit about how  Proproject is working with changing the supply chain of these companies and this is obviously  a big theme that we're hearing about in this conference.  
**0:03:07-0:03:10:**  So maybe you could tell us a bit more about how that works and how you're actually engaging  with the larger companies in the supply chain.  Yes, that's really the major focus for us, the supply chain and working with farmers.  
**0:03:21-0:03:23:**  So how does it start?  It's first making sure that the commitment taken by the company has a reality on the  field and meets the needs of the farming communities.  
**0:03:34-0:03:40:**  So we do feasibility study on the ground, work directly with cooperative, with the farmers  to seek the interest of the farming communities to understand which activities and interventions  can be implemented.  
**0:03:48-0:03:54:**  So agroforestry of course, but can be also training, creating tree nurseries, monitoring  the impact, do additional activities regarding social benefits or the economy and market  access.  
**0:04:06-0:04:14:**  All of that set of activities and interests from the farmer that we look during the feasibility  study.  And honestly, this is really a major point for success of a project is to take time to  
**0:04:21-0:04:29:**  understand the field and also draw some insights that you can then deliver to your client,  to the company who wants to change its supply chain.  And another key factor of success to change the supply chain is also meet the company's  
**0:04:39-0:04:46:**  strategy because those investments are also very risky for the company, very complex.  It takes time, money and resources, human people working on that.  So it's important that everything that has been put on a project has also value for the  
**0:04:55-0:04:56:**  company.  So meaning that the design of a project will meet, for instance, an SBTI strategy.  So we put into action also other expertise that we have internally, regenerative agriculture  
**0:05:12-0:05:20:**  expert that will work on soil testing, carbon monitoring, various set of monitoring activities  that are able to provide key PIs, measurable results over time.  And another value we bring to the company to secure their investment is to have people  
**0:05:34-0:05:35:**  on the field.  So on the field, we always have the methodology of the project as a team.  And also we train the cooperative technicians to build capacities on the field because of  
**0:05:47-0:05:55:**  course one day we will leave the area and what we want is that the project remains and  is taken over by the community.  So capacity building also is important.  
**0:06:01-0:06:03:**  That's very, very interesting stuff.  You're basically acting like middlemen as well, between, or middlemen, middlewomen between  the corporations of the larger companies and what's happening in the field.  
**0:06:12-0:06:21:**  So I'm curious as to what's the value that these companies are seeing in creating regenerative  projects.  So what's their motivation?  
**0:06:24-0:06:27:**  And you're telling me also when we're talking about your own, you're saying that you're  really trying to focus on this value, what's valuable to them.  So could you tell us a bit more about what is that for them?  
**0:06:35-0:06:42:**  What we see is that most of the companies, especially after COVID crisis, are aware of  the challenge and the need to grow food in a sustainable way, in particular a way that  regenerates ecosystem.  
**0:06:50-0:06:55:**  So I would say that the starting point of a company is the same than any of the people  working on that topic.  Even the special value a company is seeking is measurable impact for their claim, for  
**0:07:05-0:07:10:**  their carbon climate claim, but also all the type of claim that they do for the consumer.  So they also want to prove that their action is real and also that the action is aligned  with the stake we are facing, meaning it can be scalable.  
**0:07:22-0:07:27:**  It's not only a small impact, it can be a big project.  And I think that company wants to see the level of positive contribution they have on  the field.  
**0:07:34-0:07:45:**  So when I say see, it's a mix of reporting KPIs, but also photo field studies, interviews  with farmers.  So it can be very various set of proof that the company will seek.  
**0:07:52-0:07:58:**  And then ultimately, I think that most of the companies want to engage the whole supply  chain.  So they were the pioneer and they developed a pilot project.  
**0:08:04-0:08:10:**  But I think that especially in annual cropping system, the companies would like the other  to join and also have an impact.  It's complex, but I also see companies asking us, can you find other companies able to invest  
**0:08:21-0:08:28:**  with us and find a model that works for us and for our competitors or for other supply  chain actors.  So synergies is an important piece of the puzzle.  
**0:08:33-0:08:34:**  Okay, that's really interesting.  And one of the things that was discussed in the last talk here was about the economics  of creating regenerative projects.  
**0:08:43-0:08:49:**  And in your experience with the projects that you've been working on, do you see investing  in regenerative as being able to bring, for example, reducing costs or bringing more resilience  to the companies that you're working with?  
**0:08:57-0:09:03:**  Is there like an economic value beyond just communicating to customers and demonstrating  to the world that they are actually investing in regeneration?  Yes, so it's not an economic value as we are used to.  
**0:09:12-0:09:15:**  It's not a pure return on investment.  It's more like creating shared value for the supply chain, shared value for yourself as  a company because you will maybe reduce cost of managing your procurement, reduce risk  
**0:09:30-0:09:32:**  regarding volumes and quality.  So obviously, yes, there is a return on investment in there.  There is also the brand image and the corporate value to shareholder.  
**0:09:41-0:09:49:**  But in fact, what you will also bring to your supply chain is its value related.  For instance, let's say if you reduce fertilizer, you avoid cost on the field for the farmer.  By funding REJAG practices, you reduce the use of fertilizer, you reduce the use of water,  
**0:10:03-0:10:06:**  you will improve the quality.  Even it has been said in recent study that the agronomic quality of the product improves  through REJAG.  
**0:10:15-0:10:20:**  So you create multiple benefits and they have monetary value.  The only challenge today is that it's hard to put all of those shared value and net benefits  into a single number.  
**0:10:30-0:10:31:**  Very interesting.  Well, that's fascinating stuff.  Thank you so much for talking to us today and for taking the time to explain a bit more  
**0:10:36-0:10:38:**  about Proprojere.  And if anybody else wants to find out more, where can we find more information about you?  So you can definitely visit our website, but also if you are in Paris, come and say hi  
**0:10:47-0:10:48:**  at our office.  We are very keen in meeting people.  Fantastic.  
**0:10:52-0:10:54:**  Thank you so much.  Hello Roberto and thanks for coming on and talking to us today.  Maybe you can just give us a bit of an intro as to a very short one as to who you are and  
**0:11:03-0:11:07:**  then we'll understand a bit more about your work with regenerative agriculture.  My name is Roberto Vega.  I'm the head of Global Valley Chain for Sinhanta Group.  
**0:11:13-0:11:20:**  Basically my team supports companies, implementation of the sustainable sourcing programs.  We also work with academia and NGOs or other type of stakeholders, more on the thought  leadership piece, so trying to develop knowledge that then is the one that we transfer to our  
**0:11:31-0:11:34:**  farmers in order to improve their practices.  This is very well connected with the whole Reaching Act discussion.  I'm sitting in the steering committee of the Reaching Act program of Site Platform, for  
**0:11:44-0:11:50:**  example, where we're also supporting the organization to develop the knowledge, the narrative, the  KPIs that we're going to be using later to assess practices on the ground.  Fantastic.  
**0:11:57-0:12:02:**  Maybe you could tell us a bit more in detail as to how Sinhanta is engaging with Regen  Ag and what kind of strategy changes from previous activities or the previous strategies  Regen Ag is having on Sinhanta.  
**0:12:11-0:12:13:**  That's an interesting question.  It's an interesting question because I would say Sinhanta has been working on Regen Ag  for many, many years actually.  
**0:12:19-0:12:23:**  Just that we didn't call it that way at the time.  We have been putting a strong focus on soil and biodiversity, developing new solutions,  new technologies that are really in this direction.  
**0:12:34-0:12:39:**  We also are moving from an input provider company into a more holistic service input  provider company where we're really bringing this knowledge also to the farmers.  So not only the inputs as such and only the products, but also all the different elements  
**0:12:51-0:12:57:**  that need to complement those products in order for the products to be used safely and  to deliver the results that they need.  Of course, productivity is on the top of the agenda.  
**0:13:03-0:13:07:**  We want farmers to be successful.  That's ultimately the purpose.  But we also recognize that soil, as I said before, soil and biodiversity play a very  
**0:13:14-0:13:15:**  important role.  So for many years, Sinhanta has been working on these topics.  We launched the Good Growth Plan, which was a way to measure the sustainability impact  
**0:13:25-0:13:27:**  of our strategy on the ground.  We launched it in 2014.  Now we are revising our strategy, but the main pillars remain the same.  
**0:13:33-0:13:41:**  So biodiversity and soil will always be very important elements of our strategy.  In addition to that, to complement that strategy or support that strategy, we've been investing  a lot in different solutions that were not necessarily our core business in the past.  
**0:13:52-0:13:54:**  I'm talking here about digital agriculture.  I'm talking here about biological solutions that we are adding to the portfolio.  So we're really bringing a very diverse and very robust portfolio to farmers with new  
**0:14:05-0:14:12:**  genetics in our seeds, with new pesticides that are very well aligned with these topics  of soil health, biodiversity health, biodiversity friendly products.  And then in addition to that, digital tools to help farmers to take better decisions and  
**0:14:21-0:14:28:**  of course biological solutions that complement the whole portfolio with the possibility of  having much better, much sound integrated pest management systems that is also part  of what we're trying to do today and what we're trying to propose to the farmers.  
**0:14:37-0:14:43:**  That's very interesting to understand how Syngenta is evolving with Regen Agriculture.  And one of the questions that comes to mind is, how much does Regen Agriculture represent  for Syngenta?  
**0:14:50-0:14:55:**  Is it a marginal kind of side project going on at the moment or is it really a core part  of the business strategy and the evolution in the sense, just to understand a bit where  we stand with, how much has it integrated with Syngenta's strategy?  
**0:15:06-0:15:12:**  I would basically say it's not necessarily how much does it represent of Syngenta's strategy,  our strategy supporting farmers.  And what we recognize is that the farming community is evolving as well.  
**0:15:20-0:15:24:**  The situation that we're facing today when we see extreme weather conditions all around  the world, when we see what is happening with the depletion of soils or the loss of biodiversity,  this basically takes and requires an urgent response from the whole industry.  
**0:15:37-0:15:44:**  So if I turn it into different worlds, I would say this is the direction that we are taking  in the ag sector and that's what we believe will continue growing as a trend, not regenerative  agriculture.  
**0:15:52-0:15:57:**  For those who have been working in Sustainable Ag for some years, we see that the topics  are not necessarily different but what we are really making as a big difference is we  need to move from practices into outcomes.  
**0:16:04-0:16:10:**  So I think that the transformation has already started, it will take time to really get the  full adoption but we believe that the core business of the company will be basically  based on a new system where regenerative agriculture is going to be their rule and it's going to  
**0:16:23-0:16:28:**  be mainstream among farmers all around the world.  One of the topics in regenerative agriculture that's often discussed by regenerative farmers  is input reduction.  
**0:16:36-0:16:41:**  So how can we replace inputs with biological processes and etc.  This may challenge an input company in terms of the fact that it may mean less products  sold and etc.  
**0:16:49-0:16:53:**  I'm just wondering what's your take on this aspect of Regen Ag.  Absolutely, I completely agree with you and that's why it is important to revise our business  models and to revise the portfolio of solutions that we are offering to the farmers.  
**0:17:05-0:17:10:**  When we look at Regen Ag and when we look at the elements that compose Regen Ag, we  were talking about soy, we were talking about biodiversity, we recognize that the beauty  of the products relies on how the products are used and in many cases there have been  
**0:17:22-0:17:27:**  misused products, there has been abuse of products.  In other cases we may need to use more products depending on the situation and depending on  the conditions of the farms and basically what we're looking for is the right balance.  
**0:17:37-0:17:44:**  We are looking for a balance where we can continue producing given the situation that  we're facing today, we can continue producing for many years but continue producing in a  way that we reduce negative externalities on biodiversity or negative externalities  
**0:17:56-0:17:59:**  on soil.  Does this mean that we are going to be selling less conventional chemistry?  Absolutely yes and that's why it is important to diversify the portfolio, to look for other  
**0:18:10-0:18:16:**  solutions, to get into tools like digital ag solutions that are really bringing those  benefits and changing the ways of working and the business models of companies like  Syngenta.  
**0:18:21-0:18:26:**  One last question is more relating to farmers and your practical experience in the field.  What are you seeing are the benefits to farmers from your experience and the different trials,  experiments and what you've seen so far, what are the practical benefits that you're seeing  
**0:18:36-0:18:41:**  for farmers of adopting regenerative agriculture strategies and especially looking at economics,  what do you see as the economic impact on farmers?  Does it increase cost, reduce profitability or increase profitability?  
**0:18:48-0:18:49:**  What are you seeing in the field?  Yes and that's a very interesting question because the reality is every system is going  to be different and it's going to be affected or needs to be treated in a different way.  
**0:19:03-0:19:09:**  It's not the same talking about the spices farmers in India or talking about coffee farmers  in Colombia.  I mean they're going to have different challenges.  
**0:19:13-0:19:20:**  What we expect ultimately is that farmers are better off and better off means eventually  increasing their productivity, better off means accessing better markets, having better  conditions with the markets they are supplying to but also reducing the cost.  
**0:19:31-0:19:37:**  As you mentioned before there will probably be reduction of inputs in some cases and in  those cases farmers are going to be benefiting from lower cost.  At the same time there's something that we need to bear in mind which is ultimately this  
**0:19:48-0:19:53:**  is also an economical decision because if we don't do what we need to do now we will  not continue farming in the future.  So if we want continuity for the farmers and for the farms we need to take these actions.  
**0:20:03-0:20:08:**  So if we look at it from a financial point of view what we are basically doing is we  are ensuring that farmers will be able to continue farming for many years.  Otherwise if we don't take these actions basically we can assume that the farm will have a short  
**0:20:20-0:20:21:**  life term.  So this is as I said in the end a clear financial benefit for the farmers.  But yes reduction of course, better markets, better treatment of their soils and of course  
**0:20:38-0:20:47:**  productivity in the end is what we are looking for through these new practices and approaches.  Thank you so much Roberto for taking the time to talk to us and I hope you enjoy the rest  of the conference.  
**0:20:52-0:20:54:**  My pleasure, thank you very much.  Hi Andrew welcome and thanks a lot for talking to us.  Pleasure Dimitri.  
**0:20:59-0:21:04:**  Awesome, so I wanted to bounce off some of the things that we heard in your conference  in the talk that you gave a bit earlier on and around the economics of regenerative agriculture  and it's all capital, you've earned a lot of experience working with farmers and so  
**0:21:15-0:21:20:**  I wanted to know a bit more about what does regenerative agriculture cost for farmers,  what's the impact on profitability, what can we expect?  So what I was trying to explain this morning, you know, Soil Capital by background is an  
**0:21:29-0:21:35:**  agronomic advisory firm, we've worked with farmers all around the world on transitioning  from conventional systems to regenerative systems with a focus on improving farm profitability.  And now we work alongside farmers helping them to earn carbon payments, in our case  
**0:21:50-0:21:55:**  from the supply chain, from food and beverage companies that are also buying their crops.  And so it becomes really really important that we all build an understanding of what  are the implications, economic and practical implications of farmers making these transitions  
**0:22:10-0:22:14:**  from all different starting points, right, you've got farmers who are already experienced  in certain soil health building practices, you've got others who are not at all focused  on that in their system today.  
**0:22:20-0:22:27:**  And what I was trying to explain was that it's very common to understand that ultimately  once you've achieved a more regenerative system, you can expect lower production costs, at  least equal yields or better, and so better operating margins overall.  
**0:22:40-0:22:41:**  So that's the destination.  And the question is really, the more interesting question is, what does the journey look like  from from where a farmer is today, to get to that destination.  
**0:22:51-0:22:57:**  Now in our practical experience firsthand, as Soil Capital, we have seen what we describe  of as the node J curve transition, by which we mean, there doesn't need to be a dip in  either productivity or profitability on that journey from the very beginning.  
**0:23:09-0:23:14:**  And you can do that if you're designing that transition in a really knowledge intensive  way, right, you're looking at the input side of your farm system, you're maybe looking  at your fertiliser and your crop protection package, you're looking for areas where you  
**0:23:24-0:23:28:**  can optimise without taking unnecessary risk.  And you're making an instant cash saving when you do that.  And you can then reinvest that in a multi species cover crop, which unlocks opportunities  
**0:23:36-0:23:39:**  in the following season, for example.  So we've seen that it's possible to, with the right knowledge, and the right approach  to managing risk, make that transition smooth from a profitability point of view, improving  
**0:23:50-0:23:51:**  profitability.  But the message I was really trying to give today to the corporate audience here was,  like I've just said, that really depends on having access to the right knowledge, which  
**0:24:00-0:24:07:**  for many farmers is going to be tough, you know, the advice and the knowledge that they  have available is more often than not going to come from a conventional system, let's  say around them.  
**0:24:15-0:24:22:**  And so their experience of this transition may well involve greater costs up front, they  may well make mistakes and see more risk coming into their system, which affects yields.  And for that reason, that transition does need extra financial reward and incentive  
**0:24:33-0:24:39:**  from somewhere to persuade many, many farmers to go on that journey.  And that's the role of carbon credits, or I don't think you call them carbon credits,  it's soil capital, right?  
**0:24:45-0:24:50:**  Could you explain to us maybe a bit more about how you work with carbon payments and just  tell us what's the, how it works in practice for farmers?  Yeah, of course.  
**0:24:54-0:24:59:**  I mean, the transition we made as a business was that we came to the recognition that I've  just described that for many, many farmers, a new financial incentive would be needed  to persuade them to take the risk of starting to change their, you know, their fundamental  
**0:25:09-0:25:11:**  operating system.  And so we looked around at the different ways that we as a small agronomy business could  catalyse that.  
**0:25:17-0:25:24:**  And we landed on carbon as one outcome of improving your soil health, you end up reducing  your carbon emissions and increasing your soil carbon sequestration.  We do that not by generating offsets from those carbon improvements, meaning a company  
**0:25:37-0:25:43:**  that has no other relationship to the farmer will pay the farmer to make carbon improvements  so that they can claim carbon neutrality over there somewhere.  Instead, we focus on keeping that carbon inside the supply chain.  
**0:25:52-0:25:59:**  So the same companies that buy the crops, the wheat, the barley, etc, from farms are  using our platform to pay farmers to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions at farm level.  Why are they doing that?  
**0:26:07-0:26:13:**  Because those supply chain emissions are actually on those companies carbon balance sheet.  And so their investors care, their customers increasingly may care.  And actually, certainly their procurement people care because what they're seeing from  
**0:26:25-0:26:31:**  a procurement side is more and more supply chain shocks from extreme weather, droughts,  floods.  But they're sitting there with the knowledge that healthy soil, soil with more carbon in  
**0:26:37-0:26:41:**  it is more resilient to drought and flood.  So it's a better bet if you're in procurement to be buying from healthy soil.  So there's a set of logic that will drive food and beverage companies to make these  
**0:26:51-0:26:52:**  kinds of investments.  Okay, that's really interesting.  And just understand that the message that you made earlier on, you believe that this  
**0:26:58-0:27:06:**  knowledge, the knowledge to be able to have a no J curve transition will be fundamental  to scale regenerative agriculture.  Is that, did I understand that correctly?  
**0:27:11-0:27:18:**  Yeah, look, I think still this is a barrier that holds many farmers back the expectation,  the experience, even if they've tried something or just the belief that there will be economic  loss involved.  
**0:27:25-0:27:31:**  And you know, let's, let's be very real, the low margin environment that most I'm thinking  arable farmers, but this extends to others.  Most farmers live with, it doesn't give them a cushion to be able to take that kind of  
**0:27:38-0:27:39:**  risk.  So yeah, I think there are a couple of ingredients for scale that we see.  One is absolutely more farmers coming to believe that that transition can be done in a profit  
**0:27:52-0:27:57:**  compatibility, a profitability be enhancing way.  We're aiming to catalyze that with carbon payments.  Now we're also building the data set to prove it.  
**0:28:04-0:28:08:**  You know, I also think there's plenty of work that needs to happen on the corporate side  to build that return on investment case that I've been starting to outline earlier.  So that much more capital is put to work to invest in these kinds of solutions at scale  
**0:28:19-0:28:20:**  from the supply chain.  Okay, that's fantastic.  I think this is a really good overview as to your work at Sol Capital and also feedback  
**0:28:28-0:28:31:**  from your experience with the regenerative agriculture transition.  So thank you so much for taking the time to talk to us now and enjoy the rest of the conference.  Pleasure.  
**0:28:37-0:28:38:**  Thanks for the good work with the podcast.  I know you've been to visit my team in Belgium looking at the agroforestry work.  And you know, if there are listeners out there, farmers in France or Belgium or the UK in  
**0:28:46-0:28:49:**  our systems that are interested, we'd love to hear from them.  Fantastic.  So where could our listeners find out more about you?  
**0:28:52-0:28:54:**  Just head straight to our website, soilcapital.com.  One of the things we've built, which is quite handy, is a very quick free simulator.  So an arable farmer can plug in the details of their system and just model very quickly  
**0:29:05-0:29:08:**  what kind of carbon earnings they could be looking at through us.  It takes about 10 minutes, 10-15 minutes.  Amazing.  
**0:29:11-0:29:12:**  Thanks so much, Andrew.  Cheers.  Thank you very much.  
**0:29:14-0:29:16:**  Hello, Daniel, and welcome.  Maybe we could start by you giving us a bit of an intro as to who you are, where you work  and what you're doing here at the summit.  
**0:29:24-0:29:25:**  Yes, thank you very much.  And yeah, I work for Qantas International.  We are a consultancy.  
**0:29:29-0:29:36:**  Our focus is mostly climate, biodiversity and water, and we help companies to start  transforming businesses and going from business as usual to business at its best.  So our goal is really to help companies transform.  
**0:29:43-0:29:46:**  I personally grew up on an organic farm in Switzerland.  I studied agronomy and I was also working as a farmer.  So I tried to integrate my first-hand knowledge with theoretical knowledge about science and  
**0:29:55-0:30:00:**  tools how to accelerate transition towards regional agriculture.  Very nice.  So one of the first questions that we have for you is, you know, what is the role of  
**0:30:04-0:30:12:**  Qantas in the regenerative agricultural transition and how do you work with farmers or with corporates  to enable that?  Yeah, we are a science-based organization and our focus in the beginning was life-cycle  
**0:30:18-0:30:19:**  analysis.  So we have a lot of data.  So our goal is really to have good data for companies where they really find out what's  
**0:30:25-0:30:29:**  our environmental footprints in terms of climate, biodiversity, water, and then of course to  find ways how they can transform and then can improve.  And we help companies to define roadmaps, climate roadmaps, but also biodiversity roadmaps  
**0:30:38-0:30:40:**  and how to implement things.  So we don't work directly with farmers, but because we understand the whole value chain,  we can consult companies and help them to transition.  
**0:30:48-0:30:53:**  Especially, a regenerative agriculture is an interesting topic because everybody talks  about it, but there is still limited understanding in corporates.  If you talk to sustainability people, they have good understanding, but if you talk to  
**0:31:01-0:31:07:**  marketing people or supply chain people, there's still a lot of awareness building needed.  And our role is also to build awareness in companies, in communication, and help them  to understand what should be done in future.  
**0:31:14-0:31:16:**  Okay, that's very, very interesting.  Maybe you could give us some examples of some of the companies that you're, or examples  of how you're working with some of the companies in practice.  
**0:31:25-0:31:29:**  I mean, we have a lot of clients from the food industry and one example is not a big  company, it's a smaller company called Familia from Switzerland and they produce muesli.  You know, it's very famous in Switzerland and it's the only Swiss word which is known  
**0:31:38-0:31:39:**  globally.  But this company, they really wanted to embark on a journey where they, of course, they have  a climate strategy, they want to reduce emissions, comply with science-based targets, but they  
**0:31:48-0:31:49:**  want to go beyond.  And their aim is really to do something that is nature positive.  And I think that's something which inspires me because they have an ambition and they  
**0:31:58-0:32:05:**  have a clear view and we, from a Qantas perspective, we can support them with data so that they  find out what's our baseline and what's the potential to improve.  And I think there are many other companies in a similar approach, they want to find out,  
**0:32:14-0:32:20:**  well, if we do this practice or if we adapt our system in this direction, what's the impact?  So the question is always, what's the impact of change in practices in terms of climate  footprint?  
**0:32:27-0:32:31:**  My message is always, well, it has an impact on climate, but there is additional benefit  for biodiversity, water and livelihoods.  And I think if companies understand that there is a win-win-win approach, if they do it right  
**0:32:39-0:32:41:**  beyond climate, it's a huge opportunity.  And we see more and more companies, bigger, small, medium sized ones that are really seeing  it as a systemic and holistic transition and not just focusing on climate roadmaps.  
**0:32:52-0:32:57:**  And from your experience with the clients that you've consulted, do you see that, do  these clients see a business case for regenerative agriculture?  What's their motivations for adopting regenerative agriculture beyond being able to communicate  
**0:33:08-0:33:13:**  or to also, you know, to communicate to clients and to build this kind of bridge there?  I think there is still limited awareness about this.  I think they do it because they're under pressure, because of net zero claims or, you know, climate  
**0:33:22-0:33:24:**  issues or SPTI.  And I think they don't really understand the transformation that is needed in the supply  chain from soil to consumer.  
**0:33:32-0:33:39:**  And we see that there is still room for improvement, still room for a better understanding.  And I think if they just stick on climate, that's not enough.  They need to really understand also social issues.  
**0:33:48-0:33:50:**  And it's a holistic transformation.  And of course, then you need to find connections, you need to find partners to implement something  successfully on the ground.  
**0:33:56-0:33:59:**  Because there is no company that can do it alone.  They need partners.  They need local experts.  
**0:34:02-0:34:07:**  They need to have support for farmers that is on a local level.  And it's about partnerships, big competitive initiatives.  And that's something that's really needed in the future.  
**0:34:14-0:34:19:**  So do you see these companies as being ready to bear the cost of a regenerative agriculture  transition or how are they expecting to pay for this transition?  And I'm expecting that it's going to have a certain cost.  
**0:34:26-0:34:29:**  And to be honest, I think it's not sufficient.  Even if they pay a premium price, if they have some additional funding for farmers to  transition, that's not sufficient.  
**0:34:35-0:34:41:**  So there needs to be additional economic support from governments, from NGOs, and from the  private sector.  And I think it's only in a combination of different funding streams that the transition  
**0:34:47-0:34:49:**  can be successful.  Of course, at the end, the price for the product needs to be better than before.  I'm pretty convinced that there needs to be a better price that is paid to farmers.  
**0:34:59-0:35:05:**  But to have this investment in the systemic change, it's not enough just from the brands.  Very interesting.  And from your perspective, what are the key levers to change, to transition to regenerative  
**0:35:11-0:35:12:**  agriculture?  And by that, I mean, what are the biggest opportunities that you see for companies to  be able to be motivated and to actually create practical change?  
**0:35:21-0:35:25:**  I think one area that is important and key is leadership.  And we need to have leadership, be it in the board or CEO or management level, that understands  regeneration and I call it regenerative leadership that's needed.  
**0:35:33-0:35:38:**  So it needs a different approach and different view on a transition which is long term.  And it's not about quarterly reporting, it's about a 10-year plan, how to improve and transition  to a new state.  
**0:35:47-0:35:53:**  And I think on the other hand, we need more people that are, let's say, supporting this  transition.  So it's about building bridges and to work together in coalitions.  
**0:36:01-0:36:07:**  As we have seen the example from Nestle, Salviva in France, together with Earth Home Foundation.  So we always need to find the right partners to implement something on the ground.  And what's interesting that farmers are willing to make this transition, but what is needed  
**0:36:18-0:36:25:**  is beyond financial support, kind of a positive signal and kind of valuing what they are doing.  And I think there should be more communication and not only communication, but also connection  from brands to farmers to better understand each other.  
**0:36:34-0:36:39:**  It's really interesting how you're mentioning things that go beyond the financial incentives.  As we have heard many times today, a bit of a change in mindset and change in culture  that is necessary.  
**0:36:45-0:36:52:**  Of course, and I think that's not a simple task because human beings are used to comfort  zone.  We like our comfort zone because that's where if you're comfortable, so you have to leave  
**0:36:56-0:36:57:**  your comfort zone.  So the brands have to leave, corporates have to leave, but also farmers have to leave.  But farmers are reacting more positively if they have a role model, if they have a pioneering  
**0:37:05-0:37:11:**  farm in the area where they can really watch and see and really feel what's going on.  And at the end, farmers make decisions not based just on economic issues, but also on  culture.  
**0:37:18-0:37:24:**  And brands need to understand better what's the culture of a farming system in a specific  context and take that into account and find ways how to connect really with people and  not just communicate, but to connect.  
**0:37:31-0:37:32:**  That's the bottom line.  Fantastic.  Daniel, thank you so much for sharing with us your experience here.  
**0:37:37-0:37:40:**  And maybe for our listeners that want to know more about your work, what could they find  out?  Yeah, I'm on LinkedIn.  
**0:37:43-0:37:46:**  So if I'm on LinkedIn, I'm posting regularly if you want to follow me.  And I've written a small book, easy to read, 88 pages.  My goal was that everybody can read it and get some understanding on the server agriculture.  
**0:37:54-0:37:58:**  It's called Feeding the Earth.  And in French, it's called Nouris Latteur.  Thank you.  
**0:38:03-0:38:04:**  Thank you so much.  Thanks so much.  Hello.  
**0:38:07-0:38:11:**  And today we are with Bastien from Earthworm Foundation that's coming to talk to us a bit  about scaling regenerative agriculture.  Hi, Bastien.  
**0:38:14-0:38:18:**  And maybe we could just start by you telling us a bit about your work, a bit about Earthworm  Foundation as well.  Hello, Dimitri and Reza.  
**0:38:22-0:38:25:**  Thanks for inviting me.  Basically Earthworm Foundation is a not-for-profit organization, a Swiss foundation that has  been working for 20 years with the objective to regenerate soils and forests.  
**0:38:35-0:38:40:**  And the way we do it is by working with companies that are buying the raw materials eventually  on the downstream, you know, the big brands or smaller brands that want to transform.  And they want to have a positive impact on forests, on soils, and of course on the people  
**0:38:49-0:38:51:**  who live in rural areas.  And so we started working on the timber initially in the forest.  So we are very close to the forest originally and we've helped working with lots of companies  
**0:39:01-0:39:06:**  that were putting wood on the market and transformed the way forests were managed.  We did that and helped many forest and tropical countries become FSC certified.  And then little by little we worked on all the raw materials that have a negative impact  
**0:39:16-0:39:17:**  on the forest.  Palm oil, soybean, cocoa, rubber.  And then more recently we realized that eventually the key thing is to work with farmers and  
**0:39:27-0:39:28:**  their soils.  And so that's how we've gone into much more agriculture in the last 10 years.  Maybe you could tell us a bit more about how Earthworm Foundation is collaborating with  
**0:39:36-0:39:39:**  these industry leaders in order to facilitate a transition.  I mean we heard a fascinating talk about your work with Nestlé and maybe we can use that  as a case study.  
**0:39:45-0:39:46:**  Yes.  So what we, where we start with companies is always on their values, you could call  it policies.  
**0:39:52-0:39:54:**  What do you want to achieve?  So it's basically their sourcing policy where they will put down in their sourcing guidelines  what is it that they want exactly.  
**0:40:03-0:40:08:**  And what we realize is that when you talk about the kind of forest management that you  want or the kind of agricultural management that you want, you don't find often something  very clear or clear definition.  
**0:40:16-0:40:18:**  What is regenerative?  What is sustainable forestry?  You have a few principles but they are not always compiled into what could be a sourcing  
**0:40:26-0:40:27:**  policy.  So we built on the experience that we had on forests where we basically helped craft  the no deforestation policy by really getting down with scientists and creating a methodology  
**0:40:38-0:40:41:**  to say what is a forest and what is not a forest.  And if you look on Wikipedia you've got a massive definition of what is a forest but  it's not something practical.  
**0:40:47-0:40:52:**  And you think about the guys who are opening forests in Asia or in Africa and you have  on one side the big industries that think forests, in the past we had that in 2010,  the big industries that think forests is just a little bit on the hills and you can clear  
**0:41:03-0:41:09:**  everything and you've got activist NGOs like Greenpeace, like any piece of wood is forest.  And so everyone was stuck without a solution to figure out, okay, how do we define forests  and how do we develop economically why conserving nature.  
**0:41:17-0:41:21:**  So we developed a methodology called the high carbon stock forest methodology, you can find  it on the internet, highcarbonstock.org, which is a methodology that is now used by Amsterdam  declaration, New York declaration on forests, all the company policies and that helps companies  
**0:41:33-0:41:40:**  and investors and anyone basically even operators define how to manage forests in a development  context.  We are looking at doing the same thing for soils, so basically our regenerative agriculture,  
**0:41:49-0:41:52:**  what is a healthy soil, how do you measure it.  And to do that always what we try to do is to get in touch with scientists or practitioners  and practitioners so that we don't end up with something that is very researchy and  
**0:42:03-0:42:07:**  difficult to understand and then we bring them together and we said, how would you do  it in practice, we even get the farmers involved.  So we create a small scientific committee for example to do that and then we test tools  
**0:42:15-0:42:22:**  or indicators that allow us to measure soil health in a way that is scientifically correct  and practical.  And then we make sure that these definitions can be inserted into sourcing policies so  
**0:42:28-0:42:32:**  that when a company says, I want a raw material like that, it sends an instruction to the  upstream, to the producers that is something that they can do and that makes sense in terms  of indicators and guiding and measurement.  
**0:42:43-0:42:48:**  So the next step, so this is really the policy step, the next step to help companies is to  figure out where and who produces their raw materials.  So you have companies like Nestle, Ferrero, etcetera, they source from multiple origins,  
**0:42:58-0:43:04:**  multiple suppliers and for many years through the commoditization of their supplies or their  procurement they don't always know where it comes from, they don't know the farmer who  produces it.  
**0:43:10-0:43:14:**  So the next step really is to get to meet the suppliers and get to know the farmers  who are producing.  And we look there, how are you doing in terms of production, are you far away from what  
**0:43:21-0:43:27:**  is expected in terms of responsible production or not?  And then we can look at always you've got farmers that are producers that are really  well advanced and others that are lagging behind.  
**0:43:34-0:43:38:**  And the idea is how to help and support the ones that are lagging behind and reward those  who are performing well.  So the third pillar of our action is really the transformation and that's where we mobilize  
**0:43:45-0:43:52:**  people in the field but not just our people, we also partner with lots of institutes, associations,  experts, people who have done that sometimes for years, agroforestry specialists like we're  doing in France with Le Planteur Volontaire or various associations where we bring them  
**0:44:04-0:44:10:**  in in a favorable context where the supply chain, the producers, the buyers are all demanding  their expertise so they can come in and work with the farmers and there is funding for  that etc.  
**0:44:14-0:44:19:**  And eventually the last part is to verify because the verification of that eventually  you know this forest is still standing, that soil is healthy is what will allow the whole  supply chain to reward financially the farmers and the producers with premiums, with longer  
**0:44:31-0:44:37:**  term contracts, somehow de-commoditizing the supply chain and creating this long term relationship  between a farmer who produces raw materials and then a buyer who is tied to a level of  quality that this farmer can produce for him, helping him meet the climate objectives etc.  
**0:44:49-0:44:54:**  Well that's a really really elaborate and eloquent explanation of what you're doing,  it's very interesting.  And you know one of the things that came to mind is linked to, there's a certain cost  
**0:45:01-0:45:08:**  to this transition and it can be experienced by the farmer, especially by the farmer and  a sudden risk as well associated with the regenerative agriculture transition and what  I wanted to know is when you're working with these corporate industry leaders, you know  
**0:45:20-0:45:25:**  who is paying for this transition, who is reducing the risk to the farmers if it is  actually happening, how does it play out economically?  So I would say two things, the first one is our work, a bit like a coach or you know fitness  
**0:45:37-0:45:44:**  coach who would pay to help to get fit, we get paid by the brands mostly that said okay  we want to change, we need help, we have decided to invest in our change journey, we need partners  to help us, so a lot of our funding comes from brands who hire us or work with us so  
**0:45:56-0:46:00:**  we can help them transform.  Then the real cost of transformation, I would put it more as a real risk of transformation  because today many supply chain kind of function, you know they deliver raw materials to the  
**0:46:11-0:46:17:**  consumer and that's okay, the thing is we know we are extracting capital from soils,  from people and that cannot be done forever, so at some stage we need to change the course  of things.  
**0:46:24-0:46:28:**  The thing is when everyone comes to the farmer saying you need to change the course of things,  the farmer is thinking yeah nice I will try but if he fails he's the only one paying the  cost, so if I'm a farmer and I'm trying something, let's say putting trees in my field, I will  
**0:46:39-0:46:44:**  maybe lose some production, maybe I don't know if it's the right trees etc and I'm the  only one paying for it if it fails, if it doesn't bring something positive to me as  everyone promised and then there's no one to come back to the farmer and say oh poor  
**0:46:53-0:46:57:**  you, you've lost some years, I'm going to compensate you, it's not happening.  So what we believe is the need to share the risk of the transition, the transition is  beneficial for everyone, we know you can have savings by working more with nature, nature  
**0:47:08-0:47:14:**  can do things for you that will save you fuel, cost, chemicals but to get to that point you  need to take a leap of faith and to do that we believe the whole supply chain but also  the governments have an opportunity to come and support, so support with technical expertise  
**0:47:27-0:47:36:**  etc but also support by investing a bit, paying some rewards, supporting with assistance funds,  some kind of subsidies as well from the state.  I think all the actors that have an interest in seeing the farmer succeed can all take  
**0:47:44-0:47:48:**  a little bit of their share of the challenge, investors as well, they can put money on the  table saying I am funding you to do your transition and if it doesn't work maybe I don't recoup  my money but that's the kind of attitude that we're looking for.  
**0:47:57-0:48:05:**  So we're talking to governments, regional governments, brands of course, insurance companies,  investors and then ecosystem services, finances who could come and bring some reward as well  for the work done and I believe all of them have the opportunity to take a little bit  
**0:48:16-0:48:21:**  of the share, a piece of the backpack on their back to support the farmer.  And is this something that you're seeing being played out in practice?  So the big challenge to do that is that we need to put the actors around the same table  
**0:48:30-0:48:39:**  so that they are comfortable, that each is doing kind of their part because what a big  brand doesn't want to do is to take the whole transformation on its own and then the other  brands are kind of waiting for the farmer to transform and when the farmer is transformed  
**0:48:47-0:48:53:**  now we can buy from him but we haven't invested in the transformation which fair enough but  it leads to potential everyone watching each other.  So the idea is to really proactively around concrete projects, mobilize and for me concrete  
**0:49:04-0:49:08:**  projects are like being sitting around the table and saying okay we're going to transform  so many farmers with so many suppliers etc.  What do you put in and if you put in that I can put in that as well and basically everyone  
**0:49:16-0:49:17:**  does its share.  So we organize that mostly around the rotation of the crops so you know a farmer will produce  I don't know canola, beetroot in temperate regions, canola, beetroot, wheat and barley.  
**0:49:30-0:49:36:**  Let's take an actor from each raw material to come in and to support so that's one option.  The other thing that but it's valid in tropical regions as well.  We work in places where you've got palm, cocoa, you've got nutmeg, you've got vetiver, you've  
**0:49:46-0:49:49:**  got different you know products being produced.  If you bring all the raw material supply chains and the actors that have a stake in that landscape  they can all contribute to the transition to the replanting to piloting new systems  
**0:50:00-0:50:03:**  in agroforestry in particular.  Very interesting.  One of the other questions I had for you is what are some of the key challenges that you're  
**0:50:09-0:50:15:**  seeing to be able to implement and scale regenerative agriculture and throughout the supply chain?  Is it coming more from the farmer side?  Is it coming more from the corporate side?  
**0:50:19-0:50:22:**  What are some of the most difficult things to overcome?  I think there are a few.  I would not be able to point to one.  
**0:50:26-0:50:29:**  I think I will come back to the risk.  The fact that today the risk is mostly taken by the farmer and if I'm a farmer, let's say  I'm 50, my kids are in school or in university, I've got already loans.  
**0:50:40-0:50:44:**  Why would I radically change something that has been kind of functioning up to now?  So giving the appetite to risk and being able to share that risk for me is absolutely key.  To be able to do that, the second obstacle is manage the egos and the view that people  
**0:50:56-0:50:59:**  have of solving a problem.  Thinking that either I do it myself or I let the others do it, maybe we can all do a little  bit and that means being open and being able to talk to other entities.  
**0:51:10-0:51:15:**  So private talking to the public, brands talking between each other, brands talking to their  suppliers.  In another relationship that one cannot get from you, which is sometimes you take a supplier  
**0:51:22-0:51:28:**  and a brand, they're always discussing commercially every cent of the price.  What can we do else than just fighting on price?  What are the things that we can build together?  
**0:51:33-0:51:36:**  And this is this attitude that I think is needed.  And if you do that, then it allows to unlock key things that are missing, measurement,  finance.  
**0:51:43-0:51:48:**  For me these are almost sub-products of the collaboration that we can create.  Amazing.  Bastien, thank you so much for explaining and elaborating on your work.  
**0:51:55-0:52:00:**  Maybe you could tell us a bit about where our listeners could find out more about your  work if they wanted to.  So thanks a lot, a pleasure.  
**0:52:03-0:52:07:**  They can go on earthworm.org, which is our main website.  We have also a page called Solvivant in French,.org, always an S at the end of Sol and Vivant.  And that's it.  
**0:52:16-0:52:18:**  And there you can find different projects.  And of course, if they want to know more, they can get in touch with us.  Fantastic.  
**0:52:22-0:52:23:**  Thank you so much.  Thank you.  Hello, Charles.  
**0:52:25-0:52:27:**  So Charles is joining us now.  Charles Leonardi is joining us from Nestlé, France to talk about the work of Nestlé and  regenerative agriculture.  
**0:52:34-0:52:38:**  So maybe, Charles, you could give us a bit of an introduction of yourself and what you're  doing at Nestlé, France.  It's a pleasure.  
**0:52:40-0:52:41:**  Thank you.  Thank you, Dimitri.  So I'm Charles.  
**0:52:44-0:52:48:**  I'm the head of supply chain for Nestlé in France.  That means I'm covering the value chain from procurement to the delivery of finished goods.  And in France, in fact, Nestlé is very much present industrially.  
**0:53:03-0:53:06:**  So we have 17 factories.  We are sourcing one million tons of raw materials, out of which 700,000 are raw materials which  are produced in France.  
**0:53:15-0:53:19:**  So we have an important footprint.  And therefore, we are very close to our suppliers and farmers.  And therefore, regenerative agriculture is very important for us.  
**0:53:29-0:53:33:**  And if I understand correctly, Nestlé has made a very big commitment to regenerative  agriculture.  So maybe you could tell us a bit about that.  
**0:53:35-0:53:36:**  Yeah, that's correct.  So we have a very big ambition.  So we want to have 20 percent of our sourcing, which is regenerative agriculture by 2025,  
**0:53:47-0:53:49:**  and 50 percent by 2030.  So it's a huge ambition, and it's a very stretched target.  But we believe it's the right thing to do for our climate, and we have to do it.  
**0:54:02-0:54:03:**  Very interesting.  So the first question that we have, and this was of course discussed in our previous talk,  in the talk that you did earlier on with Earthworm Foundation, who we just interviewed before,  
**0:54:13-0:54:19:**  was about, you know, I'd love for you to explain to our listeners how you're integrating regenerative  agriculture in your supply chain.  And what's your strategy around that?  
**0:54:23-0:54:28:**  How are you going to actually reach your commitments to regenerative agriculture?  So first of all, we are not the ones really doing.  In fact, we have to work with the farmers.  
**0:54:35-0:54:39:**  The farmers are the ones really who are the most involved with the soil.  So what we are trying to do is, as much as possible, to support them to do this huge  transition and to go towards this regenerative agriculture.  
**0:54:51-0:54:58:**  So we are listening a lot to our suppliers and to our farmers, and we are trying to understand  what is the most important for them so that we can support in this effort.  So if I would summarize the two biggest, most important topics, one is the knowledge and  
**0:55:13-0:55:18:**  what type of expertise, what type of sharing, what type of trainings we can work with the  farmers on.  And the second part is the risk and the cost impact and the incentive we can try to give  
**0:55:29-0:55:33:**  to them in order to support this transition.  So we are, on one side, we don't have all the knowledge, definitely, so we are trying  to find the best ecosystem, the best experts.  
**0:55:43-0:55:50:**  The FITI Earthworm Foundation is a big partner for us to create this ecosystem of knowledge.  And we are working, thanks to them also, with some other partners like IcoSystem in France,  with specialists in training of the farmers, etc.  
**0:56:00-0:56:06:**  So this is one part, and then this is not enough, because if we only come with knowledge  and training or expertise or measures, we touch generally, and this is what we did a  few years ago, we touch the pioneers, so the ones who are already very much committed and  
**0:56:18-0:56:23:**  want to do it, but we don't reach enough to bring the percentage higher.  And this is where there needs to be an additional incentive, and we need to come also with some  financial incentives and some premiums typically in order to accelerate the move.  
**0:56:36-0:56:38:**  Fantastic, that's very interesting.  So you've already started to explain a bit here, but it would be great to elaborate a  bit more on how you're interacting with the farmers in this transition.  
**0:56:47-0:56:53:**  Are you always going through another specialized company or foundation like Earthworm, or are  you having some direct interactions with farmers through the supply of the raw material?  Yeah, so our supply chain in France, and this is not the same in all countries, we have  
**0:57:06-0:57:12:**  some countries like in developing markets, on cocoa, on coffee, where we are much, much  more in direct touch directly with the farmers.  In France, we are working a lot with cooperatives, and with our suppliers are the ones who are  
**0:57:23-0:57:27:**  more in touch with the farmers.  And it's very important for us, in fact, because our supply chain is designed like that, it's  very important that we onboard also the cooperatives, that we have the same directions, same vision,  
**0:57:38-0:57:42:**  we share the ambition, and also that they are part of the solution.  Because if we try to convince the farmers ourselves, but we are not consistent with  what our suppliers are working on with them, we cannot achieve it in France.  
**0:57:55-0:58:04:**  So yes, generally it is the suppliers, the farmers, ourselves, and then around that,  an ecosystem of specialized companies who will bring different types of expertise.  One would be training, another one would be measure, another one would be, and this is  
**0:58:15-0:58:19:**  this whole ecosystem that we are trying to co-design now, and that we are working on  in France, in what we call the originally Living Soil Project, because everything started  with the soil, and which we are now coding more and more regenerative agriculture.  
**0:58:32-0:58:33:**  Very interesting.  And I'm curious as to what stage are you at at the moment?  Have you already worked out this model and the key partners to create this transition,  
**0:58:42-0:58:43:**  or where are you at?  I think we will never have finished, so we are really in a building mode, and we'll continue  learning by doing, etc.  
**0:58:50-0:59:00:**  We start to have some scale, so last year we reached 10 suppliers already, and last  year we were able to already work with 200 farmers, really engaged, involved, doing trainings  with us, and starting the measurement, which is very important in this transition.  
**0:59:16-0:59:22:**  So getting a training, getting the first measures, and being involved with us on longer term  engagement, longer term commitment, to go forward in this transition.  So we start to have some scale, and the ecosystem to support this scale is getting built at  
**0:59:34-0:59:42:**  the moment, and the more it goes, the more we try to bring other companies with us, other  suppliers, other food companies, other stakeholders, because we will not do it alone.  One of the things in your talk earlier on that we were listening to that I thought was  
**0:59:52-0:59:57:**  fascinating is that you were mentioning the need to collaborate with competitors in the  field, and so maybe you could tell us a bit about why you're needing to collaborate with  some competitors, and why does the regenerative agriculture transition require a community  
**1:00:07-1:00:09:**  to work together, which is something that's quite fascinating.  Thank you.  So this is difficult, very difficult part, because after 25 years in supply chain, in  
**1:00:18-1:00:25:**  Nestlé, and always competition is important for us, it's the first time these past years,  the first time that I'm sitting around the table with my competitors, and it's not easy,  but we need to do it, and why we need to do it is because, again, we listen to the farmers  
**1:00:37-1:00:43:**  and our suppliers, we try to understand how we can help them, and one part where we can  help them is to be consistent in the industry of what we are asking them, and if we are  not coming, we have to simplify the life, we have to simplify the life of the farmers,  
**1:00:54-1:01:00:**  if they have one day in Nestlé, another day, another one coming with a different framework,  and the third day, a third one coming with a different framework and different asks,  they will not be able to manage, it will be too complex, and at a certain point of time,  
**1:01:09-1:01:10:**  they may even give up.  So we have a role to play to align, because all of us, we have to move, all of us, I think  we are convinced that this is a way, we need to transition, and we need to help the ones  
**1:01:22-1:01:27:**  who will do, and the ones who will do are the farmers, and this is why I'm trying to  convince my competitors also to sit around the table.  We are open to update the framework, to take some other things into consideration we may  
**1:01:38-1:01:43:**  not have put immediately, but it's very important for the farmers that we are all aligned on  what we ask them, and how we support.  So, yeah, this is...  
**1:01:48-1:01:52:**  No, no, that's great, that's a very clear answer, thanks for that.  And you know, we're talking about this transition, we're talking about the farmers, that they  are going to be implementing this in the field, and that's going to incur certain transition  
**1:02:02-1:02:05:**  costs, which is a theme that's been coming out a lot in these talks that we've been listening  to at the moment.  And so I was wondering, how is Nestlé, how is Nestlé helping the farmers in this transition?  
**1:02:12-1:02:17:**  Is Nestlé assuming these costs, or how are you distributing the financial burden of a  regenerative transition?  So what we started doing, the first thing we did was to bring some expertise, so we  
**1:02:26-1:02:33:**  paid for experts like Earthworm Foundation, like Ecosystem, all the satellite data we  are trying to gather, etc.  So all the expertise, training that we wanted to bring, we took the cost on our shoulders,  
**1:02:43-1:02:48:**  and we said, okay, it's our part, and we do it.  Then we found out, if we just do that, which is already a big investment, to be honest,  but if we only do that, it will not be enough to accelerate and to go to the ambition, huge  
**1:02:59-1:03:01:**  ambition we are trying to get.  And this is where we decided, in fact, to give an incentive.  And this incentive is very difficult to say if we cover all the additional costs or if  
**1:03:14-1:03:22:**  we cover the risks or whatever, but it has to be sufficiently consistent to be already  something motivating, and also it has to be gradual.  So it has to start from the beginning, so from the beginning, for the people who get  
**1:03:30-1:03:37:**  involved, engaged, get the training, and in fact start the measures, we already gave a  first incentive.  Then there is a second step, when people change practices, we give an additional incentive.  
**1:03:43-1:03:48:**  And then there is an additional step, when people start to get quantitative results in  the soil, soil fertility, or soil carbon, etc. and then we give an additional incentive.  So we made a gradual incentive, so that we start from the beginning with something, and  
**1:04:00-1:04:05:**  that the more you advance and the more in fact you get involved, and the more you put  money or risk on the table, and the more we gradually give additional incentive to the  farm.  
**1:04:12-1:04:17:**  So this is how we try to build and try to do it as fair as possible.  In this incentive system that you've created, you see that as being able to scale to the  50 or 100% of the farmers that you're working with, or you're seeing it as an incentive  
**1:04:30-1:04:33:**  system that's specialized for the pioneers?  So the pioneers, honestly, they didn't even need us in fact.  They were already convinced, they did a lot without us, to be honest.  
**1:04:43-1:04:47:**  But they were of course happy to get additional expertise and they were happy to get additional  food.  Now the fact that we started to give this additional incentive I was speaking about  
**1:04:56-1:05:01:**  helped us to go from these pioneers to more scale.  And typically 200 in one year was not easy to get 200 farmers to be engaged in our program.  But still it happened I think a lot because we were ready to put some money on the table  
**1:05:16-1:05:17:**  and to give this incentive.  Now on top of this incentive to go from 20 to 50, I think it will be much easier in a  sense than to go from 0 to 20 because people will start seeing the first results of the  
**1:05:32-1:05:38:**  0 to 20 and they will start having their peers, their colleagues showing what it brought to  them, why they're happy about the change, why they are more resilient, why etc. etc.  And then the more testimonies you will have and the more proof points you will have, the  
**1:05:50-1:05:51:**  easier it will be.  But of course the incentive will remain important for us to put on the table.  That's very very interesting.  
**1:05:57-1:06:03:**  The final question that I have for you is what are some of the biggest challenges that  you've had to overcome in order to create this regenerative transition to onboard the  farmers to convince, I don't know exactly where it could have come from, but what are  
**1:06:11-1:06:15:**  some of the biggest challenges you're facing to reach the commitments that you've made?  That's a very big question because we had a lot of changes I must say.  It's not easy because you have to work with people and you ask people to make a big big  
**1:06:28-1:06:31:**  change and there are a lot of fears behind this change etc.  A big part is how you bring people for this change management and to trust you that you  bring them on a positive path.  
**1:06:46-1:06:51:**  How to onboard the farmers was really one of our biggest concerns and how we can make  it etc.  The other part was how you convince the business to invest and how you make sure that everybody  
**1:06:58-1:07:02:**  is behind you within the company.  Here I must say the ambition that the group has put and that our CEO has put to give very  big and strong and very ambitious targets has helped us a lot because then it was very  
**1:07:15-1:07:17:**  clear that we had to do it.  There needs to be an ambition coming from the top and I think this was very very helpful  in our transition.  
**1:07:23-1:07:33:**  I would say one other thing is that one of the changes is not to get disrupted by short  term issues.  Every year one day you have Covid, another day you have Ukraine and the impact on commodities,  
**1:07:41-1:07:45:**  another day you have weather impact etc.  You should keep the focus on we have to continue our vision, we have to continue our ambition  and you should not get distracted by the short term issues.  
**1:07:54-1:08:00:**  The big picture is more important than the short term hurdles and this is across the  chain.  Farmers can also be tempted to say let's wait for next year because this year we have to  
**1:08:07-1:08:13:**  put as much volume as possible because the wide year to send big volumes etc.  We as well we can have some other concerns so we have to keep this focus.  I would say the last point and last point is last challenge is as you were saying we  
**1:08:24-1:08:32:**  need to bring around the table people who are not used to work together and institutions,  authorities, scientific, farmers, suppliers and at the end competitors making sure that  we are all aligned on what we want to do, how we want to do, we help each other and  
**1:08:46-1:08:52:**  we also see that the bigger picture is more important than the rest.  And I think we learn at the moment to work totally differently, no longer in a pure competitive  mode but in a coalition mode.  
**1:09:04-1:09:11:**  And I think for all of us it's a learning but I think we start to have quite positive  first success stories.  And I hope we could share this morning part of it.  
**1:09:16-1:09:20:**  This morning was definitely very interesting and I cannot resist the temptation to ask  one last thing because you're giving me some very interesting elements and answers here  which I know our listeners will love.  
**1:09:27-1:09:32:**  What is the value that Nestle sees in regenerative agriculture?  Why is Nestle taking such a massive commitment to regenerative agriculture?  So we were anyway already convinced that soil is super important for the sustainability  
**1:09:46-1:09:48:**  of the supply chain.  We were losing soil, if we want to continue being able to produce food in the future we  need soil.  
**1:09:56-1:10:00:**  So we were already convinced that in terms of disruption, risk of disruption, risk of  our supply chains we will have to protect the soil and we will have to work on this  topic and this is why we started several years ago.  
**1:10:08-1:10:13:**  Now on top of that it's more and more clear that if we want to reach our commitment in  terms of climate change and in terms of carbon and in terms of we need the soil to be also  part of the solution.  
**1:10:22-1:10:29:**  And in our carbon footprint, depending on the country in Nestle we have between 60 to  70 percent of our total carbon footprint which is in agriculture, which is on the upstream  side.  
**1:10:36-1:10:42:**  So if we want to be carbon neutral in the future, if we want to reach our net zero commitment  that we gave to ourselves for 2050 which is tomorrow, we cannot not work with the farmers  on soils and regenerative agriculture.  
**1:10:52-1:10:58:**  So I think it's now it's super clear within the company that not only it's a good idea  for supply continuity and business continuity but it's also very important for climate and  for the environment and overall.  
**1:11:10-1:11:14:**  So it's only a good idea in fact, we have to do it.  That's good to hear from our perspective as well, regenerative agriculture is a win-win  and a win-win-win possibly as well.  
**1:11:21-1:11:25:**  So thanks a lot for taking the time to talk with us today and what could our listeners  find out more about Nestle's commitment to regenerative agriculture?  Okay, so on our website you will find all our commitment in terms of the net zero footprint  
**1:11:39-1:11:46:**  strategy so how far we want, how fast we want to go there.  And yeah, I'm sure we'll continue to publish our progress and with a lot of humility because  we are continuing to learn a lot by doing so.  
**1:11:57-1:12:05:**  We'll continue hopefully by sharing, convincing others to join the road and to join the journey  which is a very important one.  Thank you so much Charles for taking the time to talk with us.  
**1:12:09-1:12:13:**  You're welcome, thank you Dimitri, it was a good exchange, thank you very much.  Hello Felix Jacobsen, thanks for coming on and for talking with us.  You're coming from KLEAM so maybe you could you know tell us a bit about yourself and  
**1:12:21-1:12:25:**  what KLEAM does and how it's related to regenerative agriculture.  Yes, hi, good to be here.  I work at KLEAM, KLEAM is a company based out of Berlin in Germany and we're really  
**1:12:35-1:12:41:**  focused on actually making regenerative agriculture or the transition to rag-egg scalable across  farmers in a very farmer-centric way.  So when we started a few years back we saw that a lot of the programs out there and a  
**1:12:47-1:12:53:**  lot of the things out there are a very prescriptive and b quite cumbersome on the farmer side.  So we really aimed at building something from the ground up looking at what do farmers need  and what that was for us was really, well it's transition finance obviously, it's  
**1:13:07-1:13:09:**  knowledge and it's also recognition.  So we think the combination of the connection between consumer and farmers in agriculture  is super super important and in making that transparent.  
**1:13:18-1:13:27:**  And out of that actually came an app that we built and launched in 2020 for farmers  supporting them, giving them a toolbox, enabling their decisions on what to do in order to  grow more regeneratively.  
**1:13:35-1:13:40:**  Fantastic, I'm very curious, you're going to have to break a bit, break down these things  that you've said and maybe help us to understand how does your app and your solution help to  train farmers, find educational, find transition finance and also connect to the customers.  
**1:13:52-1:13:54:**  How does that work out in practice?  So imagine you have a farm, you download our app, you set up your farm, you upload your  fields, you tell us about your crop rotation, about what you're going to do, it's your  
**1:14:02-1:14:03:**  baseline.  We, based on that, instantaneously offer you a bunch of different things that you could  be doing and that would work well for your certain fields within your crop rotation.  
**1:14:13-1:14:18:**  But at the end of the day you can choose what you want to take, really making your decisions  because I mean every farm is different, we do not have a one size fits all solution that  works everywhere and we don't tell you what exactly to do but what practice to apply.  
**1:14:31-1:14:37:**  And with that, talking transition finance or transition incentives, financial incentives,  we do have a certain amount of money that we will pay you after you successfully applied  these methods within your farm.  
**1:14:46-1:14:49:**  And where does that come from is probably the next question.  The only value that industry and or consumers are currently willing to pay is carbon sequestration  but also carbon reduction which is per definition permanent if you look at reduced fertilizer  
**1:15:04-1:15:07:**  usage and so on and so forth.  Fascinating, that's really interesting.  How many farmers are you working with at the moment?  
**1:15:11-1:15:17:**  So it's almost 2000 farmers just in the German speaking regions going to expand next year.  That's very positive, that's very exciting, it's many farmers.  And so based on that oversight that you're gaining, what are some of the key opportunities  
**1:15:27-1:15:31:**  that you're seeing the regenerative agriculture creates for farmers?  I mean this summer has been a very difficult summer for farmers which of course helps our  regenerative agenda as an industry but is difficult for the food ecosystem as a whole.  
**1:15:45-1:15:52:**  I do think the opportunity lies really around the overall ecosystem services and yield security  and supply chain resilience which helps farmers but ultimately also the farmers' buyers be  it consumers or large food corporates.  
**1:16:01-1:16:04:**  That makes a lot of sense, it's something that resonates with other things we've been  hearing around the conference and some of the interest that we're seeing from some of  the big buyers that are here with us in the conference.  
**1:16:11-1:16:16:**  And so you know, similar to this question I just made, what are some of the biggest  challenges that you guys are seeing for farmers to transition?  Where is there either resistance or struggle to transition towards regenerative agriculture?  
**1:16:27-1:16:35:**  We do still see, even though it changes, that farmers are a bit resistant to new things  coming into their life.  Actually, especially when it comes from larger companies because farmers do feel that they  
**1:16:43-1:16:48:**  have been a little bit marginalised over the last years.  And that is something that is changing and that's why we think also the recognition part  is so important.  
**1:16:52-1:16:58:**  We realise how big an opportunity it is to actually speak with farmers, be very close  with farmers.  Not saying that large companies don't do that and that agronomists don't do that, but to  
**1:17:03-1:17:10:**  really engage with them in the discussion again of how we can make sure to actually  make their farms and their fields and their practices more sustainable.  That's very interesting.  
**1:17:16-1:17:20:**  You know, you're making me think about something, a conversation that we had earlier on off  mic and in the halls and you were talking about the importance of telling a story.  And you were saying that, Adklim, you're taking on, you're addressing the issue of scaling  
**1:17:31-1:17:34:**  regenerative agriculture also through quite an emotional lens.  So maybe you could explain to us a bit what that means and why you're doing it like this  and what it means in practice.  
**1:17:44-1:17:51:**  So what that really means for us is that we're not just a farmer or B2B company, but we also  work on the consumer or as we heard today citizen side of things.  By seeing ourselves and our space and our role in the regenerative ecosystem as a larger  
**1:18:05-1:18:10:**  one, meaning we don't just need to take the food corporates and the farmers on board,  but we also need to take the consumers on board, meaning we actually work, for instance,  for Instagram, through other campaigns for influencers on educating around what does  
**1:18:20-1:18:23:**  regenerative agriculture actually mean?  What does agriculture, what does our ecosystem mean?  How much of an existential and essential foundation of our life it ultimately is.  
**1:18:35-1:18:40:**  So we take that and we really aim to connect that because at the end of the day, we do  need a consumer pull in order to get a more environmentally friendly, nature friendly,  climate friendly, however you want to call it, food production and food ecosystem.  
**1:18:53-1:18:59:**  In the current agricultural system or organization, there's often a big divide between the farmer,  not a divide, but a big distance between the farmer and the consumer.  Many people, organizations, companies in between and products that can travel extremely far.  
**1:19:11-1:19:16:**  And so I'm curious as to your take on how you're talking about the importance of creating  more connection there and how does that work in practice?  What other organizational models are you seeing that could be successful in connecting farmers  
**1:19:25-1:19:29:**  with consumers and that could apply at scale?  So we work on insetting with large organizations where we take their farmers.  And that is something that can obviously be very transparently communicated also to customers  
**1:19:39-1:19:41:**  and consumers at the end of the day.  But also on the offsetting side, we have the opportunity for companies that don't have  as much control about their supply chains to be working with us offsetting their emissions  
**1:19:52-1:19:56:**  by supporting regenerative agriculture and communicating that through clear brand and  label claim.  And we actually very transparently connect that to which farmer is being supported, what  
**1:20:03-1:20:04:**  do they do?  We show a photo of them.  And it even means that we even have customers of ours, like B2B customers that go, they  
**1:20:12-1:20:17:**  go to the fields, they make videos with the farmers, they implement it in their communication,  really connecting and really showing what is actually happening.  And what's the actual impact of the extra money that the company invests into carbon  
**1:20:26-1:20:28:**  offsets and the ecosystem services.  But ultimately, of course, also the consumers that buy these products and really bringing  it closer and showing that, yeah, showing how the food ecosystem works and can change  
**1:20:38-1:20:40:**  and transition in that way.  That's fascinating.  One of the big themes that we've been hearing in this conference is about monitoring and  
**1:20:45-1:20:50:**  measuring change and having an outcome based approach to regenerative agriculture.  And so I was just curious as to, you know, how your company works with that.  How do you have you developed some kind of a framework?  
**1:20:58-1:21:00:**  Tell us a bit more about that aspect.  So we have a very science based, science based approach, not going around and soil sampling  every hectare every year, but looking at what is actually happening and what is proving  
**1:21:12-1:21:16:**  or what is proven that is happening very conservatively.  We very conservatively look at that in order to potentially improve error margins that  might be there.  
**1:21:23-1:21:26:**  We calibrate with soil samples and we recognize the importance of them.  We just don't find them operationally as essential and not where the money should be spent compared  to the actual transition.  
**1:21:38-1:21:41:**  Based on those models, we very transparently communicate to the farmers of what they can  expect in terms of carbon sequestration values and do photo documentation as well as satellite  documentation where we actually know very exactly what is happening, where, on what  
**1:21:53-1:21:56:**  field, at what time.  And through that, have documented what is actually going on.  Okay, that's fascinating stuff.  
**1:22:01-1:22:05:**  So maybe to finish off, you could tell us, our listeners, where they can find out more  about Klim and your work.  Klim.eco or just shoot us an email, find us on LinkedIn, wherever you may, or on Instagram.  
**1:22:14-1:22:16:**  We have farms and a consumer account.  Fantastic.  Felix, thank you so much for taking the time to talk today.  
**1:22:19-1:22:20:**  Thank you.  Hello, Philipp.  Very nice to have you here.  
**1:22:22-1:22:25:**  So you're working with Klimat Farmer.  You're the founder, the co-founder of Klimat Farmers.  Maybe you can tell us a bit about your work and what Klimat Farmer does to get started  
**1:22:32-1:22:33:**  here.  Sure.  Hi, pleasure to be here.  
**1:22:35-1:22:36:**  Very nice.  Klimat Farmers is essentially there to serve farmers.  So that means we're helping farmers all over Europe with the transition towards more regenerative  
**1:22:43-1:22:45:**  practices essentially.  This started with me buying some land and starting a village project in Portugal, which  caused me to start looking at the land myself, which got me into regenerative agriculture.  
**1:22:55-1:23:00:**  And then I tried to find out why this seems to be such a niche, even though it's a solution  to so many of our problems.  And then I had the pleasure of spending almost one year working on regenerative farms with  
**1:23:06-1:23:08:**  regenerative farmers.  First of all, falling in love with them.  And second of all, trying to understand what we can do to help them.  
**1:23:14-1:23:16:**  And that's essentially the core starting point for Klimat Farmers.  Okay, very nice.  What are your current activities now?  
**1:23:20-1:23:24:**  How do you work with Klimat Farmers at the moment?  So the essential first part is that we have a community of around 600 farmers in there.  We organize skill calls between the farmers, so on topics and by experts which the farmers  
**1:23:33-1:23:34:**  can request from us.  For example, Elaine Ingham, John Kempf, Richard Perkins would be in there.  We organize the yearly Climate Farming Congress, which is a conference for farmers.  
**1:23:42-1:23:47:**  So we have a majority of farmers being present there, exchanging thoughts with each other.  And basically everything that we're doing is always driven by feedback that we're getting.  So one thing that we have been hearing a lot in the last year is that due to the hype around  
**1:23:56-1:24:01:**  regenerative agriculture, there's a lot of new fancy websites coming up with consultants  which can teach, but they actually don't really know what they're doing.  And there's a lot of really good consultants, which are very hard to find because they don't  
**1:24:07-1:24:09:**  have fancy websites.  So what we started building is a farmer-backed consultant database, where we essentially  have consultants which are verified by farmers from us and recommended to us.  
**1:24:19-1:24:22:**  And then once they have consulted farmers through us again, they get another verification  because we talked with the farmer afterwards how it was.  So that we have a better chance at giving farmers the custom-made support that they  
**1:24:29-1:24:34:**  need for transitioning because as we know, it's very context-specific and the general  principles are nice, but they're not going to help farmers to see how it works in their  individual context.  
**1:24:38-1:24:39:**  Okay, that's fascinating.  And I think you've started talking a bit about my, introducing my next question, which is,  you know, here in the Congress, we've talked a lot about scaling regenerative agriculture.  
**1:24:50-1:24:56:**  And we've heard the opinions of many different players, including companies that are leading  the industry and corporate players inside the food industry.  And so I would love to get your take on, you know, what does regenerative agriculture need  
**1:25:07-1:25:08:**  to scale?  What is the feedback that you're getting from your community of 600 farmers?  Yeah, I would say the core point is we need to put the sexy back into farming.  
**1:25:17-1:25:21:**  So the core issue that we are seeing and the biggest demographic that we're seeing of farmers  which are transitioning is age, which is very logical, right?  Like if you're in your 50s or you're in your 60s and you've been doing something for 30  
**1:25:27-1:25:31:**  years, and then you have to admit that this was wrong and that you need to change your  practices, you're not going to do this and you're not going to want to do this and you're  not going to want to hear this or even accept this, which totally makes sense.  
**1:25:38-1:25:41:**  But what is the average age of farmers in the European Union?  56 years.  And the reason for that is that it's just not attractive to live on the farm because  
**1:25:45-1:25:49:**  farmers don't get a lot of reward in society and it's just not a profession which people  want to do.  So we need to look at how do we make it attractive again for young people to go into farming,  
**1:25:55-1:25:58:**  to take over the farms of their parents, and then we can talk to them and we can show them  the way towards regenerative agriculture.  And they will be a lot more open to this and they will be the ones which will be driving  
**1:26:03-1:26:04:**  the change.  Okay, that's very nice.  And how do you plan on, how can we make farming more sexy again as you're saying?  
**1:26:11-1:26:14:**  I think there's several parts which are coming into this.  One is definitely around storytelling and stuff that we're trying to do with farmers  and with all the social media for example, and it's just giving more recognition to farmers  
**1:26:21-1:26:22:**  again.  And another part also comes around which is I think very interesting, bringing culture  back to the countryside because one of the reasons why people also don't want to be in  
**1:26:29-1:26:33:**  farms and why we want to be in cities is because we want culture, we want community, so we  need to revive those communities and we need to make it attractive again to live on the  countryside.  
**1:26:37-1:26:40:**  And then of course we also need to make it financially interesting again, right?  I was speaking here with two farmers which by their parents were told, you should not  take over the farm because they are already financially with their back against the wall  
**1:26:49-1:26:52:**  and that is just not a bright future to look out for, right?  So we need to start paying premium and we need to pay especially farmers which have  positive ecosystem services, right?  
**1:26:57-1:27:01:**  Because that is the issue that we're having right now, that farmers which are farming  industrial and which are having a negative impact on the planet get the same amount of  money for their yield than farmers which are farming regeneratively and having so many  
**1:27:08-1:27:13:**  positive benefits ranging from biodiversity over carbon storage to water storage.  Okay, and I was hearing you speak a lot as well earlier on together in the corridors  about how transition finance is vital to be able to support the farmers in the regenerative  
**1:27:25-1:27:30:**  transition so that going a bit beyond a freemium to continually farm regeneratively there is  actually quite a high cost and a high risk around the transition.  So could you tell us a bit more about that experience that you're having with the farmers,  
**1:27:39-1:27:42:**  feedback you're getting there and solutions that you're excited about?  Yeah, so I mean one thing that we're definitely seeing there as a good solution is carbon  plus credits which can cover part of the costs.  
**1:27:48-1:27:51:**  Here it's also I think very important to be realistic.  I know that there's some ridiculous numbers being thrown around and I know from several  of our farmers that they have been told some things which are just not unrealistic.  
**1:27:59-1:28:04:**  So we're talking about one to maximum three tons per hectare which is essentially we're  selling for a premium price of 50 euros per ton.  So we're talking about something between 50 to 150 euros per hectare per year which is  
**1:28:11-1:28:16:**  a little bit of money but it's not all of the transition cost we're having.  So this will be part of the solution.  Another part needs to be coming from society, from governments essentially looking at the  
**1:28:23-1:28:24:**  common agricultural policy.  Here we're talking about 444 billion euros which are mostly given out based on the size  of the farm.  
**1:28:29-1:28:33:**  This needs to be given out based on regeneration and based on ecosystem indicators which the  farmer is increasing.  And if we have that happening then we will also see a very strong increase in farmers  
**1:28:39-1:28:42:**  really trying to focus on increasing those indicators because they need the subsidies  to survive.  To put things in perspective most of the farmers in the European Union are dependent on their  
**1:28:47-1:28:51:**  income of 60 to 80 percent on the European subsidies.  So this is the very big financial lever that we can be using here.  That's very interesting.  
**1:28:56-1:29:01:**  And are you starting to work with policy and lobbying and trying to get some change happening  on the political side?  Yeah I'm very excited that since half a year we have Mateusz Ciesznoła, my excuses to  
**1:29:08-1:29:13:**  all the Polish listeners for completely messing up his name, but Mateusz is a sixth generation  Polish farmer that has been transitioning his own farm to us with genetic practices  and has been doing amazing work in Poland and pushing with genetic agriculture forward.  
**1:29:21-1:29:24:**  And he's right now our policy and advocacy lead which is bringing a lot of the documents  that we are creating together with our farmers such as the Regenerative Agriculture Manifesto  that we wrote at the last conference and also the outcome of the next conference that we  
**1:29:32-1:29:36:**  are organizing together with farmers to the Common Agricultural Policy discussion and  to the European Union discussion.  We were very happy to have the open ear of Christian Holzleitner, the head of the Sustainability  
**1:29:42-1:29:46:**  Committee who is working together with us in trying to see how we can push regenerative  agriculture agendas and how we can make this attractive from a farmer's point of view.  Amazing.  
**1:29:51-1:29:52:**  That's really exciting.  You have an important role as climate farmers clearly and it's fascinating to see the development  of climate farmers throughout these years, right?  
**1:29:59-1:30:00:**  How long ago did you start?  So my journey started essentially in 2018 with an interest in regenerative agriculture.  Then me and my co-founder Ivo Degen basically decided in June 2019 that this is what we  
**1:30:11-1:30:14:**  want to do with our life or at least with the foreseeable future.  And then I spent one year researching and speaking with farmers and then we registered  the company in August 2020.  
**1:30:20-1:30:21:**  Amazing.  So I've seen you today talk with a lot of the people that are here.  A lot of them are industry leaders, corporates, etc.  
**1:30:28-1:30:33:**  And so I'd love to know about what do you think is the potential or where do you see  the role of these companies that are here, for example like Nestle, in the transition  towards regenerative agriculture and if as climate farmers you are engaging in conversations  
**1:30:42-1:30:47:**  with them and if so, how do you expect to be collaborating with them?  I mean in the end we're talking about system change here and if we want to do system change  in agriculture then we need all of the different players to be on the table and we need to  
**1:30:53-1:30:55:**  involve all of them.  And for me it was a very interesting one because I come from a background of water activism  in my 20s so I have been actively protesting against Nestle and now I'm speaking with them  
**1:31:04-1:31:09:**  on the table and I have to say I believe them that they're serious about this and I believe  them that they want to do something and it's a very interesting case there because it comes  from the top.  
**1:31:13-1:31:19:**  The CEO of Nestle, Mark Schneider, has committed 1.4 billion euros to the regenerative agriculture  transition.  So in conversations here today with them we quite literally came to the situation that  
**1:31:23-1:31:28:**  hey I have farmers that want to transition, they need a premium price for this and now  let's see if they would follow up on the conversation that we had today but the idea was that next  week they would send me a list of produce which they need for their products from what  
**1:31:36-1:31:40:**  countries and for which they are willing to pay a premium price and for which they're  paying to guarantee the farmers a premium price if they're turning regeneratively.  With that I can go back to our farmers and I can say hey if you are transitioning and  
**1:31:48-1:31:53:**  you're growing this crop Nestle will be buying it for 20-30% higher than the market value  and that is amazing because this is again part of what we need to make the transition  happen to have farmers being able to get the premium price for a premium product which  
**1:32:01-1:32:04:**  is what we see with a lot of our farmers at the moment which they're not getting.  They're providing amazing products and they're generating the ecosystem but they're not getting  paid any cent more than an industrial farmer and that's where the multinational corporations  
**1:32:12-1:32:16:**  like Nestle and Danone and so on need to step in by paying premium prices for regenerative  produce.  It's fascinating stuff, it's really exciting and I appreciate your nuanced point of view  
**1:32:22-1:32:26:**  and looking at them as a part of the solution and not trying to Nestle fight against some  of the things that may have disagreed that they were doing in the past.  But I'm curious and I'm going to ask this to you because I haven't had the opportunity  
**1:32:33-1:32:38:**  to ask it to other people before but I'm curious if this increase, quite significant increase  in cost that they're going to incur from regenerative agriculture if they're going to just like  take that themselves or if they're going to pass that on to consumers at the end.  
**1:32:46-1:32:50:**  Do you have a bit of an idea of some kind of prediction of what's going to happen in  the future?  I personally put my money on nutrients.  
**1:32:56-1:33:01:**  I think nutrient density from regenerative produce is a very interesting one and I think  the direction of what I'm hoping what we can make happen is that we can convince some of  these bigger players that the transition makes sense and that it will pay off for them in  
**1:33:09-1:33:10:**  the long run.  So they are investing right now.  Let it be 1.4 billion.  
**1:33:14-1:33:16:**  Sounds like an insane amount of money for you and for me.  For them it's like that's okay.  And with this they can set themselves up as having regenerative supply chains and then  
**1:33:23-1:33:26:**  we will have studies coming back which are running already and we are involved in some  of them together with the IAT Food on regenerative produce yields which have higher nutrient  density than conventional organic ones.  
**1:33:34-1:33:38:**  And with that one we can definitely convince consumers again to pay higher prices.  So I think initially these companies need to pay the transition and I think in the long  run we will get private consumers to also be willing to pay a premium price because  
**1:33:47-1:33:50:**  if you're not caring for the climate you will definitely be caring for your own health and  the own health of your children.  And though you might be very willing to pay a premium for higher nutrient density of food.  
**1:33:56-1:33:57:**  That's very interesting.  That's fascinating stuff.  So if you want to find out more about climate farmers where do you suggest they go?  
**1:34:02-1:34:03:**  Where can we find out more about your work?  That would be either on the website and I'm not on Instagram myself but I'm told we have  a very amazing Instagram channel so you can definitely find us there as well.  
**1:34:12-1:34:13:**  Fantastic.  Philippe thank you so much for talking today.  Cool.  
**1:34:15-1:34:16:**  My pleasure.  Thank you so much for making it this far.  We really hope you enjoyed it.  
**1:34:20-1:34:24:**  Please let us know what you thought in the comments or on our website.  You can get in touch with us on various platforms and we really look forward to hearing from  you.  