### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2022-16-04)
**0:00:00-0:00:16:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  
**0:00:32-0:00:33:**  these challenges.  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Hello and welcome to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  I'm your host Etienne.  
**0:00:50-0:00:56:**  Today I interview David Brass, the CEO of the Lakes Free Range Egg Company.  Almost 30 years ago he started planting trees in the fields to encourage his laying hens  to go and range, which makes him a pioneer in the matter.  With about 70 farmers and 2 million birds supplying eggs to his company today, this  is an example of agroforestry working at scale.  
**0:01:13-0:01:18:**  The interview brings forward both practical considerations for the layout and maintenance  of trees, as well as explains how they have scaled the tree plantations throughout their  suppliers.  David is enthusiastic about the numerous benefits of these trees that they have documented throughout  the years and various studies.  
**0:01:32-0:01:37:**  It does seem that there is a very clear case for integrating trees in all poultry production  with very limited trade-offs.  I wanted to apologize to you listeners as my English was particularly rusty for this  interview and my questions a bit fumbly at times.  I hope it will still be enjoyable to listen to.  
**0:01:50-0:01:51:**  Enjoy the episode.  Hi David, welcome to the podcast.  Hello, pleased to meet you, yes, great.  Let's start by having a bit of an idea of your background and how you got to agroforestry.  Farming background really.  
**0:02:08-0:02:16:**  Started off as a farmer with chickens in the Lake District in England, north of England.  It was kind of obvious when you were farming that on lots of days the chickens weren't  going outside.  They just stayed next to the shed because it was just wide open space outside.  There would be an odd tree in the middle of a field and you would see hundreds of chickens  
**0:02:31-0:02:33:**  underneath the tree in the shade.  So we thought that they obviously liked that and we thought that they would go out and  plant a few more.  That is kind of when it started.  Back in 1997 and it has grown from them over the intervening years.  
**0:02:43-0:02:50:**  We have developed a company selling eggs that has grown to a decent sized company with another  70 or 80 farmers supplying eggs into us.  And all of those have planted trees on their ranges, again to encourage birds to go outside.  And also it is in the intervening years we have done quite a bit of science to show that  those birds, those trees are very effective at all sorts of other things as well as just  
**0:03:08-0:03:12:**  getting the birds to range outside.  Well that is a great introduction and we will make sure we go into the detail of all of  that.  Can you give us a bit more context on the company today, how you operate so we get an  idea of what scale it is at and what are your customers and how you function?  
**0:03:28-0:03:35:**  Okay, we are probably a couple of million birds supplying eggs into us now, all free  range or organic free range.  We are a specialist organic free range egg supply company now.  And those farms, 73 or 4 farms are contracted to us to supply eggs into our packing centre.  We pack them here probably a million eggs a day, something like that, a million and  
**0:03:51-0:03:52:**  a half eggs a day.  Put them into retail packs and sell them out to various retail companies in the UK or food  service companies in the UK.  Specifically those with fairly high requirements for things like woodland planting or range  enrichment or bird welfare.  
**0:04:10-0:04:16:**  So you mentioned earlier on that the initial reason why you started thinking about birds  about including trees with birds was the fact that they weren't necessarily going out much  and that you wanted them to colonise the space more effectively.  How did you get the idea?  Were you working with an organisation at the time or were other people already putting  
**0:04:30-0:04:35:**  in trees for poultry to be roaming further away from the buildings?  No, at that time there was nobody in the UK that was doing that.  We were the first to do that back in 1997, others have followed since because it became  a good idea.  It was just reputationary.  
**0:04:52-0:04:57:**  We are a reputation as a free range, one of the largest specialist free range egg companies  in the UK and to be not having birds going outside just didn't seem right so we looked  everywhere we possibly could to encourage them to go out.  And that's really where the journey started and at that time there was a charity in the  UK called the Fwag Farm Wildlife Advisory Group and they had advisors who would come  
**0:05:16-0:05:19:**  on to farm and advise what trees you should be planting and how you should be planting  them.  So there was a chap called Paul Arkel who worked for that group at the time.  They've since packed up and he set his own company up as an environmental consultant  so he still used Paul.  
**0:05:35-0:05:38:**  To be honest the first couple of years were a disaster.  We planted two or three hectares of trees for the chickens and it was just the wrong  sort of trees, the wrong sort of planting.  It's been a 25 year journey that every single year we learn something new, we change things,  we adapt things, we make them easier to look after trees, make it more sensible so farmers  
**0:05:58-0:06:02:**  will because if it involves a lot of work and expense it very quickly gets to be something  they don't want to do.  So that's been a journey that's developed over the years and it's got quite complex  and very structured now but works really well.  You know it's things like the first planting we planted in the UK was to UK Forestry Commission  
**0:06:19-0:06:26:**  standards which is random two metre spacings and they're impossible to look after.  If you do that on moorland where the undergrowth doesn't grow particularly quickly that's fine  but if you do it on grade 3 agricultural land the grass grows and swamps the trees so you  have to cut it every year but of course with random spacing the only way you can cut it  is to get there with a strimmer and strim it which is really hard work so people don't  
**0:06:42-0:06:43:**  want to do it.  So after the first couple of years we started to plant them in rows so the rows will follow  the contours of the hillside or the contours around the poultry shed so they're not straight  rows so they don't look like soldiers, they look like normal woodland but we plant the  rows 4 metres apart and the trees 2 metres within the rows and that means that you can  
**0:07:02-0:07:10:**  drive up and down with your tractor and the topper on the back to cut the grass and it's  not too much like hard work so people are quite happy to do that.  It's much easier to sit in an air conditioned cab and do that to look after the trees than  it is to be out on your feet with a strimmer and so it's things like that that we developed  over the years and those spacings we kind of developed to get cover still as rapidly  
**0:07:25-0:07:34:**  as possible but make it possible to mechanically weed them and then it's again we started planting  things like 20% fast growing.  The planting plan usually is just look around the area and see what's growing well in the  area and then just copy that.  In this particular case here it's usually upland, limestone, woodland which is largely  
**0:07:48-0:07:53:**  ash based but lots of others there's hollies and field maple, silver birch, aspen that  sort of thing really but at the same time we plant 20% fast growers because you want  the cover of the chickens quickly so we use hybrid willow and poplar as the fast growing  species to get cover really quickly and it encourages the smaller or the slower growing  trees to grow better as well and then you discover that farmers aren't looking after  
**0:08:16-0:08:17:**  them properly.  You make the mistake and everybody makes the mistake because it's a farmer they think it's  a forester and they're not it's a different skill set and we very quickly found that they  let the sheep in and the sheep would take all the bark off the trees and they die or  the cattle get in or the horse gets in and knocks them over that sort of thing so there's  
**0:08:36-0:08:40:**  a skill to thinning them out and beating them up when they die and that type of thing so  every year Paul now goes around technically it's an audit to audit the tree planting on  all our farms our supply farms but actually he's really going for is he gets a couple  of hours of the sole attention of the farmer so when he's walking around those trees he  can say you need to be thinning these ones out or you need to be tripping the branches  
**0:09:00-0:09:06:**  off the bottom of the trees and this is how we do it so the you know prime example of  that I guess was I went to a farm on Danes you need to take at least 50% of these trees  out they're thinning they're too dense we need to get some sunlight into the base of  the canopy off I went come back a month later to the same farm and the guy had chopped down  all the oaks and valuable species for biodiversity and left all the poplars and willow and it  
**0:09:27-0:09:30:**  wasn't his fault he just thought well I'm leaving the ones that's growing really well  and chopping down the ones that aren't but totally the wrong ending so hence Paul goes  around now and say thin those ones out that one that one that one and actually spray marks  the trees that sort of thing really so it's developed as a relationship as we've gone  along.  
**0:09:45-0:09:50:**  There's actually a lot of really interesting things to go into and what you've just said  one of the things I wanted to bounce back on though is the choice of species because  you mentioned that you got it really wrong in the beginning and now you seem to have  quite I wouldn't say elaborate but like a very you know good plan with the succession  of different types of species and some destined to stay long term yeah could you tell us a  
**0:10:07-0:10:13:**  bit more about what mistakes you made initially and how you bounced back and yeah the design  now nowadays.  The first plan is we did were funded by the forestry commission in the UK which is very  much based towards commercial timber so you're planting commercial timber species because  that's what the grant funding came for and actually when you looked at it wasn't suitable  
**0:10:29-0:10:33:**  for what we were wanting really.  We are much more valued towards this than the whole we're in a high animal welfare production  system with free range poultry so you really need to go out on with your biodiversity benefits  of what you're doing and that's native species local to the area because that's what the  local biodiversity wants so gradually over the years the way that those species have  
**0:10:52-0:10:56:**  been planted and the mix of them has changed and also we either we have we take we have  farms in Shropshire which is in the Midlands of the UK and farms up in Scotland in fairly  high levels so and some in Cumbrey which is where I'm based right on the seashore where  it's just pure sand up to Limestone Mountains so there's quite a quite a diversity of what  we what we plant there's no wrong tree to be fair we have an odd farmer that plants  
**0:11:21-0:11:26:**  apple trees because he wanted to have a little bit of agroforestry and make ciders as a sideline  so he does that it still suits the chickens and we're not going to die die in a ditch  over what type of trees people want to plant we suggest and then if they want to do something  else fine.  It's interesting because that was one of the questions I wanted to think through with you  
**0:11:44-0:11:50:**  I know that in your case you've gone for like essentially wild trees mainly for their ecosystem  services to your operation but I wanted to ask you with your knowledge of how poultry  functions would you find that realistic for people to include productive trees let's say  you know maybe not in your climate but in France it could be walnuts it could be different  nuts do you see that as something potentially interesting or do you kind of think well that's  
**0:12:10-0:12:15:**  a bit too complicated and at the end of the day it's already complex enough to be farming  poultry you know?  Oh no no no no almost any tree is a good tree and I think most people phrase nowadays right  tree right place and I think that's absolutely fair if people want to plant walnuts actually  have a sideline that they're very good at keeping flies away from poultry units apparently  
**0:12:34-0:12:38:**  so that the story goes so that they could be useful around poultry sheds just to keep  the flies down which you can get problems sometimes in summer with flies and neighbours.  Then the only ones that I've ever come across the obvious ones like you you have to be a  bit careful about and a lot of the willows you have to be a little bit careful of we  plant hybrid willow but it's quite quickly probably within 10 years that we fell it out  
**0:13:01-0:13:05:**  and you have to be careful what you do with those branches when you fell them because  willow has a lot of willow species have quite high oxalic acid content aspirin effectively  they have a source of aspirin but the oxalic acid will burn if hens eat too much of it  will burn their tongue and so they won't eat after that so they can starve because they  can't eat because they've got to so you have to be a little bit careful with somebody it's  
**0:13:23-0:13:30:**  very very few the vast majority of species you can use and like I said earlier it's it's  been a journey and very early on it was Forestry Commission then it was what actually grows  in the native local area and some of the work that we've done quite a bit of science and  research over the years on the benefits to poultry the benefits to biodiversity and what  it did show was you plant native species in their area and they're very good at linking  
**0:13:48-0:13:53:**  other areas of biodiversity it together into corridors that's that's a massively improves  the local biodiversity and then that was just looking after that how you look after the  farmers and how you advise the farmers to grow them was the next few years worth of  development and then we started looking at what would be best for for customers in the  sort of mid 2005-2008 ish as to make set to their profiles as to how they want to develop  
**0:14:17-0:14:23:**  for the product and then in the last probably seven seven years I think we've gone more  down the route of sequestration and the benefits to to soil health sequestration of co2 but  particularly ammonia they're very good at trees absorbing ammonia and poultry and it's  not just poultry any intensive livestock species dairy, beef, sheep, pigs all produce lots  of ammonia that trees can take 30, 40, 50 percent of it out of the plume from the production  
**0:14:49-0:14:55:**  site without any artificial input you just let the trees get on with it and that's that's  changed the mix a little bit we didn't really want to go for pine species a bit too commercial  went away from those but actually now when you want year-round greenery we plant more  probably 15-20 percent of the plantings have pine in them so at least there's some greenery  leaf area to absorb ammonia year-round and it's interesting we've just just finished  
**0:15:16-0:15:21:**  a it's the ART project it's called it's publicly published by Natural England in the UK so  it was government funded ammonia reduction from trees the ART project for quite a few  years I tend to have a reputation in the UK poultry industry for hogging trees and bunnies  and because of all the emphasis I put on planting trees and benefits to poultry and I've been  asking for quite a few years for somebody to actually do the research because the individual  
**0:15:43-0:15:50:**  scientific research had been done by the CH I've done the scientific work in that for  deaf three years ago but hadn't done it on commercial farms and so I was to say that's  fine having the science but can we actually do it on commercial farms so then we can go  to the environment agency in the UK and say look this is what actually happens on commercial  farms with trees give us some benefit for us when you're looking at the Clean Air Act  
**0:16:08-0:16:14:**  so we did that research over the last couple of years and that was quite interesting it's  fun to do I love working with scientists on those sort of projects and put the agricultural  spin into that so that's proven our benefits to ammonia reduction over the last couple  of years which is interesting.  Because you talk about testing ideas against actually what happens on commercial farms  
**0:16:30-0:16:35:**  I know that in some more let's say small scale projects or alternative projects people have  been interested in also the contribution that trees might make to chickens diet either through  like protein rich leaves or because you have fruit you know that gets full of worms and  can be valued do you see that as like idealism do you see that could it work at scale like  what's your view on that?  
**0:16:52-0:16:55:**  It's something we haven't concentrated on there will be some input to that and they  do eat some of the apples and things if you happen to have crab apple or something in  the in the planting but it's not something we've done much research on at all.  Largely you have to be a bit careful in that you don't want to dilute the diet of the chicken  too much these guys are egg laying machines they're genetic Rolls Royces you don't want  
**0:17:14-0:17:20:**  to be diluting the diet with too much bulk because that's bad for the welfare really  they will produce eggs you can't stop them producing eggs they're egg laying machines  so if you don't feed them the correct diet that can have detrimental impacts on their  health and welfare so you have to be a little bit careful with that but they do grub around  outside if they find lots of worms and grubs and insects in the undergrowth and I think  
**0:17:35-0:17:40:**  trees probably are beneficial to that compared to open grassland.  The other topic I was wondering is just you know if we have any poultry farmers listening  to us it'd be interesting for them to understand really what that implies for the day to day  operation to include trees so let's say you're a poultry farmer and all of a sudden you believe  that you should be including trees in the for the poultry what do you see are the major  
**0:18:01-0:18:08:**  things to master in terms of skills or in terms of organization of your workloads?  To be fair once they're planted they they look after themselves chickens don't bother  them too much the ones near the shed within whenever plant trees closer than 20 meters  to the shed you don't want leaves to get in the downspouts and that sort of thing really  so you'll have an area of stone or clean area between the shed and the trees at 20 meters  
**0:18:29-0:18:33:**  then you'll plant your trees and some of them they'll dig out the hens love digging and  scratching in in the dust so some of them they will dig out so you maybe protect those  with some people note an old scrap tire around them and with plastic down to protect them  it's one of these where most people have tree guards that work reasonably well unfortunately  we still end up using plastic ones because the ones that are naturally disintegrate with  
**0:18:57-0:19:01:**  times and they're not plastic based the chickens tend to eat them very quickly they quite like  them so we haven't found a substitute for plastic as yet and then it's it's relatively  simple is beating up which maybe is a couple of days in the first year for our first or  second year then for maybe five years after that there's a little bit of thinning of the  grass between the rows but I can say you can do that with a tractor and a topper so it's  
**0:19:21-0:19:28:**  not too much of a hardship then after that there's probably every now and again half  a day two or three times a year you'll take the lower branches off the trees because you  don't want them you don't want them to be too low if you get low branches things like  hawthorn which grow very close to the ground and then the grass grows up underneath them  and you get an area where the grass has reached the base level of the trees it's nice and  
**0:19:47-0:19:51:**  dark and hence will go on legs in there so you want to keep an open space between the  bottom of the leaf canopy and the top of the grass canopy so that you don't there's this  they want legs outside which isn't a problem as long as you do that but after that you  know for the next 150 years they do it themselves it's it's brilliant really the other alternative  is to put an artificial ammonia scrubber in which uses thousands and thousands of pounds  
**0:20:11-0:20:15:**  of electric costs you tens of thousands of pounds to buy and uses sulfuric acid all the  time so you look at the options which do you go for it's a no-brainer really and on the  because you mentioned that you then started planting in lines so it means you cut the  grass between the tree lines but you just leave whatever grows between trees on the  line then because you have no way of of cutting that with a strimmer yeah okay and you don't  
**0:20:36-0:20:41:**  need to yeah you're still happy with the growth and the and the protection you don't fence  and it's just tree guards there's no systematic fencing of the tree lines or whatever you  just have the tree with a plastic tree guards and whatever few trees are damaged then you  know that's just the certain percentage and moving on that's right effectively yes we  we do fence them right around the outside with stock proof fence it to keep all the  
**0:21:01-0:21:06:**  stock out sheep and cattle that sort of thing and to maybe rotate the paddocks so you'll  have three or four paddocks outside your potage and it'll go into different ones so not all  of them are where isn't puddly all winter a kind of rain here a meter of rain here so  it can be puddly in winter so you need to rotate the paddocks yeah it's it's it's really  interesting just you know kind of concluding this this part which was really aiming to  
**0:21:27-0:21:31:**  understand how you put things into place like I was wondering what technical assistance  you'd had but actually just seems like a lot of trial and error and really building that  knowledge in the house over the last you know 25 years or I'd remember exactly how many  years it's been but yeah there's been a lot of that then the trouble it's it's a problem  with being first isn't it when there is no advice on how to look after trees and how  
**0:21:49-0:21:53:**  to plant and look after trees for poultry you have to make it up as you go along and  we had a good team there's myself Paul as well and then lately Roger my head of agriculture  and between us every year we've at the end of the season we look at how those plantings  have done what they look like what we should be doing what is the next step the next development  are we happy where we are and I don't think this but a year we haven't changed something  
**0:22:14-0:22:19:**  but we can't with I think we're kind of there now we there's this massive benefits massive  benefits you may as well utilize as many of them as possibly can where are you planting  at the moment then because I assume that on your your farm or your initial sites that  was the first place where you started planting trees those number of years ago so now are  you kind of at full capacity on the number of trees you want in the landscape you're  
**0:22:36-0:22:42:**  always developing and always changing most of the range areas is planted with about 20%  of the ranges planted with trees which is about right probably some people put more  in and we'll probably end up keeping adding to that we've changed a little bit how we  how we work in that up until six or seven years ago you the aim was that you went out  into dappled sunshine so there's a sort of shady 50% shade 50% open sunshine throughout  
**0:23:04-0:23:09:**  the tree canopy that gives you a keeps the grass growing underneath the trees rather  than just being leaf litter and also is good for invertebrates so it's by diversity point  of view it was the way to do it but in the last few years we've changed that in that  you need a dense canopy to absorb the ammonia so you don't want those open spaces because  that lets the ammonia escape without having to force it through the leaves of the trees  
**0:23:29-0:23:34:**  so what we changing now is those areas that's near to the shed within sort of 50 to 80 meters  of the shed we will keep quite dense and not thin them out too much it's a dense canopy  just raise the base by taking branches off the bottom and that's meant that without now  planting further away from the shed with the more open dappled sunny gladed type planting  in the maybe the next 50 meters outside that so that's adding quite a bit more planting  
**0:23:55-0:24:03:**  to those areas at the same time it's we still get new farms or people building new units  there's always new units to keep processing and developing and adding tree planting to  so to sum up where your design is at the moment is you leave an area around the buildings  without any trees to avoid any leaves coming in and you were saying what 20 meters or are  you extending that are you extending that now are you still putting the first trees  
**0:24:25-0:24:31:**  at 20 meters 20 meters is fine yeah okay and then you you put quite a dense layer of trees  like and that would be on how many meters for example you would have several lines of  trees very close to each other then yeah about the next 50 to 50 to 100 meters okay and that  almost becomes a woodland then yes just yes just an elevated woodland and then behind  that then you'll go back will you have also clearings without any trees or do you just  
**0:24:53-0:25:02:**  go for this dappled kind of homogenous savannah planting on the rest of the land both if people  want and to some extent on our own farms it's it's what the surroundings are we have one  particular farm that's on a on a south facing sandy slope which is very good for low intensity  grassland so wildflowers grassland it's sandy areas it's not particularly fertile hasn't  been ploughed for hundreds of years so you don't want to plant trees and a lot of that  
**0:25:29-0:25:34:**  so we tend to leave open gladed spaces with just sort of trees clumps of trees dotted  around and then others is very much 50 percent glade 50 percent shade and I was wondering  I don't know if you have issues with predators then because I know that some people have  issues with prey birds of prey here in France or any other predators do the trees change  anything on that level or not really like have you noticed any difference the main aerial  
**0:26:01-0:26:08:**  predators that we have in the UK are buzzards or red kites and they will take chickens so  by planting trees you avoid that predator but the other main predator we have is foxes  and trees are good for foxes so yes you have to on the outside of the range people tend  to plant fox-proof fences to keep keep foxes out if they can it can be a challenge but  I assume that you did that before anyway no I mean that's right if you have so it's not  
**0:26:31-0:26:36:**  really a any additional cost or whatever okay no that's interesting yeah I wanted to yeah  go a bit more into how you work with farmers because one of the topics we're interested  with Dimitri is always about scaling and in a sense that's what you've done in your own  network because you've started things on your farm and then ultimately you were mentioning  that you work with 70 to 80 farmers and I assume that takes also organization and skill  
**0:26:56-0:27:02:**  and and and I'm really interested in the process of how you're able to scale those agroforestry  plantings throughout like quite a big acreage and with a lot of different people to address  and train yeah tell us a bit more about working with your network of farmers it just takes  a while I guess Paul's very good at visiting every year that's it that's a key thing but  at the same time we as a company will provide skills to show people what a planting an ideal  
**0:27:28-0:27:32:**  planting plant for their particular farm would be in consult consultation with them of course  and it's quite interesting we we do a little bit of work with the Woodland Trust in the  UK through one of our contacts one of our retail customers and about 10 years ago the  Woodland Trust asked if we would ask our farmers some questions when Paul went around and one  of the questions was would you plant any more trees and at that time we had 62 farmers and  
**0:27:53-0:28:01:**  60 of them said no and two said yes they would at that time it was probably when there was  a lot of fairly young plantings they asked the same question last year 10 years later  and it was exactly the opposite way around 60 said they would and two said they wouldn't  which I was astonished by when you think about it they grow on people they grow on you you  walk through these trees now they're 20 30 40 feet high they have barn owls living in  
**0:28:26-0:28:33:**  them they have squirrels living in them you can walk through and see red squirrels and  it leaves you can see it leaves something and I think people understand that they're  leaving something for the future it's here for 150 years it's them that did it and that  they kind of grow on people so it's initially it was it was cajoling it was chasing it was  well you can't supply eggs to us if you haven't got them we pay them significantly more for  
**0:28:50-0:28:56:**  eggs from where they have tree planting which helps they have to look after them and they  know that but it's it's just little steps it's it's not a big we have the plan with  the plan developed we know what it is that is how you can plant them we'll supervise  the plant and we buy the trees all they've got to do is plant them and then look after  them so that that's that the deal initially is like if you're if we're gonna buy your  
**0:29:16-0:29:22:**  eggs you have to plant trees or is it we give you a premium but you don't have to no no  they have to plant trees okay that's part of the part of the contract okay yeah and  then you have now all the expertise within the company then to do the design to do the  consultation you have those skills yourself or do you work with a third party that will  do that audit and do that consulting with them yeah we still work with Paul you know  
**0:29:41-0:29:46:**  25 years down the line we still work with Paul as an independent consultant he's the  guy with the knowledge he knows where the grant funding is for funding he knows what  tree needs to go where and more especially actually what tree doesn't need to go where  we're in a very area of outstanding natural beauty very sensitive landscapes you have  to be careful where you plant trees they don't all want to go everywhere you need to think  
**0:30:05-0:30:09:**  about it and that's what I try to get over to people that actually there's no one size  fits all there's no bad tree planting as long as you have thoughts about where it should  be planted and how it should be planted okay maybe don't get if you can't plant it downwind  of the chicken shed because you've got some type of particular protected pasture land  with wildflowers down there you maybe won't get the ammonia benefits but you'll still  
**0:30:27-0:30:31:**  get the welfare benefits and production and performance benefits if you have to go upwind  you know it's not the end of the world but you just have to work with your farmers sure  and you were mentioning the grants and I guess that's one big aspect of it I wonder both  you know 25 years ago when you started planting trees and now how does the funding function  you know is that something that you managed to get fully funded by private or public grants  
**0:30:52-0:30:56:**  or is that something that your company has to invest in because it sees the value as  part of the production process initially it was forestry commission planting and then  we discovered that didn't work because of the random spacing and planting they wouldn't  go to the trees in rows type funding so we just did our own thing and accepted the fact  there was no grant funding we've done quite a bit of scientific research over the years  
**0:31:17-0:31:21:**  with an organization called the farm animal initiative which is the old Oxford university  research farm is where it's based and that's 2007-2012 there's a long term plan there with  hundreds of thousands of data points on production and performance that showed that you get better  production less mortality better feather cover better production from birds that have access  to trees so it pays for itself and so you know that sells to farmers as well once they're  
**0:31:43-0:31:49:**  planted they don't have a lot of cost and it pays for itself anyway you get less mortality  you get better drainage you get the CO2 now you get the ammonia as well so it is sellable  to farmers the grant funding like you say was forestry commission to start with and  then for years and years and years there wasn't anything that was suitable probably 2018 in  fact it was outside most European single farm payment schemes it was outside of those because  
**0:32:09-0:32:15:**  forestry isn't counted which was a downside for tree planting I guess but the benefit  to the farmer outweighing what funding you would get since 2018 the UK has looked at  a lot of the ammonia reduction targets and they're not achieving them there's grant funding  for ammonia scrubbing machines for poultry sheds in Northern Ireland mainland and some  of Wales and farmers are getting the funding for them and putting them in to keep the local  
**0:32:40-0:32:44:**  planning authorities happy but couldn't afford the electric to run them so they've never  been run so it was a waste of time and I think Northern Ireland very quickly realised that  one that over the 20 years they've been funding these machines actually ammonia had gone up  and not down so like it's about five years ago they were quite keen I was speaking about  trees at a conference in Edinburgh actually Centre for Environment and Hydrology that's  
**0:33:03-0:33:08:**  a CEH it was a CEH conference in Edinburgh and a representative of their government was  there and it was interesting the fact that ammonia reduction can be helped by tree planting  so they were one of the first of the UK devolved governments to put grant funding in place  for poultry and well not just poultry intensive livestock ammonia reduction so this grant  funded in Northern Ireland has been for quite a few years now and it's looking as though  
**0:33:35-0:33:40:**  the Brexit related rewriting of regulations in the UK will mean that it will be grant  funded in England and Scotland as well and talking to Welsh government on a similar sort  of scheme so it's just coming to the fore now that you can see for all the benefits  I mean you get benefits for animal welfare you get benefits for clean air so the Clean  Air Act is coming in in the UK and they're not quite sure how people farmers will react  
**0:34:00-0:34:04:**  to that challenge they'll have to plant trees it may as well be funded and I think the grant  funding authorities understand that you pay a farmer to look after these for 15 years  and for the next 150 after that they look after them themselves so there isn't a lot  of cost to it but all the benefit is still there and growing bigger every year so it's  an area where funding is starting to come into.  
**0:34:23-0:34:29:**  But before that actually happens or before you can fund all of that your company is still  the one investing in the trees on the farms on your suppliers farms then?  That's right yes it works it's not a big cost it's interesting you mentioned that the roll  out as well that the work we did with FAI clearly showed there's a bit higher welfare  there's less mortality better production better quality of product and better welfare less  
**0:34:51-0:34:59:**  feather pecking you mentioned how do you roll trees out the the RSPC Road Society for the  Protection of Animals UK have an assurance scheme for poultry farmers and well any farmers  but mainly poultry farmers and because we clearly showed there's better welfare for  planting trees it became part of their code of practice so anybody who is RSPCA assured  as a farmer has to plant their range with trees so we've planted as a company probably  
**0:35:20-0:35:25:**  quarter of a million trees something like that there's probably a million and a half  more across the UK as part of that code of practice and it's only been done because of  the research that showed that it was higher animal welfare so it's interesting if you  want to get things like trees rolled out across the country get the codes of practice for  welfare involved.  
**0:35:37-0:35:44:**  I wonder why is that the case that it increases it decreases feather picking do you have any  hypothesis on how it affects their behavior?  The science didn't particularly show why that was and to be fair we hadn't we hadn't really  figured that into the piece of research work but the understanding probably is two things  one it makes them range better so there's less density of poultry in the shed so during  
**0:36:04-0:36:08:**  the day they're out and about running about outside rather than sat inside picking up  diseases off each other and annoying each other so they start to feather pick and at  the other side the ones that do go outside are getting much more exercise and because  they've got more space between them they don't feather pick as much they don't get bought  there's other things to do there's books and leaves to play with and trees to play with  
**0:36:28-0:36:34:**  so they don't play with eating each other so I think it's just giving them more space  really.  And that would be the same factors that explain the increase in production then I mean it's  basically everything's linked right it's because they also have more space and less stress  that they produce better.  
**0:36:45-0:36:46:**  Exactly.  I remember when we had our initial conversation before recording you mentioned a figure I  think you were able to say that in a certain amount of time you were already paying back  the trees that you planted through these gains in production could you remind me this figure  I don't know if you still have it in your mind but that was quite fascinating.  
**0:37:01-0:37:07:**  Yeah the research showed that you get 2% less mortality and 2% more class A or edible human  edible eggs in a 16,000 bird unit which is an average sort of UK free range unit that  works out at around about £3,000 per year better performance from your birds that's  before you start to count all the environmental benefits so it's that pays for around about  the tree planting you do on a normal range that's out of flock there's 8 hectares of  
**0:37:33-0:37:38:**  range you plant 20% of it so you're looking around about 2 hectares couple of thousand  trees it just about covers the trees and the guards.  Oh that's interesting yeah and then every year it gets better then.  That's right yeah.  Because here you know because we've had trees planted for a long time like maybe 30 years  
**0:37:53-0:37:59:**  they're 40 feet high so we're quite regularly thinning those trees because they're still  quite dense and that biomass is just chipped up and goes into the factory and heats the  factory and all the wash water in the factory for washing trays and floors and machines  and things so we don't actually import any solid fuel of any sort be that gas or oil  because we have our own biomass.  
**0:38:21-0:38:26:**  That's really interesting I mean recently my colleague Dimitri recorded an episode with  a company producing biomass and although you've taken a very biodiversity approach to this  problem I imagine that you could also be looking at highly productive systems where you're  getting all these benefits but you have also planted trees with a more like production  oriented goal with you know quick biomass species popular etc and have actually you  
**0:38:47-0:38:51:**  know a high production biomass system you know I mean it's just a hypothesis but it's  just interesting to see that there seems to be like a lot of options around including  trees into poultry production and a lot of potential there to build really interesting  systems.  Yes I can say that you can have just about any sort of tree the only type of biomass  
**0:39:05-0:39:07:**  that doesn't work is willow.  Okay.  Because it's in very big coppice in willow so it's lots of very dense low branches, low  stems that it's impossible to get poultry out of so in order to put them back in the  shed at night it's impossible to get them out and lots of areas where they can lay eggs  
**0:39:23-0:39:29:**  and things so we have a couple of farms that tried coppice willow and it didn't work for  poultry but that's about the only thing I can think of all the other stuff has worked  yeah pine or whatever.  And I just wanted to go back to the work you're doing with farmers because we mentioned how  their perception really changed over these last few years and I was wondering initially  
**0:39:45-0:39:50:**  what were the oppositions what were the reluctance around trees?  Primarily change of use of land at that time land in the UK was probably 30,000 pounds  a hectare something like that and woodland was five so they were looking at the value  of their farms and saying I'm turning land from 30,000 pounds a hectare into 5,000 pounds  a hectare why should I be doing that?  
**0:40:14-0:40:20:**  And there is an argument to that I guess what we have in the UK is that those values have  got very much closer together just recently because of the need for biomass and demand  for land for planting biomass and things like nature conservation for new housing developments  and ecological benefits of new housing developments and CO2 sequestration so the value of land  for woodland has gone up significantly to be almost matching agricultural land values  
**0:40:45-0:40:50:**  so that reason has largely gone but even so in a big scheme of things we were paying these  guys five pence a dozen each more for their eggs for planting trees and that would way  outweigh for the sake of planting two hectares of your land for a chicken shed the loss in  capital cost of that of planting trees on it.  The only areas where we have significant problems really is on rented land where it isn't the  
**0:41:13-0:41:17:**  farmers own land and then it can be more of a challenge if the landlord just does not  want trees.  Not like you can do then.  But it's interesting because that premium is actually quite significant and I'm wondering  what your motivations are and were is it at some point did you are you doing this really  
**0:41:32-0:41:39:**  out of your values and you're out of care for you know the environment and biodiversity  or do you really see a business case for doing this and a way of also distinguishing yourself  from your competitors like I'm really interesting to see because you know it's quite a strong  statement.  If I'm being totally honest no it's not the saving the planners biodiversity angle it's  
**0:41:54-0:41:59:**  driving it and an ecological benefit angle it's driving it it's pure commercial farming  staying in business and selling a product for a higher value than you would if you didn't  have all of that in place but at the same time it's a nice that comes for free alongside  what you're doing.  Of course because that's something then you that you're able to you're able to sell your  
**0:42:19-0:42:24:**  eggs at a premium I think compared because of this of these trees because of what you're  showing in terms of animal welfare etc.  I have no idea how you know the your egg business functions and who you who you're selling to  but that's really something today that's valued by your customers.  Absolutely absolutely.  
**0:42:37-0:42:44:**  Some of our particular customers are some of the food service and retail in the UK that  prides themselves on not just their the quality of their product but how it's produced and  we particularly concentrate on that market it's it's it's not a commodity market and  if you're producing a non commodity product a high welfare high provenance ethically produced  product you may as well be selling it to the people who are demanding that as part of their  
**0:43:07-0:43:09:**  offering.  But in a sense you were almost one step before everyone because I don't know when you know  twenty five years ago I was like five years old or four years old so I don't remember  much about that time but I'm assuming that this whole concern about food quality has  increased dramatically in the last few years and that has changed a lot.  
**0:43:27-0:43:31:**  Was there already that customer base that was ready to pay for that premium at the time  you started planting trees?  I'll have to say I'm a business genius but actually it's just blind luck.  1995 when we set the company off we were selling only high welfare free range organic free  range product from ethically produced that was the business statement at the time and  
**0:43:54-0:44:01:**  that just asked us to look that the rest of the world has come down that road and met  us.  And do you see other actors in the poultry production starting to bring in trees is that  something that's picking up you would say in general because it's there seems to be  quite a strong case for it or are you still are you still quite unique in that respect?  
**0:44:19-0:44:24:**  No with the rollout in some of the welfare organizations demanding range planting that  certainly helped a lot of people on that route but you think of the things that it does it  gives you better performance so you make more money so that's a good start.  It reduces the runoff from your range so it reduces flooding and improves the percolation  rate of water into your range so it's drier.  
**0:44:41-0:44:45:**  It absorbs ammonia which is clean air is a huge thing at the moment it sequesters carbon  dioxide which everybody is demanding at the moment so you can plough your chicken range  but at the same time it can make you money from absorbing carbon dioxide so every single  piece of COP26 environmental provenance reducing carbon save the planet it fits with planting  trees for your chickens as well as things like nitrate runoff is significant or is a  
**0:45:09-0:45:13:**  significant problem in the UK from some of these intensive farms.  If you get the right if you plant the right type of trees that puts more carbon into the  ground the you put more carbon into the ground there's a direct link with the carbon nitrogen  ratio so you store more nitrogen in the ground so there's just numerous benefits for planting  trees that has meant that it's a sensible thing for farmers to do going forward.  
**0:45:35-0:45:40:**  We've mentioned a few times carbon sequestration and because you're giving talks and you're  talking with people from government I was wondering do you see carbon credits or payment  for ecosystem services as becoming part of your business model because there's been talks  about this for a while about exactly paying premiums to farmers or subsidies for sequestering  carbon for delivering good quality water for potentially reducing ammonia pollution all  
**0:46:04-0:46:09:**  these things seem obvious but it's quite hard to put into place because you obviously need  to quantify things you need to measure them you need to certify and I'm wondering how  you see these things evolving in the future.  You're right it's very early days it's baby steps at the moment isn't it but there's just  it's things like ammonia reduction it's a legal requirement by 2030 you have to reduce  
**0:46:26-0:46:32:**  your ammonia by 15 percent simple government legislation so you need to comply with that  type of thing.  Carbon dioxide there's just starting to be early days in carbon credit government sponsored  carbon credit so you sell your carbon credits to the government on a formula that they have  and then they supply them on to whoever wants carbon credits so that's a market that's just  
**0:46:52-0:46:57:**  starting to develop and I think will get bigger as it becomes more important and people need  to get near a net zero and another thing that's kind of coming into it is new developments  new housing developments in particular in the UK have to have a nitrate plan nowadays  which and trees are good at holding groundwater and storing nitrates and at the same time  they all have to have an environmental plan so you're not allowed to go and chop down  
**0:47:20-0:47:26:**  trees and woods and hedges and greenfield sites and put houses on it and have no benefit  for the environment so a lot of those particularly in the inner city areas where you can't plant  lots of trees within the estate to recoup that they're looking to purchase those credits  from farmers out in the countryside so again that's a market that hasn't it's there and  people pay money for it but the background that you were saying earlier about having  
**0:47:50-0:47:55:**  it accredited and counted for and assessed so you can't sell the same carbon 15 times  is that area regulation still to be developed it's early days.  But you know if it does develop and if they do manage to do that it could become a significant  source of income for farmers and tree plantations.  But listening to you it seems like such a no brainer to put trees and integrate trees  
**0:48:16-0:48:22:**  into poultry production do you see any kind of obstacles or reason why people wouldn't  do it either in terms of legal you were mentioning the type of land that's really interesting  I don't know if you see any other kind of big picture issues that might prevent that  from being scaled up.  A lot of the big picture issues are quietly being whittled away by the changing government  
**0:48:42-0:48:51:**  regulation as to the benefits of trees and tree planting the government is keen to have  people planting trees so there's less issues with things like the single farm payment where  you just didn't get any payment at all if you planted trees on it well any new grant  schemes that's coming ahead tend to encourage trees rather than discourage them.  I think the whole atmosphere has changed in the last five years and I think one of the  
**0:49:13-0:49:19:**  other things you're getting is that a lot of NGOs that over the past 20 years have constantly  battled for their little bit of NGO land and now on a bigger picture they all kind of try  to work together on the whole environmental linking networks of environmentally different  schemes be that wildflowers or wildlife welfare or biodiversity so we're all kind of going  in the same direction rather than everybody pulling in different directions I think it's  
**0:49:40-0:49:45:**  been a big change in the last five years.  But you need to have someone that's acting a bit like your company as a broker in between  and that is able to go and see the farmers and say listen we have the technical expertise  we have the person who can help you we have the trees we know the nurseries and it's just  a question of and we have the economic incentive in a sense like there would need to be many  
**0:50:05-0:50:10:**  other companies or the government should take that role of a kind of broker but I guess  that that role that you had is very crucial because probably that the farmers that now  have plants and trees working with you wouldn't have already maybe they would have one day  but you know that accelerated a lot.  Yes you're absolutely right but there's quite a few companies in the UK now major retail  
**0:50:30-0:50:35:**  which are insisting on that being part of their supply chain or some of the bigger other  egg companies in the UK are seeing the benefits and what will really drive a lot of that is  that particularly in the UK I don't know if it's the same across the rest of Europe is  that eggs are relatively carbon efficient so a lot of retail who have all their net  zero targets and will be net zero in eggs by 2035 or whatever it's an easy option to  
**0:51:00-0:51:05:**  start with and so a lot of those farmers are now getting the supply to those type of companies  are now getting carbon audits and on the back of that things like solar panels and trees  can become very much to the full and so if those farmers who had resisted and just planted  the minimum out that the welfare organizers recommend they'll be planting more because  of all the incentive is there to do that.  
**0:51:28-0:51:33:**  But from what I understand it seems that the change at least in the poultry sector is coming  more from the top down by buyers saying listen this is you know our list of criteria and  this is the conditions we want in our products that's where the most change is coming from  is that correct?  At the moment yes probably at the moment yes yeah it's big picture is that's one of those  
**0:51:50-0:51:54:**  drivers the other one is government and a lot of the way their subsidies and funding  is going is another driver public perception of the actual farming communities probably  another driver there's you know there's lots of drivers that they weren't there five years  ago so it's somebody with the head in the sand who doesn't seriously think about at  least planting some of their range in trees at the moment.  
**0:52:15-0:52:20:**  And what you said about government it seems that in that sense Brexit was positive at  least in terms of agroforestry that it was maybe easier to get that message through to  the government because it was maybe less of a big structure I don't know is that how you  see the that has evolved linked to before when it was the cap payment system?  I think government can probably react quicker I would imagine that Europe will get down  
**0:52:42-0:52:50:**  the same road eventually but having one government and not having to talk to every other 27 to  decide what you're going to do is mainly we can react quicker although we're still there's  still a long way to go on that there's still quite a bit that needs changing that doesn't  get changed but certainly from an agricultural point of view I think we get lighter touch  quicker movement.  
**0:53:07-0:53:12:**  And it means that you know people working with agroforestry or convinced of its benefits  have been effective in delivering that story and that message through to government which  is I guess the point of effective lobbying and when you're trying to bring in positive  change so it is interesting to see that this message seems to be going through then.  It's not a difficult message though is it?  
**0:53:29-0:53:35:**  You know you can have your acid scrubber with concentrated sulfuric acid going on to farm  using tens of thousands of pounds of electric every year and costing you hundreds of thousands  to buy in the first place or you can have some trees and they'll do pretty well the  same job and they'll do it for 150 years for free.  Okay they'll only take 50% of it they won't take all of it but you know that's just an  
**0:53:49-0:53:55:**  argument they just as well as all the other stuff you need like manure treatment and dietary  change for proteins and that sort of stuff it's just such an easy win and so obvious  that even government has to take notice of that.  There's still challenges you know you plant a tree and it's a whip in a tube for three  or four years so you have to work on crediting people before the trees are actually sequestering  
**0:54:21-0:54:25:**  ammonia because they don't start sequestering much ammonia for at least the first ten years  so there's still that step that the government hasn't taken us yet.  We just alluded a few times to the research I don't know if you feel like it's necessary  that we synthesize or have you know just that you make sure that you talked about all the  different research you did or if you feel like we've mentioned it enough because we've  
**0:54:42-0:54:46:**  mentioned it in different topics but it was interesting the type of research you carried  out do you feel like there's anything to add on that or are you just happy with what we  said so far?  To be honest with you we've covered most of the research work we did there was the obviously  the production health and welfare and benefits of trees research there's various other bits  
**0:55:02-0:55:08:**  and pieces of ammonia research which we discussed and the other was biodiversity work looking  at the different biodiversity and that's a big message on the biodiversity work that  was done with the Woodland Trust and Paul again just surveying detailed surveys of biodiversity  on farms for the first few years when you've got open sunny areas between the rows of trees  very good for bats the whole of the planted area becomes woodland edge effectively because  
**0:55:25-0:55:29:**  you have these alleyways up and down through the woodland so it's very good for bats and  bugs but that tends to go away as the canopy coalesces and you get more bird species coming  in and less of the invertebrates and bats but you get much more woodland resident type  birds a lot of which in the UK are red list species so that the ones that are in danger  of becoming extinct are certainly red list so that was quite an interesting piece of  
**0:55:53-0:55:57:**  research to show that benefit because it's not something that farmers really see or anybody  really think about but it clearly works but other than that we've talked about most of  the research I guess.  Great okay well David thank you so much for your time and thank you so much for all these  you know fascinating points that we covered today.  
**0:56:10-0:56:15:**  What we have to say is plant trees don't we?  Thank you for making it until the end I really hope you enjoyed the episode as usual you'll  find all the relevant links below and you can get in touch with us through our website  or social media.  