### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2022-10-20)  

**0:00:00-0:00:16:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:23-0:00:27:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry.  In order to find out how it can help us with these challenges, we'll be interviewing farmers,  
**0:00:35-0:00:40:**  scientists, and other experts to share with you their experiences, practical advice, and  scientific research.  Hello and welcome to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:00:48-0:00:53:**  I'm your host Dimitri and today we have the immense pleasure of welcoming Danielle Froebel  on the show.  So Danielle is the co-founder of the Agroforestry branch of Mata do Lobo, a 2,800 farm in the  
**0:01:02-0:01:05:**  Guayas region of Brazil.  And this farm produces soybeans, corn, other beans, and also has a pig fattening operation.  And they've decided to diversify with centropic agroforestry.  
**0:01:17-0:01:21:**  And we're really interested in this because it's quite a good follow up from the last  conversation we had with Mark Leiber who introduced us to centropic.  And today Danielle is going to show us how they are scaling the centropic system up to  
**0:01:33-0:01:36:**  a 50 hectares on the farm.  So Danielle, thank you so much for joining us today and welcome on the show.  Hey Dimitri, thanks for having me.  
**0:01:42-0:01:43:**  Awesome.  I really look forward to this conversation.  From what I understood, you know Mark, right?  
**0:01:49-0:01:50:**  Yes.  I got to know him in Portugal.  I just can't quite remember if it was like two or three years ago, but yeah, I got to  
**0:01:59-0:02:00:**  know him.  Amazing.  That's really cool.  
**0:02:03-0:02:09:**  And so, you know, the first thing I want to ask you, and I think is important also for  our guests to know is who is managing the Instagram account of Mata do Lobo?  Because it is just phenomenal.  
**0:02:16-0:02:21:**  And I advise all of our guests right now before they start to open their phone and to check  it out and to look at some of the pictures because it's going to give a lot of visual  information as to what we're going to be talking about today.  
**0:02:30-0:02:36:**  Well, firstly, nice to hear never anybody said something like that.  I'm sure they have.  It's so good.  
**0:02:39-0:02:40:**  There's so much info.  No, we're just, it's me and my wife.  We just managing it spontaneously like at the beginning I did lots of posts, but now  
**0:02:49-0:02:53:**  they, I really got lazy of Instagram.  So my wife is doing all the work and sometimes I just going into the fields of filming something  and then I give the photos and everything to her and then she just processes it and  
**0:03:07-0:03:12:**  yeah, but it's all her merit nowadays.  Nice.  And I wanted to also tell our listeners that we wanted to get you and your wife on it together,  
**0:03:19-0:03:22:**  but as you had told me, your wife doesn't speak so good English, right?  So we're, so we're just with you at the moment.  Exactly.  
**0:03:27-0:03:28:**  Yes.  Mm hmm.  Nice.  
**0:03:30-0:03:38:**  So yeah, maybe you could tell us a bit about how you got started in agriculture, in agroforestry.  How did you end up having this epic project going at Matador Lobo, maybe giving us a bit  of context as to the story?  
**0:03:47-0:03:48:**  Okay.  It's going to be a long story because I actually, I was born in Germany, right?  I'm from Berlin.  
**0:03:58-0:04:02:**  I'm originally an urban guy.  So I studied in Germany.  I studied environmental and resource management and then I, I went into agricultural economics  
**0:04:11-0:04:15:**  just out of, out of interest.  And during this, these studies I had like an exchange semester in Brazil and the University  of Sao Paulo.  
**0:04:26-0:04:29:**  And that's where I got to know my, my wife.  Her name is Maria, by the way.  And amazing.  
**0:04:33-0:04:34:**  So we got, we got to know that.  And then her father, her father, he has like, he is the owner of Matador Lobo, right?  And that's when I really first set foot on the farm.  
**0:04:47-0:04:50:**  It was in 2013.  I really didn't have any idea of agriculture or I don't know of all the practical details  of agriculture.  
**0:04:58-0:05:06:**  For example, I, I drive through Brazil and I wouldn't, I wouldn't know what a soybean  looks like.  I was really like a nobody, you know, I didn't know anything.  
**0:05:13-0:05:21:**  So yeah, but then in 2016 we decided to, to get married and then we decided also to move  to Brazil.  And Maria's father gave us this, this great opportunity to, to work at the farm, Matador  
**0:05:30-0:05:32:**  Lobo, right?  And at the time it was like a complete a hundred percent conventional farm, like a grain farm.  And so we started working there and we just like operating and helping, helping my father  
**0:05:52-0:05:54:**  in law, right?  We just saw like the immense amount of, of like agricultural inputs that I used there,  like pesticides, all kinds of fertilizers.  
**0:06:06-0:06:11:**  And it was really impressive because like the list of products that they use nowadays  in Brazil and tropical agriculture is like, wow, it's like, it was really a shock to us,  you know?  
**0:06:21-0:06:27:**  And especially what it means in terms of dependency also for the farmer, right?  And what this means for the, for the profit margin too, like the farmers really, really  just in many cases, just barely surviving, right?  
**0:06:40-0:06:47:**  And the big money is made by the, by the fertilizer and pesticide companies.  So the first intuition when we got there and we, we moved there, we, we started living  on the farm.  
**0:06:55-0:07:02:**  The first intuition was like, let's find a way to get out of this dependency, right?  Because it's really, I don't know, it brings a really bad feeling to be dependent on so  much stuff.  
**0:07:08-0:07:17:**  And so we started studying like various, various forms of different, different agriculture.  And then, yeah, like after a couple of months, we stumbled upon this, this course that was  offered that this workshop that was offered by, I think, at the time it was Namaste.  
**0:07:34-0:07:40:**  Namaste is a pretty famous agroforestry guy in Brazil.  And so we started, we applied for this workshop and then we started studying about centropic  agriculture, right?  
**0:07:49-0:07:51:**  And so that's where it all started.  And like, we really fell in love with the idea, you know, especially with the idea to  build like a complex agroforestry system that is completely independent from, from any input,  
**0:08:07-0:08:08:**  you know?  And so, yeah, we started studying, started studying, and then we started talking to my  father-in-law.  
**0:08:17-0:08:24:**  He could give us like some land to, I don't know, to test some stuff to practice.  Then he would just say, oh, I have this plot, you have 50 hectares.  If you want, you can plant by the end of this year.  
**0:08:33-0:08:38:**  We were just totally, I don't know, totally overwhelmed because 50 hectares is quite a  lot, you know?  But for him is like just this little piece of land, you know?  
**0:08:46-0:08:53:**  And so we got really, I don't know, we got really overwhelmed and we somehow got in touch  with Ernst Goertz, right?  We talked to him and we convinced him to come down to the farm and give some ideas to us,  
**0:09:04-0:09:07:**  to my father-in-law.  And yeah, that's where it all started.  So we worked out some designs with him and decided that we want to go into coffee production.  
**0:09:20-0:09:30:**  So coffee production is, how do you say, is the main cash crop of the agroforestry.  Okay, very interesting.  And I'm just curious because, you know, when you talk about complex and tropic systems,  
**0:09:39-0:09:46:**  that's very different agricultural approach to conventional corn and soy rotations.  And so if even there is rotation.  So I'm curious as to what, you know, your father-in-law and I'm sure he has a large  
**0:09:52-0:09:53:**  team there.  What were their initial thoughts about, you know, having such a massive paradigm shift?  Of course on a small plot, but I'm curious as to how that culturally, you know, sat for  
**0:10:06-0:10:07:**  him.  No, actually for him, I have to give like a huge credit to him because he was surprisingly  open to this and we even went to visit a farm in Sao Paulo state that's also quite famous  
**0:10:21-0:10:32:**  and Ernst worked on this farm like to start scaling centropic agroforestry.  It's Fazenda da Toca.  It's really quite famous.  
**0:10:35-0:10:45:**  That's how he visited this farm and yeah, I think he just saw there, ah, maybe it's  possible.  It looks really good and most of all, maybe we can do even better, you know, and he just  
**0:10:53-0:11:00:**  wanted to, if you guys like it, okay, then just do it, but do it like really, how do  you say it?  Let's do it a hundred percent, you know, let's don't just try to turn on.  
**0:11:08-0:11:15:**  Let's do it like full on, you know, and that reminds me of conversations that I had with  my father when we were starting Massey Farm as well.  It was like, you know, the same kind of approach, I guess it's interesting, but then, oh, but  
**0:11:23-0:11:24:**  then that's my father-in-law.  But then if we talk about like all the workers and neighbors and we have, for example, a  good friend here in the city of Rio Verde and we were talking about this idea and he  
**0:11:41-0:11:51:**  just said, ah, I can offer you something like in two years, if everything goes wrong, I  can borrow you some machines to rip out all the trees again and plant soybeans.  So I think that sums up like the mean opinions like of the people in the region, right?  
**0:12:08-0:12:09:**  So it, but that's the beginning, right?  It all over the years, the dynamic quite changed a little bit.  So I'm curious as to the objectives of this agroforestry plot, were you really looking  
**0:12:20-0:12:27:**  to do something that's, you know, economically viable and kind of maximizing, let's say,  maximizing the economics of agroforestry for that plot?  So were you looking to do more something kind of to learn kind of research-based to actually,  
**0:12:35-0:12:42:**  let's say the main objective, like which we are still, it's of course economics.  We want to create like a large scale system that is economically viable, but there are  like some sub objectives that are quite different, I would say.  
**0:12:53-0:13:03:**  For example, like it was really, how do you say, if you, if we talk about complex centropic  agriculture, like Mark Leiber was talking about, you use like really thousands and thousands  of specimen on one hectare, for example, and like really an immense amount of species,  
**0:13:18-0:13:19:**  right?  Like in a really dense plantation.  And if you do that, it's quite easy in my mind.  
**0:13:29-0:13:34:**  And we tested this at first, like in really small scale plots, like let's say a hundred  square meters and something.  And it's really easy to achieve like input independency, right?  
**0:13:43-0:13:49:**  So you do the system, maybe at the beginning you fertilize it, but in some cases you don't  even need it.  And the system just works on its own.  
**0:13:53-0:14:04:**  You then you prune the system, you prune the trees, you accelerate the organic matter recycling,  right?  And the system just works on its own.  
**0:14:08-0:14:11:**  So now we want to do it on large scale.  We need, for example, for the coffee production and for the managing of the organic material,  we need to, we need machines, right?  
**0:14:24-0:14:31:**  Like for example, we need a tractor to pass between the lines and we need to simplify.  It's really hard to work with, I don't know, a hundred species on a 50 hectare scale and  like manage it somehow mechanically.  
**0:14:41-0:14:56:**  So a really big sub objective is to find a system, like a prototype for our region, right?  Which is economically viable, but also doesn't need an input like on a long scale, you know?  So the question is by how many species, by how much plant density we can simplify the  
**0:15:12-0:15:20:**  system so that it still works independently and doesn't need any disease control from  outside or any fertilizers, right?  So that's the big question.  
**0:15:26-0:15:28:**  Yeah, for sure.  No, it makes a lot of sense.  And some people will kind of be kind of shocked or impressed to hear that you can have a system  
**0:15:39-0:15:46:**  that is this really complex system you're talking about that doesn't require any inputs  to work.  And so I'm just going to ask you to reconfirm that.  
**0:15:50-0:15:55:**  Is that something that you've really, you've experienced there on your land in your context  that things just work like trees, fruit trees grow and produce in that kind of context?  No, I totally can confirm it.  
**0:16:03-0:16:11:**  Like the plot, the oldest plot, it's like five years old, right?  And it's a small scale plot, 100 square meters.  And we planted it, it was our first or second plot.  
**0:16:17-0:16:21:**  The first didn't go so well.  And then we rethought everything and like did it in, let's say, had more luck or planted  more densely, adapted our whole planting system there.  
**0:16:34-0:16:35:**  And it is possible.  And I, until now I didn't, I didn't use any fertilizer, anything, but it's the, it's still,  it's a small scale plot, right?  
**0:16:45-0:16:54:**  And we also, we also made some soil analysis and it's really interesting because the organic  matter content like really increased.  I think it's, it's 18% or something.  
**0:17:01-0:17:07:**  And the phosphorus amount is like really insanely high on this plot too.  And it got confirmed by university too.  So there was a master student that came there and like took some soil samples and took it  
**0:17:16-0:17:20:**  to the professors and they were like, ah, but it's not possible.  Take it again.  You know, it's really surprising.  
**0:17:24-0:17:25:**  But wow.  Yeah, and then again, on the large scale, it's a whole different story.  We are still like, I call it like a transitioning system because we are still applying some  
**0:17:39-0:17:40:**  fertilizers.  It's, it's certified organic, right?  So we, we use compost, we use manure, for example, like in the first year, because for  
**0:17:50-0:17:57:**  example, coffee is like really, it's like really dependent on some, on some available  nitrogen at the beginning.  So we have to use some, some other fertilizers.  
**0:18:03-0:18:08:**  And so how many years in that, like, let's say in this transition system or the larger  scale system, how many years are you expecting to be continually bringing in fertility?  Ah, like, I think like about three years would be a realistic number.  
**0:18:20-0:18:22:**  And then you can just let it go.  Yeah, but it's like, it's really hard to say too, but because we are still adapting like  on the, on the species composition of the whole system.  
**0:18:34-0:18:38:**  And that's the tricky, the tricky, the tricky part of it.  Like what trees to use and what spacings to make it like easy, easy, manageable, right?  And large scale to make the coffee harvest easy.  
**0:18:47-0:18:53:**  There's so many components and so many plants that I don't know, for example, there are  so many variables, right?  For example, you have one plant and I don't know how this plant will behave like five  
**0:18:59-0:19:01:**  years from now, you know?  So it's really, and how it will interact with some other plant on the other end of the,  of the system.  
**0:19:09-0:19:17:**  So it's really a really complex task, you know, to, to simplify a syntropic system.  Yeah.  And I mean, in general, this is one of the big topics around syntropic is the complexity  
**0:19:22-0:19:23:**  of it.  And I wanted to get back to that soon.  But before we go into all these like very juicy topics which are, I'd love to maybe  
**0:19:30-0:19:34:**  set a bit more context about your system first, so people can understand it a bit better.  But to finish off this last conversation we were having, you see the factors that make  that that creates a input independence system is just the species density and high diversity.  
**0:19:50-0:19:54:**  Or is it also the fact that these systems you have to manage them more with more pruning,  more organic matter cycling?  You know, what are the factors that create, that make the system so, I mean, independent  
**0:20:01-0:20:02:**  from inputs?  No, it's the, it's the whole design of the system, right?  It's so it's the diversity, right?  
**0:20:07-0:20:09:**  The root diversity.  So we, because we haven't even started to talk about it and that's what makes it so,  so complex too.  
**0:20:16-0:20:20:**  For us nowadays, it's all about the soil biology, right?  And so for like a good soil biology that can sustain the plants, you need like diverse  root systems, right, diverse species.  
**0:20:34-0:20:43:**  And of course in the syntropic system, we also always need to work with the completely  covered soil, right?  Because the tropical heat at the sun, it's like really strong.  
**0:20:48-0:20:56:**  And if you have like the uncovered soil, I don't know, so biology just won't get better,  right?  So, and in the syntropic system, we, yeah, as you said, we start, we work with a lot  
**0:21:02-0:21:12:**  of pruning, like in order to manipulate the shade of the system too, or the sun intensity,  that's especially important for the coffee, but also like to create a thick layer of organic  material on the ground, right?  
**0:21:21-0:21:26:**  That creates lots of humus.  And yeah, and also the, how do you say the, the composition of the, of the system by itself,  like in terms of stratification, like how, how do I organize my stratification?  
**0:21:44-0:21:51:**  So for example, coffee is a, a tree species that needs a lot of shade in certain times  of the year.  And so I need to organize various plant species that are above my coffee.  
**0:21:57-0:22:04:**  So the, the various layers of the forest system, so a tall layer, then I need some emergent  layers.  And so that's, yeah, that's a complex task.  
**0:22:10-0:22:17:**  So maybe we can then go into describing a bit, the, the, I mean, you've told us that  your, your main product is going to be coffee, but I mean, I'm expecting, I mean, I can't  expect that you have other products that you'll be generating as well based on the diversity  
**0:22:26-0:22:27:**  that you implemented.  So when we're looking at now, let's look at the scale systems that you're planting on  so far 28 hectares, if understood well, maybe tell us a bit about what products in total  
**0:22:37-0:22:40:**  are you expecting to get out of that plot?  And we had to learn this, like for the large scale, we really are only focused on coffee.  So the other, the other stuff, they are only like sub-products, you know, for example,  
**0:22:51-0:23:00:**  my, my tall, tall forest layer, I, for example, I planted lots of, um, mango trees, avocado  trees, but I'm not thinking about the fruits, like per se, I'm thinking about the, the organic  material that the trees will generate me in, in the longterm, you know, so, but still,  
**0:23:15-0:23:23:**  yeah, we, for example, nowadays we have like tons and tons of bananas that, uh, that are  producing.  And yes, I say the mangoes avocados, uh, are you selling those bananas or are you just  
**0:23:30-0:23:31:**  keeping them for internal?  I mean, on 28 hectares, I just imagine it's quite a lot.  Yeah.  
**0:23:35-0:23:43:**  We are commercializing them and yeah, using for, uh, we are using them for, for feeding,  for example, the chickens too, or we are trying to sell them and it's, that's like the next  big task in our commercialization because, uh, it's a really, really interesting story  
**0:23:58-0:24:04:**  too, because, uh, the bananas, they, they started producing like this year, like really  big amounts.  And so we are trying to sell them in the, in the close by city Rio Verde is like one  
**0:24:11-0:24:19:**  hour away and for, and for like, for this to compensate, we need, like, we need to be  selling like big amounts of bananas, you know, because of the transport costs and everything.  And so, but because our bananas, they are like growing in the shade and they get like  
**0:24:33-0:24:34:**  really, how do you say it?  They get like a thick skin and they grow like really big, you know, our bananas are huge  compared to the supermarket bananas.  
**0:24:44-0:24:49:**  And so we started talking to local distributors and showing our banana say, Oh, it's organic  bananas.  We, but we, we are willing to sell them, uh, for a conventional banana price.  
**0:24:56-0:25:03:**  And they say, no, we can't take your bananas because they are too big and too strange.  And like people will get, they won't, they won't know what to do in the supermarket because  they're not used to these types of bananas, you know?  
**0:25:15-0:25:21:**  And so now we are talking to some, uh, some government guys there that, uh, that organize,  how do you say the, uh, the meals and local schools, you know?  And so now we are trying to sell the bananas directly to the government, you know, maybe  
**0:25:34-0:25:40:**  that will be an a way, but it's really, I don't know.  It's really, you think about it, it's really, it makes no sense, you know, ah, the optics  of your banana is different.  
**0:25:48-0:25:50:**  It's it looks, it looks healthier.  It looks better, but, uh, we can't, we can't buy it because it's out of the, you know,  the standard we have, you know, so now we are looking, I don't know, we are looking  
**0:26:01-0:26:03:**  on for some other strategies.  So it would be, for example, an idea to, how do you say, to, to raise some, some pigs to  like, how do you say organic pigs and then feed the bananas to them or invest more into  
**0:26:16-0:26:21:**  chicken, you know, they eat bananas too.  But in the end, I only planted the bananas because of the organic matter.  I wasn't at the beginning thinking about, ah, I need to say, ah, sell this banana, you  
**0:26:32-0:26:33:**  know, it's just a bonus.  So I can really, I'm really relaxed about it.  It's not like, ah, oh no, I'm gonna go bankrupt if I don't, don't sell these bananas, you  
**0:26:43-0:26:45:**  know, it's just a bonus.  And what I am interested in is the, is the organic matter from the, from the tree, you  know,  
**0:26:52-0:26:58:**  I wanted to know as well about the, the timber products that you've, you've planted.  Um, I thought I saw on Instagram that you were planting some trees and managing them  for, for, for timber as well above the coffee.  
**0:27:07-0:27:17:**  So we are, how do you say, we are, we are planting, um, on Instagram, you probably see  that we are planting lots of eucalyptus.  And, but the eucalyptus for example, is, is only also for organic matter.  
**0:27:26-0:27:35:**  So the eucalyptus, I have to say to like, as Mark said in the, in the other podcast,  syntropic agroforestry is all also a successional system, right?  So we, we planning to have some, uh, some type of species succession.  
**0:27:46-0:27:53:**  So in these timber species, like eucalyptus is the first one in the succession.  So we planned like really lots of eucalyptus and like, uh, in three or four years, I guess  we won't have any eucalyptus anymore.  
**0:28:02-0:28:09:**  They will be all chipped and go to the, to the ground, to the soil.  And then for the actual timber production, we planted, uh, Australian red cedar and African  mahogany.  
**0:28:21-0:28:25:**  But they are only like the phase two in the succession.  Then we also planted like lots of native species, which we, uh, planted directly by seed or  I still, I'm still completing the system, like, uh, with some really slow growing timber  
**0:28:39-0:28:46:**  species that need like, uh, 50, 60 years, you know, like all native species.  Very interesting.  And the objective here as well is to get one to create the dynamics of the system and get  
**0:28:52-0:28:55:**  the succession growing and get the diversity in there.  But at the same time, you're hoping to get some wood out of that, right?  I'm hoping to get some wood out of that.  
**0:29:01-0:29:08:**  Um, but, uh, especially, but nowadays I'm only thinking about the, for example, about  the African mahogany and Australian red cedar.  Like I don't know if, if there's like a 50 year old, uh, uh, Jatoba tree.  
**0:29:20-0:29:23:**  That's like a really, really expensive wood here.  If I would be able to cut it down because I don't know, like 50 years from now, and  you have like this beautiful tree, I'm, I'm also not considering it in the economic calculations,  
**0:29:36-0:29:37:**  right?  So in the economic calculations, and I mean, we love talking about economics on the podcast.  So I like that you're bringing this, this word up so often, you know, you're, you're  
**0:29:46-0:29:52:**  just looking at, you're, you're, you're, you're basing your business plan on coffee.  And then everything that happens beyond that is to be able to be dependent on, uh, independent  of inputs, to be able to activate your soil, to be able to create those successional dynamics  
**0:30:02-0:30:04:**  that create that make the coffee thrive.  Is that correct?  If I can summarize it a bit in a schematic.  
**0:30:08-0:30:09:**  Only it's only based on coffee.  I'm working, I'm working only for the coffee and trying to get the best atmosphere for  my coffee plant without any, without any inputs.  
**0:30:21-0:30:26:**  So how many of these other species, excluding the seeds that you're planting of the native  plants, just looking at the ones you mentioned, eucalyptus, the cedars, the mangoes, the ocada,  bananas, how many of these of these support species you have per coffee plant in a way  
**0:30:35-0:30:40:**  I'd love to understand, like kind of like what's the, what's kind of the, the, the,  the density, um, um, proportions between your main cash crop and the, and the others, because  some people may think, and there are some agroforestry systems where, you know, you  
**0:30:49-0:30:55:**  have coffee, but then there's a support species planted on the edges for, um, for, for wind  breaks or there's a few species dotted around the landscape, which would also be considered  agroforestry more conventionally.  
**0:31:01-0:31:06:**  So how does, you know, how does, maybe you can tell us a bit about how syntropic differs  from that and give us a few more details.  Ah, so like in terms of trees, like only for, if we consider the, yeah, got to go in, go  
**0:31:19-0:31:22:**  into a little bit into the design.  So if you have like a coffee, a coffee line, right?  So there are, for example, there are two types of, of, of rows we work with.  
**0:31:29-0:31:39:**  There are the coffee rows and the, let's call them service rows, tree rows, but in the coffee  row there are, there are trees too.  So, but there are, but there are not any coffee plants.  
**0:31:43-0:31:46:**  So it's really somehow confusing.  For example, only in the coffee row, I have like one support plant for every, for every  coffee plant.  
**0:31:55-0:32:02:**  So for example, I planned a coffee plant, like, like every 65 centimeters.  And like in the spaces between I planned cassava, I planned some beans and then I planned some,  some other tree that's called Guapuruvu.  
**0:32:13-0:32:20:**  That's only for shading and for, for organic matter too, like more upfront.  The only in this line, for example, I have a successional structure and I also have like,  how do you say, the succession and the stratification, right?  
**0:32:32-0:32:35:**  Because the coffee is my low level plant.  Then I have the cassava, which is like a really fast growing initial plant that creates really  good soil conditions.  
**0:32:43-0:32:46:**  And you don't harvest.  I could, but I don't.  I just prune it.  
**0:32:49-0:32:53:**  Like whenever the coffee needs more light, I just prune it.  Like for example, the coffee, it needs more light and dry season, right?  So in March I would go then prune all the cassava plants and then, and then for example,  
**0:33:04-0:33:10:**  every six coffee plants, I planned a Guapuruvu tree, which gets like a really, it's a really  big tree and it has like, you can compare it somehow to, to a palm tree.  It gets like, really diffuses the light, you know?  
**0:33:22-0:33:28:**  So there's still lots of light coming to the ground, but like really filtered in a really  cool way and really, in a really good way for the coffee plant.  And it also, this Guapuruvu tree is like the next step of succession because for example,  
**0:33:39-0:33:46:**  my cassava plants, they normally will only survive like for two or three years.  And so they won't be in the system anymore.  But then the Guapuruvu tree, it's gotten like really strong and gets like lots of material  
**0:33:57-0:34:01:**  and then lots of organic material.  And also, how do you say, gives like a complete closed rooftop of, of, of, how do you say,  of leaves that filters the sunlight, you know?  
**0:34:16-0:34:27:**  So only in this line I have, I have normally for one coffee plant, one support specimen,  right?  And then again, I have the, the pure tree lines where I have the eucalyptus, the mango,  
**0:34:34-0:34:37:**  the avocado.  But just to get an idea, I think, I made, I made this math yesterday.  I, for example, per hectare, I planned 2,600 coffee plants.  
**0:34:52-0:35:01:**  And in total, in total, I have 7,500 plants per hectare, including the coffee.  So it's, so it's a ratio like two to one for coffee, not for whichever very dense planted,  as you said, every 65 centimeters, not for a mango tree planted every four meters.  
**0:35:17-0:35:21:**  So it's, so there's more support species than there's twice coffee.  Very nice, very interesting, fascinating stuff.  And so, I mean, the next thing is to ask you, have you experienced coffee, health and vigor  
**0:35:31-0:35:37:**  and growth similar to the banana experience that you're having with very healthy bananas,  very big fruits, lots of them is, is the coffee responding as you would expect, or as you  would like from this kind of these conditions with low inputs to no inputs, shade, et cetera?  
**0:35:51-0:36:01:**  Yes, yes, I can say this, especially, especially in the last two years, we like saw, I don't  know, we saw like really good plant health, you know, and I can say this because coffee  is a really problematic plant like in our region, because it's in the dry season, it  
**0:36:16-0:36:23:**  gets like really, really dry and it doesn't rain for, for five months.  And there are lots of problems with the, with the so-called coffee leaf borer.  It's like, it's like a pest that goes in there and eats all the leaves and it causes like  
**0:36:37-0:36:42:**  huge how do you say, desfoliation, do you say it like, like this?  Yeah, exactly.  And it's really interesting because we also have how do you say we have a consultant that  
**0:36:52-0:36:57:**  helps us with the, with the coffee issues on the farm because coffee is like a really  new area for a really new area for us too.  And like he gives us some, some hints about the plant physiology and like how to deal  
**0:37:09-0:37:11:**  with the pests and diseases.  And we also always like to get like the conventional view on the plant, right?  And he just comes in and sees like all the, all these plants attacked by the coffee leaf  
**0:37:23-0:37:24:**  borer.  And he's, he would just say, man, if, if this, if you would have so much of this pest on  a conventional plot, there wouldn't be any leaves left on the, on the coffee plant.  
**0:37:40-0:37:46:**  But for some reason with all the shading and because all the environmental conditions,  our leaf, they won't drop.  So it doesn't cause any, any desfoliation on our plants.  
**0:37:55-0:37:56:**  That's fascinating.  That's really interesting.  And has the coffee started producing?  
**0:38:00-0:38:10:**  Yeah, this year actually we had the first little harvest and, but it wasn't a lot.  It's only like for experimenting and try to, because we have to learn about the drying  of the, of the coffee fruits too, and how to process the coffee.  
**0:38:23-0:38:31:**  So the little bit we, we harvested, we, we, we start, started training how to process  the coffee, right?  And two, two weeks ago we sent the first little sample to, how do you say, some, a roasting  
**0:38:45-0:38:47:**  company, right?  People that are really specialized in roasting, like for a speciality coffee.  And yeah, they said, wow, great quality.  
**0:38:57-0:39:03:**  They wouldn't expect this great of quality, like from the region where we are from, right?  Nice.  Well done.  
**0:39:05-0:39:06:**  Congrats.  That's really, that's really awesome.  That's really, really cool to hear.  
**0:39:09-0:39:12:**  And again, this is at now this coffee, how old is it?  Four years old?  No, no, the oldest plot.  
**0:39:16-0:39:19:**  The oldest coffee is two and a half years old.  Okay.  So you're still bringing in a bit of a fertilization and a bit of input at this stage, right?  
**0:39:25-0:39:28:**  You're still helping the system transition.  Yeah.  But still two and a half years.  
**0:39:31-0:39:34:**  But the whole system is older, right?  Because another strategy is that we, we plant the tree lines that haven't any coffee.  We plant them one year in advance.  
**0:39:45-0:39:47:**  Then we let the trees grow a little bit.  And then afterwards we enter with the, with the coffee lines because we discovered in  our first, in our first endeavors with the, with coffee planting, we planted all at the  
**0:39:59-0:40:04:**  same time and, and try to go low input.  And it just didn't work out.  Like coffee trees would die.  
**0:40:07-0:40:16:**  And so we decided our first, our first coffee plantation, we replanted it like a year afterwards.  So it didn't work out.  And it's really, it's really interesting to see like on the, how do you say on the, like  
**0:40:26-0:40:32:**  on the, on the borders of the, of the plot, sometimes you have some, some coffee plants  that don't get any shade, right.  And they get the same treatment, like from a same amount of compost, same amount of everything.  
**0:40:43-0:40:46:**  And yeah, they just don't like it.  They get like really sick and eventually don't produce.  So there's like really a direct, a direct dependence on the, on the conditions you provide  
**0:41:00-0:41:06:**  to the coffee and the amount of, of external inputs you have to use, right.  So more and more shade at the, at the right time.  And I'm curious, and of course it's a bit early to say so, but what is your, like your  
**0:41:18-0:41:25:**  best guess or what do you expect the yield at maturity of coffee to be as compared to  conventional plot, which is without shade, lots of inputs to keep the plants healthy,  to keep them running.  
**0:41:31-0:41:33:**  I'm convinced about quality differences.  We don't need to go into that in so much, but you know, just looking at quantity differences,  do you expect your coffee, your agroforestry coffee to produce as much?  
**0:41:41-0:41:43:**  I want to.  And your father-in-law as well.  Yeah, no, but seriously, I think the goal, the goal for us is to, to have the same quantity  
**0:41:55-0:41:56:**  of production.  Of course we have a, how do you say, a lower density in terms of coffee plants, right?  So in our, our preferred system, for example, we have a 66% of the, of the amounts of coffee  
**0:42:12-0:42:22:**  plants compared to conventional system because we always have one, one, a tree line.  So yeah, we want to, to even the, the conventional production in terms of production per coffee  plant.  
**0:42:30-0:42:31:**  Right.  And we also, I didn't tell anything about this.  We we have three types of systems too, so we have this one system I told you about,  
**0:42:46-0:42:52:**  like it has one, one tree line, two coffee lines, but we also planted a system where  there is one tree line, one coffee line, and we planted a system where there's three tree  lines and all three coffee lines and one, three, three lines.  
**0:43:03-0:43:09:**  And so we are, we are testing three different systems too, and it's really, it's really,  really interesting like how the dynamics change and yeah, how the, the coffee health changes  too.  
**0:43:18-0:43:27:**  If you, if you plant more service species for the, for the coffee plant, for example,  this one plot where we planted one tree line, one coffee line, we have this really extraordinary  amount of, of wood chips now.  
**0:43:39-0:43:47:**  So we have on the, on the tree line, no on the coffee line, we have this maybe let's  say 10 centimeter thick layer of mulch and it directly translates into the, into the,  into the health of the coffee plants and into the, to the production and to the size of  
**0:44:02-0:44:03:**  the fruit.  And it's really interesting.  Our goal is to find out, oh, what is more economically viable?  
**0:44:11-0:44:19:**  This one tree line, one coffee line, one tree line, two coffee lines and yeah, just time  will tell.  So I asked on Instagram and I saw that you shared it as well.  
**0:44:25-0:44:29:**  I asked people to tell us about what they wanted to ask you guys.  And we've got lots of responses and everybody, 95% of the responses that we got were to understand  the technicalities of, you know, how did you plant the system?  
**0:44:41-0:44:42:**  How do you manage the system?  It's crazy because people really are hungry for, and so are we with Etienne on the podcast,  are hungry for these technical details, you know, and how are we going to make it work?  
**0:44:52-0:44:56:**  Because people, they, they, they, they kind of, there's a, there's a certain understanding  now that agroecology works and, and is powerful and working with ecosystems and ecosystem  processes is, is important and we're seeing it on various different, you know, from coffee  
**0:45:08-0:45:11:**  to pasture and animals to, you know, row crops.  So the, what people want to know now is, you know, how does it work in practice?  So you've taken a syntropic system and you've planted it at scale and, and quite fast.  
**0:45:19-0:45:25:**  So maybe we can start going a bit into some of these details as to first question, how  the hell did you plant so many trees with such high density?  You know, we're talking about 7,500 plants per hectare in an efficient way.  
**0:45:33-0:45:36:**  What was your strategy?  What was like kind of the evolution?  What did you learn on planting so many trees and making it work?  
**0:45:41-0:45:48:**  So I think the most important part for, for this type of system to work without any, any  herbicides for example, you need lots of organic material at the beginning.  And so the first intuition was to plant a really high yielding grass species on the  
**0:46:02-0:46:04:**  whole plot.  So we planted Mombasa grass on the 50 hectares and let it like grow for, for the, for the  rainy season and then we're mowing it on the, during the dry season and then let it grow  
**0:46:22-0:46:27:**  again on the, on the beginning of the next rainy season.  And then we started to, yeah, to, to mark these different rows, you know, like with  the, with the distance of, we started the system with a row distance of four meters.  
**0:46:45-0:46:54:**  And so we were marking it with the GPS and a subsoiler, but we went in with a subsoiler  and then with, tried somehow on, on this, on this row to, to kill the Mombasa grass  with the, I think you call it a rotary tiller.  
**0:47:08-0:47:10:**  Is that right?  So you have this, this clean row of like 80 centimeters, it's like 80 centimeters wide.  And then, and these rows, we, we put in some, some limestone, some stone meal, some compost.  
**0:47:31-0:47:38:**  And then, and then afterwards the central part is we, we used, I think you called, I  even looked it up the, the word you call it.  It's like a mechanical dented rake.  
**0:47:46-0:47:48:**  Is it just a hay rake?  It's a rake hay and to, yeah, like a hay rake.  And so we, so, so we could cover all the, all the rows with the Mombasa grass.  
**0:48:00-0:48:05:**  And so we, we took care of the, of the, of the weeds, right.  And that was effective as a strategy for weeds that really kept the weed.  It's really effective.  
**0:48:10-0:48:18:**  If you have like a good, a good biomass at the beginning is the best thing you can do.  And so it keeps weeding to, to really a bare minimum.  And so you did that, you applied, you, you mulched with the Mombasa grass just after,  
**0:48:28-0:48:30:**  just after making the line.  So you, you, you pass the rotary tiller and you, and you soon afterwards you passed your  mulch, right.  
**0:48:37-0:48:42:**  And then, and then all the trees, for example, we started with the, with the tree lines and  then we started planting eucalyptus.  Eucalyptus was all planted manually.  
**0:48:48-0:48:50:**  So we would just, I don't know, how do you say it?  We would just put a stick in the soil, make like the, and then plant the plant the eucalyptus  tree.  
**0:48:58-0:48:59:**  I don't know how you call it there.  Like these little tubes, you know.  On forestry tubes.  
**0:49:02-0:49:04:**  Just pull out the eucalyptus, plant it.  And yeah, we would like, we would plant like, I think 5,000 trees a day with about six persons.  So it's a really quick operation.  
**0:49:17-0:49:25:**  And then for all the avocado, mango, we would plant seedlings, seeds.  And then for mahogany and Australian red cedar, we would plant them with these tubes too.  So it's really a quick operation.  
**0:49:35-0:49:40:**  And then for the coffee, the coffee is a little bit special.  So we would have the same technique where we have the rose, you know, and then for the  coffee we would call like specialized coffee planters from, you know, the region where  
**0:49:53-0:49:56:**  it is more common to plant coffee.  And they're just like insanely quick in planting coffee manually.  So they just want, there are these tubes too, right?  
**0:50:04-0:50:09:**  And they're just like three guys that take the tubes, plant that, that, that, and they  make it like in a really quick fashion.  I think the last plantation we did, they planted 30,000 of these coffee seedlings in one and  
**0:50:21-0:50:23:**  a half days for a person.  Okay, nice.  And so you've planted and the coffee as well, you had enough bombastic grass to get started  
**0:50:32-0:50:35:**  to not need to import any mulch material.  Is that correct?  But still sometimes, of course, there are some spots where there isn't enough.  
**0:50:41-0:50:50:**  And especially in the first year, weeding is one of the principal activities, you know,  there's lots of weeding going on all the time, especially during the rainy season.  And so how many people do you have working on the weeding, for example?  
**0:50:57-0:51:02:**  Do you have like a team of six people constantly working on the agroforestry?  When we started, I think it was, we started with four people, like during the planting,  we also have, sometimes we have seven.  
**0:51:10-0:51:16:**  And then during the dry season, we maybe have four people.  But now, nowadays we have a fixed amount of workers, five persons, sometimes six.  For 28 hectares.  
**0:51:26-0:51:29:**  Yeah, for the 28 hectares.  But yeah, and they are busy like year round, like with the, with weeding, with mulching.  Yeah.  
**0:51:38-0:51:42:**  And then, and then I have to say again, like when the system is implanted, then we have  the bombastic grass coming back, right?  And here in the rainy season, you can cut the bombastic grass six times.  
**0:51:50-0:51:53:**  So it goes like, it grows, it grows.  And then we have this other machine.  If the guys are interested and want to take a look at it, I think there are lots of videos  
**0:52:02-0:52:03:**  on Instagram.  Yes, and I've seen it.  It's a, it's a, it's a flail mower with side discharge.  
**0:52:08-0:52:11:**  Oh yeah, a flail mower you call it.  And it has, it has like a conveyor belt, you know, they're amazing.  And it just puts the bombastic grass.  
**0:52:17-0:52:29:**  And the really awesome thing about this machine is that you can put wood onto the, onto the,  onto the field too, like wood with a diameter of up to 15 centimeters.  And it will just chew the wood and spit it out on the side too.  
**0:52:42-0:52:45:**  So it really, this really, yeah.  How do you say?  It was really, it really helped to reduce the labor costs, right?  
**0:52:54-0:52:59:**  So for example, if we, we prune some, some of the trees and we have these little sticks,  we just throw it all on the, on the field and then the machine goes over it and it spits  it right out in little pieces.  
**0:53:07-0:53:09:**  It's really.  I'm kind of in love with that machine.  I've been following it for, well, since, you know, for six years now.  
**0:53:15-0:53:17:**  I've been looking at it and dreaming of using it.  Haven't had the opportunity to use it yet, but hopefully it will happen soon.  Going and shifting now to kind of the inputs that you used at the beginning, you mentioned  
**0:53:25-0:53:26:**  rock dust.  I always calculate for a meter, like meter of row, you know.  Do you have an idea of how much compost you find per hectare for the coffee?  
**0:53:33-0:53:43:**  So for example, for the coffee, I applied three kilos per meter of compost.  And then on the rock dust, for example, depending on the rock dust, it was like half a kilo.  So there's this one rock dust that has like lots of phosphorus.  
**0:53:55-0:53:57:**  The other one has more potassium.  Very nice.  And did you irrigate at all?  
**0:54:00-0:54:01:**  Yeah.  Actually we tried without irrigation and yeah, the coffee just died.  But it was also because of the, what I told you at the beginning, because there wasn't  
**0:54:12-0:54:15:**  any shade for the coffee.  But still we see in our region, even with like really old coffee trees, like in parentheses,  like six year old coffee trees, we planted at the beginning on our little plot.  
**0:54:28-0:54:36:**  If it's not like a really, really dense, dense agroforestry, it doesn't, for us, it doesn't  work five months without rain and really dry air.  It's almost impossible.  
**0:54:43-0:54:44:**  Interesting.  Yeah.  The coffee would establish under a canopy of a forest that's already gone through a  
**0:54:49-0:54:54:**  certain evolution in terms of soil, microclimates.  So that's interesting.  And so maybe now we can shift to how you manage the system nowadays.  
**0:55:01-0:55:09:**  And again, there's some phenomenal videos of your team working with, as you said, the  side discharge flail mower with a chipper as well.  So maybe you could tell us a bit about how you're managing at scale this quantity of  
**0:55:17-0:55:18:**  biomass.  You know, what's your, what's the strategy, what have you learned and you know, where  do you want to go with this?  
**0:55:23-0:55:25:**  Yeah, it's really a lot of work.  If you think about it and, but really have to get credit to the team because they're  really awesome and like doing all the work because it's, yeah, it's really an immense  
**0:55:37-0:55:38:**  amount of work.  But still the main strategy is like, there are lots of strategies because you, for example,  and especially the coffee, right?  
**0:55:49-0:55:54:**  If we look at the coffee again, the coffee at the beginning of the dry season, you need  to open up light, light for the coffee, right?  Because he needs more and more light in order to, in order to flower evenly and to get a  
**0:56:04-0:56:07:**  good amount of flowers and fruits.  So that fact is really interesting because if you, if you look at studies of shaded coffee  that come from universities, for example, ah, they planted coffee in shaded conditions,  
**0:56:20-0:56:22:**  shaded by African mahogany.  The result is always, ah, it doesn't produce, it produces only 10% of the normal amount.  But where's the error?  
**0:56:33-0:56:40:**  The error is they did not work with the dynamics of the shading, right?  So you have a time of the year where you need shade and a time of the year where you need  like almost 90% sunlight, right?  
**0:56:49-0:56:54:**  And so if you do that with coffee, it produces a really good.  So and if this time comes, ah, all the coffee needs light.  We go around in the coffee lines, we cut down all the cassava, all the guapuruvu trees,  
**0:57:05-0:57:13:**  and then we shred them and put the shredded material on the lines of the, of the coffee,  like to, to get the whole, the whole row covered.  And at the beginning of the system, we also worked with, um, how do you say, do you say  
**0:57:23-0:57:26:**  apical pruning of the eucalyptus?  Like cutting the tops off?  Yeah.  
**0:57:29-0:57:30:**  Makes sense.  So we, we would go around, cut the tops of the eucalyptus trees, um, and thinning the  eucalyptus trees too, because we plant them really densely.  
**0:57:37-0:57:45:**  So some we would cut at the top and some we would eliminate and then go around with the  wood chipper, ship the wood and where organic material is needed, we would, uh, we would  put it on, on the row.  
**0:57:55-0:58:04:**  And uh, nowadays, yeah, we see that this apical pruning, it's like, if we, if you think about  it at scale and you do it all manually, it's really lots, lots of work.  So in our new systems, we, we designed them to, to don't, to don't do this anymore.  
**0:58:17-0:58:24:**  So we planned a certain amount, for example, of eucalyptus trees, and then we make a plan  in advance.  So after two years, we will cut down this one.  
**0:58:28-0:58:30:**  After three years, we will cut down this one.  And then after four years, we won't have any eucalyptus anymore because then the African  mahogany, the cedar will be big, big enough to give like a canopy, a canopy layer to the  
**0:58:45-0:58:46:**  whole system.  So I don't need a eucalyptus anymore.  And those African mahogany and the Australian red cedar, I won't do any apical pruning.  
**0:58:55-0:59:01:**  I just want them to grow big and big, and they're planted in an amount per hectare that  they won't influence on the, on the coffee production.  Wow, that looks really smart, complex system.  
**0:59:08-0:59:10:**  And then comes the other part.  And then you have to make sure that the, the tall layer of the forest system develops really  good too, because from this point on, no, I don't have any eucalyptus anymore.  
**0:59:24-0:59:30:**  All my organic, the big, the big amount of my organic material comes from the tall layer  because I won't touch the canopy layer anymore, which was the eucalyptus, but now it doesn't  exist anymore.  
**0:59:36-0:59:42:**  So now my organic material comes from the mangoes, the avocados.  So you're, but you're, you're pruning them at a tight, you're pollarding them still.  When they are big enough, the mangoes and the avocados.  
**0:59:49-0:59:55:**  No, I could prune them in like two meters.  I don't need, need any, because you could, you could prune them even in half a meter  of height and they will just come back like really, really strongly and, and grow again.  
**1:00:08-1:00:15:**  And so, so the whole idea of the, of our new system designers to, to don't need any, how  do you say, ladders, any ladders that you, so you won't, won't have to go up on some  ladder on some platform, you know.  
**1:00:27-1:00:28:**  Okay.  So everything is kind of accessible for human height to be able to easily prune them intensely.  Okay.  
**1:00:37-1:00:41:**  And then you've, you're still going to have lots of biomass and organic matter, right?  So I've seen you've been using a chipper to process that organic matter.  Are you happy with that system?  
**1:00:47-1:00:54:**  Yeah, especially the wood chipper was the first, or first machine for the processing  of biomass.  But yeah, we, I'm always thinking it's, it's a really slow process, right?  
**1:01:01-1:01:06:**  If you cut down the eucalyptus, ah, you cut down, I don't know, 2000 trees and you have  to put them in the wood chipper.  And sometimes there's a problem with the wood chipper.  
**1:01:11-1:01:15:**  For a big system, I think it's not the future, you know?  I think maybe the future is the, a really robust flail mower.  So you throw everything on the ground and just go over it with the flail mower.  
**1:01:26-1:01:34:**  And I've seen some that they use in another coffee system that are really, really robust  and you just throw like a big chunk of wood on there and just, just goes through and,  bah, disappears, you know.  
**1:01:43-1:01:47:**  There's some machines called forestry mulchers.  Yeah.  They need a big tractor though.  
**1:01:49-1:01:54:**  They need a, quite a, I think, I think a minimum would be 90 horsepower, but I think I'm not  even sure that's enough.  And they have like a teeth system, which isn't with hammers.  
**1:01:59-1:02:03:**  It's with little teeth that gradually like eat into the wood.  And so it, you know, it doesn't require, it doesn't completely smash it up.  It really just like chips at it.  
**1:02:09-1:02:13:**  And they seem really interesting, but again, they're quite a big piece of equipment.  In terms of, I'm thinking in terms of compaction, passing it often, but, but how many times  did you pass in your lines with this type of material?  
**1:02:21-1:02:25:**  Yeah, it's really, that's really not what we want, right?  Because compaction is really an issue.  And another option is just cut down big chunks of wood, you know, and just leave them on  
**1:02:32-1:02:33:**  the rows.  That's another option that we do sometimes.  Just leave it there.  
**1:02:36-1:02:42:**  Just cut it with the chainsaw and leave it there because, ah, it will get decomposed  someday, you know, it just takes a lot, a lot of more time.  A two and a half years of coffee growth evolution.  
**1:02:53-1:02:57:**  Are you still weeding or is that completely, is that not, you don't do that anymore?  I'm still weeding, but it's a lot less, you know, it's just like some, sometimes it's  just normal that you have like, I don't know, some grass grows between some coffee plants  
**1:03:11-1:03:15:**  or something, but it's, it's reduced really to a, to a minimum.  Yeah, but there's, there's another dimension also that I want to talk about is the, the,  the pest, the pest and disease control, right?  
**1:03:26-1:03:32:**  Because it's, it's a transition system still, and it's not, it's not totally stable.  So at the beginning we have lots of problems with, how did I say the leaf borer, for example.  No, that's, yeah, that's probably the only problem.  
**1:03:44-1:03:49:**  And we, we still use some inputs that we produce on farm.  So we use lots of fungi that we produce on farm, and then we put them into a sprayer  and spray the spores.  
**1:03:59-1:04:06:**  And so the spores will stick to the, to the leaf borer and then they will just kill it.  So, but I think.  What fungi do you use?  
**1:04:10-1:04:18:**  We use bulbaria, the other one is called metarhizo.  I don't know how it is in English, but we use lots of fungi on the, on the farm that  we produce in our own lab here.  
**1:04:28-1:04:32:**  And we use them in the, in the conventional fields too.  Okay.  That's amazing.  
**1:04:34-1:04:40:**  And so how many times would you be intervening with a sprayer inside your centropic system?  Ah, in the new system you see, it gets attacked a lot more.  So at the beginning, the leaf borer, it only attacks like during the dry season.  
**1:04:52-1:04:59:**  And if we talk about like a five months dry season, we go, we spray it like three times.  But then our, in our oldest system, we only sprayed this year one time and we saw just  stabilized, you know.  
**1:05:06-1:05:09:**  And there we have, we have another component.  So now we adapted our, our composition of the tree species.  We plant, for example, more Inga trees.  
**1:05:20-1:05:24:**  And they have the, they have the property that they, when they flower, they attract  like these predator wasps and they also attack the leaf borer.  And so we found that out like two years ago and now we are including these tree species  
**1:05:37-1:05:41:**  like heavily in our, in our new plantations.  And it really, wow, it's really awesome.  It really makes, it really makes a big difference.  
**1:05:46-1:05:53:**  So the, of course, here the aim is to, to in the future to have a stable system.  And so we won't have to, to enter with the sprayer anymore.  Right.  
**1:05:59-1:06:01:**  Fascinating.  And so if you look at the work that you're doing on your turn a half old system, would  you say that most of the work is managing biomass?  
**1:06:09-1:06:15:**  Is that kind of like where most of your team is, is active or cause you're not, you're  harvesting a bit, but not yet a lot.  Just understand a bit like the proportion of work that you guys are engaging in.  
**1:06:21-1:06:28:**  Yeah, I would say half of the work, half of the work is managing biomass.  Then another, let's say a quarter of the work is managing weeds, manual weeding.  Right.  
**1:06:42-1:06:51:**  And then the other part, I just for example, yeah, harvesting banana harvesting, coffee  harvesting.  So, but the, yeah, as you said, the biomass managing is the principle, principle part  
**1:06:59-1:07:01:**  of the activity.  So I'm, I'm, I'm curious about the, the harvesting process and that you're expecting.  I mean, now that you've got smaller, smaller yields, they've just started, but when they  
**1:07:09-1:07:14:**  pick up and you start to have bigger quantities and they pick, excuse my ignorance in terms  of coffee production systems, can you mechanically harvest this?  Are you, will you be using mechanical harvesters for coffee or does everything go by hand?  
**1:07:25-1:07:37:**  So the system is designed for, to have the possibility to use a harvester, a coffee harvester.  But if you use a coffee harvester, you have to know, oh, okay, it's a heavy machine.  There will be compaction.  
**1:07:45-1:07:48:**  Branches of our loved coffee will break off.  So it's like really how do you say it's a rough method to manage the harvest.  So in the last years we have been thinking, is it worth it to use a coffee harvester?  
**1:08:05-1:08:14:**  And I think if we get the good compensation out of the coffee, if we get quality coffee,  bio organic coffee quality, good quality, I think we don't need the coffee harvester.  We would prefer to have the manual harvest because you get more quality out of it, you  
**1:08:25-1:08:28:**  know.  So yeah, tell me, sorry, finish off your thoughts.  And also less losses because normally if they use a coffee harvester, they are like, let's  
**1:08:39-1:08:45:**  say 20% of the coffee fruits, they will end up on the soil.  And so what they do in a conventional coffee farm, they will like really clean up the area  between the rows, like really, I don't know, like really get out all the weeds, get out  
**1:09:01-1:09:06:**  all the plants and there's nothing, nothing anymore.  So it's only bare soil and so the grains that get lost, they pass with another machine that's  like, how do you say, yeah, a sweeper will get sucked in by a vacuum and so it will suck  
**1:09:23-1:09:26:**  in the rest of the grains.  And this method, like you can hear, it's really aggressive because yeah, you have to get rid  of all the vegetation between the coffee lines and all the mulch theoretically, right?  
**1:09:40-1:09:47:**  So it would be for us a stupid thing to do, like during the year to invest in mulch and  then, ah, let's put the mulch away and then pass with the coffee harvester and then yeah,  get the rest from the grains from the ground.  
**1:09:57-1:10:05:**  So if you do it manually, there's no necessity because you won't have this much of a loss  in terms of coffee fruits.  That's very interesting.  
**1:10:10-1:10:15:**  So it's kind of this mechanical harvesting method is slightly incompatible with some  of your agroecological techniques.  You'd have to think about some serious changes to the system.  
**1:10:23-1:10:28:**  And also what I was thinking about is that all the support species that are pollarded  relatively high in the coffee lines, you'd have to have them really low and without any,  you know, they'd have to be like kind of sticks so that the coffee harvester could pass on  
**1:10:40-1:10:42:**  top of the coffee lines.  You see what I mean?  It would change the management of the support species.  
**1:10:46-1:10:50:**  It's interesting that you mentioned it because we have to do it anyway.  Like for example, in April, we will, I told you about the guapuruvu tree that looks like  a palm tree.  
**1:10:58-1:11:04:**  In order to get light, we cut it completely off so there will only be the stick left,  right?  And so it would be compatible for a coffee harvesting machine to pass over it.  
**1:11:11-1:11:18:**  So even with the manual harvesting, we will cut it off the same way, you know?  So for example, I cut it off in April and now we are in September.  Now the branches that are coming out of the guapuruvu tree, they already grew like one  
**1:11:31-1:11:33:**  meter.  And so in two more months, I think there will be this closed rooftop we talked about, you  know?  
**1:11:42-1:11:44:**  I'm going to pick your brains a bit more here.  What do you see as the main, let's say opportunities for mechanization beyond the mulcher, which  you mentioned, to be able to have these centropic systems work at scale more efficiently?  
**1:12:02-1:12:06:**  What kind of machines are you talking about with your teams or that you're hearing about  coming from the different centropic practitioners, consultants, experts in Brazil?  What are the next steps for mechanization of these systems?  
**1:12:16-1:12:25:**  Well, I think for us, what we feel right now, it's really only about the pruning, you know?  And the pruning, sometimes you have to, how do you say, you have to get rid of the side  branches of the eucalyptus.  
**1:12:33-1:12:38:**  So it would be nice to have like really a fast way to cut down the side branches because  we all do it manually with, how do you say, with the machete and some like tools, you  know?  
**1:12:49-1:12:50:**  So the guys really do it manually.  It would be really nice to have like a faster way to do it, like all the pruning activities.  And I think for our system especially, that's about it.  
**1:13:02-1:13:07:**  I really don't see, it's all about the biomass managing.  For the other parts, I don't see any special necessities.  Like for coffee harvesting, if you want to do it mechanically, we could do it.  
**1:13:18-1:13:23:**  And yeah, it's not really, I don't know.  For me, it's only the part of the biomass managing.  Okay, that's really interesting.  
**1:13:29-1:13:34:**  So I don't see it like lots of people talk about, ah, because we can't scale it up because  of, we don't have the machines or something.  For our system especially, I don't see it this way.  
**1:13:43-1:13:54:**  But if we talk about, I don't know, some other systems based on other crops, maybe it would  be different.  But in coffee, traditionally you use lots of manual labor.  
**1:14:00-1:14:01:**  Fascinating.  Very cool.  So we talked a lot about the more practical sides, etc.  
**1:14:08-1:14:16:**  I do have a few questions for you relating to, to start off with commercialization.  And you already brought this up five minutes before.  And I'm curious, when you're looking at your coffee, are you thinking of marking up the  
**1:14:25-1:14:30:**  price based on quality, based on the fact that it's a syntropic agroforestry coffee?  And you think you can, you know, how is your system going to influence the way that you're  going to commercialize it and also take into account that if you do manage to set a higher  
**1:14:41-1:14:46:**  price at a premium, you're probably going to be able to cut out the mechanized harvesting,  which is going to be able to meet your soil and regeneration objectives.  So what are you guys talking about internally when it comes to commercialization?  
**1:14:57-1:15:08:**  Internally, I guess, to get a good price out of coffee, I think it's all about quality,  you know?  And so without quality, I think even with the best story, syntropic agriculture, I think  
**1:15:17-1:15:22:**  if it's a bad coffee, you won't get a good price.  So it all depends, it really all depends on if the syntropic system gives me a good quality  fruit, coffee fruit.  
**1:15:34-1:15:35:**  And so that's one part.  And then, yeah, of course, we have an organic certificate.  In Brazil, normally, this gives you like a 20% price advantage, 20, 30%, it's not a lot.  
**1:15:51-1:15:59:**  But if we talk about like specialty coffee with a really good quality, we talk about  100% price advantage, right?  So double the price, triple the price.  
**1:16:04-1:16:09:**  There's no limit.  And that's why I told you like it was a really good news for us that on the last week, we  got this approval.  
**1:16:19-1:16:24:**  Ah, your coffee really is great, you know?  So it was like a really a key element because if they would have said, oh, no, your coffee,  it doesn't drink really well, it would be devastating, you know?  
**1:16:37-1:16:40:**  That's such good news.  And really, I said it before, but again, congrats, because it's really something special in and  what kind of markup as compared to conventional coffee?  
**1:16:48-1:16:52:**  What kind of markup can you expect when you have that quality?  Let's assume a markup, it's how, let's say, how much more will you be able to get paid  for per kilo?  
**1:17:01-1:17:07:**  Or are we talking about, you know, you said there's a markup at 20, 30% for organic, but  if you have some really high quality, decent coffee, can you expect 50%, 100% more?  You know, I want to try and understand the scale of how much flexibility it's going to  
**1:17:18-1:17:19:**  give you economically.  Yeah, I think you can easily, if you really have a good coffee, you can easily expect  the 50 to 100% markup, but then you have to consider that, of course, not all of your  
**1:17:33-1:17:42:**  production will be this good quality, because there's also always, like, how do you say,  inferior quality coffee, like all these, how do you say, my vocabulary.  So some of the coffee you harvested and it has some damage, you have to do really a separation  
**1:17:56-1:17:58:**  process.  So I would say, like, for specialty coffee, like, maybe only 60 to 50% of your production  qualifies, maybe, and then the rest will be conventional coffee.  
**1:18:11-1:18:12:**  No?  But if you have a really good coffee and a really good story behind it, because story  is also an important factor, right, especially when you talk to small scale, how do you say,  
**1:18:28-1:18:36:**  these cafeterias that have like a roasting operation, you know, it's really important  to have this, to have the story too, and the certificates, right.  And I think in terms of story, syndromic agriculture is really, like, people are looking exactly  
**1:18:47-1:19:00:**  for this, it has, it's the complete package for me, it's CO2 neutral, or at least CO2  neutral and it's organic and if it works out totally and part independent, it has everything.  Reforestation.  
**1:19:08-1:19:12:**  Yeah, it ticks a lot of boxes.  Yeah.  Very interesting.  
**1:19:15-1:19:22:**  And are you guys planning on having your own processing facility on site eventually when  the yield goes up or, and you know, being able to really integrate vertically there  with the coffee?  
**1:19:29-1:19:31:**  What do you mean by processing like roasting?  Yeah, I mean, having the whole cleaning, separating the skin from the pips and then, and you know,  the whole kind of transformation processing chain.  
**1:19:45-1:19:54:**  No, that's actually something we will have to do because, for example, if we harvest  our coffee, organic coffee, and then we ship it out to some, after we dried it, of course,  and then we ship it out to some processing facility and I don't know any nearby processing  
**1:20:08-1:20:15:**  facility that's certified organically, so we would lose the organic label.  So it's kind of mandatory for us to take the step.  So yeah, we will have to invest in it really.  
**1:20:28-1:20:38:**  And then, yeah, the principle idea is do the processing on farm and sell the green beans,  but I'm really interested to get into roasting too.  It's really interesting.  
**1:20:43-1:20:44:**  Nice.  That's awesome.  But then, for example, roasted coffee would only qualify to sell in Brazil, right, nationally  
**1:20:51-1:20:55:**  because of crazy, of crazy taxes.  If you want to export roasted coffee to Europe, oh, it's impossible because of import taxes.  I want to pick your brains on one last subject.  
**1:21:11-1:21:19:**  And I'm very curious as to, I mean, you're from Europe, you know the European context,  and I'm curious as to how you think a centropic system can scale.  So you're looking now at 28 hectares, you're going to be scaling up to 50, right, gradually.  
**1:21:34-1:21:37:**  So that's quite a large farm.  If we even just look at a tree crop farm, it's significant acreage.  And so do you think that these systems are applicable and would work in a European context?  
**1:21:50-1:21:55:**  And could you a bit like give us your thoughts on this because you're actively there, you're  managing it, you're managing your teams, you're right in the middle of it.  So really curious as to what you could share to our listeners on that front.  
**1:22:06-1:22:10:**  Wow, that's a big question.  First, I think if I would do it in Europe, maybe it would be really, I would need lots  of more strength because it would be, I don't know, not depressing, but plants are growing  
**1:22:24-1:22:28:**  so slow there if you compare to tropical agriculture.  Here it's so rewarding, you plant an eucalyptus tree and after one year, it's like eight meters.  I don't know how it would work there, it would be really slow.  
**1:22:39-1:22:49:**  And then as you said, still even with the best machines and all the stuff you need really  lots of manual labor and you need people there observing the system daily.  So you can design a proper system, right?  
**1:23:02-1:23:07:**  And I don't know how it would work in Europe.  Where do you get your knowledge from?  Because clearly this is a much more complex system than a traditional orchard and requires  
**1:23:18-1:23:22:**  another set of skills that we discussed in our previous interview with Mark.  A lot of observation, being very intimate with your system ultimately.  And so you've also started in 2013 without prior experience with centropic systems.  
**1:23:34-1:23:40:**  So in agricultural terms, it's relatively, well, very relatively young system.  You've also been doing it for four years in your context, you're pioneering in your region,  you're finding the solutions, you're kind of breaking through the ice for the other  
**1:23:53-1:23:54:**  people that come behind you.  So it's a really tough situation to be in.  And so where do you get your information, your knowledge?  
**1:24:01-1:24:03:**  How do you make it work?  As it works in your Instagram, which seems like it works.  The basic knowledge you get in agroforestry courses, like centropic agroforestry courses,  
**1:24:17-1:24:24:**  like the basic understanding of stratification succession, right?  And reading a little bit about species, but I think the two, the one most important thing  you said already, it's observation.  
**1:24:34-1:24:40:**  And what we see, especially in conventional agriculture and especially in Europe too,  like the trend is the opposite.  It's like nowadays the big companies are trying to sell these iPads where you can track your  
**1:24:52-1:24:56:**  tractors from the city and use drones.  So all the technology nowadays, it's developing to get the farmer away from the field, right?  And I think it's especially the wrong direction.  
**1:25:08-1:25:14:**  People have to get back to the fields, like feel the soil, observe.  An observation is like the principle, it's the most important thing you have to do in  a centropic system.  
**1:25:24-1:25:28:**  So if not, you will lose track and it just won't work.  And another big factor is you have to be good at coping with deception because at the beginning  you plan some stuff, you think this, you have these romantic thoughts about thriving forests  
**1:25:44-1:25:46:**  and stuff.  And in almost all the cases, at the beginning it won't work that way.  You will be totally disappointed and then you have to move on.  
**1:25:56-1:25:59:**  You have to be really dynamic.  Maybe I try this, try this, try this.  It's all about trying an error, I guess.  
**1:26:04-1:26:14:**  And really, because nowadays with the basic knowledge about some species you could use,  you just have to try and make errors and try to look also at local ecosystems, see what's  growing there.  
**1:26:24-1:26:30:**  Try some different species and stuff and always trying to improve the system.  And another big component we didn't talk about, like in our case, we have to say we are managing  a system for about trying for five years now.  
**1:26:42-1:26:46:**  Now we will harvest the first good results.  I think in the modern language you would say we have an angel investor.  So for example, the convention agriculture is paying for our project now because we didn't  
**1:27:01-1:27:09:**  have any returns yet and had some bad experience, some failures at the beginning.  So that's a really special situation we have.  So it would be really different if I would have taken a credit from a bank, for example,  
**1:27:19-1:27:23:**  and I have to repay it in five years.  I would act differently.  For sure.  
**1:27:30-1:27:34:**  But this is part of the work of pioneers, as we said, people that are developing solutions  in a local context.  The next people that want to start a centropic project, your neighbor that said, I'll rent  
**1:27:40-1:27:43:**  you the machines to take down your orchard.  Well maybe in a few years you'll see it works.  He'll be like, well, come and help me do this.  
**1:27:47-1:27:53:**  He's going to start on a completely different basis with a completely different set of,  let's say, yeah, with a different ability to make the right decisions.  I just wanted to take on, because you were asking at the beginning what people are saying  
**1:28:06-1:28:12:**  like, and I told you this example about the one guy who wanted to rip out our trees so  we could plant soybeans again, right?  And nowadays I have to say the agroforestry, it had like a spillover effect on our conventional  
**1:28:23-1:28:25:**  farm.  So we started working on the agroforestry and really concentrating on this agroforestry  system.  
**1:28:32-1:28:37:**  But then we really, because on the system we are only working part-time, like half a  day, the other half day we are working on the conventional farm.  And then it just makes no sense to do on the one side business as usual and on the other  
**1:28:47-1:28:51:**  side we have this perfect system.  And so we really rapidly try to make some changes in the conventional farm too.  And so nowadays, for example, we don't use any more chemical fertilizer, we don't use  
**1:29:06-1:29:16:**  any more fungicides, and we really have tremendous cost reduction on the conventional farm and  really amazing results.  And yeah, all because, yeah, it started with the agroforestry and then it spread like,  
**1:29:26-1:29:31:**  how do you say, a good virus, you know.  And so nowadays we are really working hard to get a really sustainable soybean production,  for example, and corn production.  
**1:29:41-1:29:48:**  So when we had talked before, you mentioned that you had quite a large reduction in input  costs without compromising yield in your, so this is something that needs to be repeated  to our audience because it's another example of the power of regenerative agriculture capable  
**1:30:03-1:30:09:**  when done correctly and in the form of a slow transition has some pretty spectacular results  for farmers, especially demonstrated in row crops.  Yeah.  
**1:30:16-1:30:23:**  So yeah, just to summarize, like I think it was, it's the fourth harvest now that we don't  use any more chemical fertilizer, so we, again, all credit to my father-in-law, we told him,  ah, we could change up the fertilization program, why don't we use compost, for example, like  
**1:30:36-1:30:45:**  chicken manure, rock dust, could we make a little test plot, like 30 hectares, and he  said, no, let's do it on the whole area first year.  So it's kind of crazy, and so the first year we just cut out all the chemical fertilizer  
**1:30:58-1:31:05:**  and changed to organic fertilization, and ah, you know what, let's not use fungicides  anymore.  Okay, we didn't use any fungicides anymore, but we had to substitute them with some, started  
**1:31:16-1:31:24:**  working with bacteria, started working with other fungi that we would apply on the fields  and surprising results.  We, like in the second harvest, we did our record production, right, of soybeans with  
**1:31:37-1:31:43:**  reducing the cost by 40%, the whole operation costs, and it was really amazing, and now  we're going into the fourth harvest with the same program and always trying to reduce more  and more of the chemical part, and it's working, it's really, and the last news we got, like  
**1:31:58-1:32:05:**  the guy that takes the soil analysis, he said, oh, your phosphorus tripled in the last two  years without applying any significant amount of phosphorus.  So how to explain that?  
**1:32:13-1:32:16:**  Phenomenal, this is a hopeful message.  It gives a lot of hope, you know, when you hear these stories, and this is without a  complete change in paradigm, but just massive improvements in practices, without yield reductions,  
**1:32:28-1:32:31:**  this is what's going to scale regenerative agriculture.  And that's awesome because in Brazil, really, lots of farmers are going into the same direction,  you know, using rock dust, compost, focusing on soil biology, focusing on, how do you say,  
**1:32:48-1:32:55:**  green cover, like mixtures of plants during the dry season to get the soil cover, to maintain  soil biology, and all like mainly because of the cost pressure, right, because fertilizers,  they got really expensive.  
**1:33:08-1:33:13:**  Everything got so expensive, and so these guys, they don't have any subsidies, right,  and so they have to find a way out.  And so many of these farmers, they go into that direction, the more regenerative approach,  
**1:33:24-1:33:33:**  not because society wants it, because they are forced to do it because of the cost pressure.  And at the same time, they go back, how do you say, they somehow go back to traditional  practices and like, learn to observe again, take the soil into the hand, observe with  
**1:33:52-1:33:53:**  a microscope and stuff.  And so it's really awesome to see what's happening here for many farmers.  That's amazing.  
**1:34:02-1:34:03:**  That's really cool.  That's a beautiful way to finish this interview.  That's your agroforestry adventure that you started and project that you started there  
**1:34:10-1:34:21:**  is kind of emanating and creating change throughout the 2,800 hectares that you guys are managing.  So that's really cool.  But Daniel, thank you so, so much for coming on and sharing your experience with us today.  
**1:34:29-1:34:34:**  An absolutely fascinating talk.  And I know that this is going to be a very practical talk and I know that this is going  to be very much appreciated by our listeners.  
**1:34:40-1:34:43:**  So thank you so much for taking the time.  Thank you too.  And sorry for my English sometimes, for my vocabulary.  
**1:34:49-1:34:52:**  But thank you very much for having me too.  It's been very good.  Awesome.  
**1:34:54-1:34:55:**  Really cool.  All right.  And then we'll see you next time then.  
**1:34:57-1:35:02:**  So in three years down the line when you've got, Max, when your coffee has reached maturity,  we'll check in again and see what's up.  