---
title: #5 Creative strategies for balancing diversity and economy with Adolfo Rosati
---
### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2020-09-14)  

**0:00:00-0:00:16:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:23-0:00:27:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  these challenges.  
**0:00:33-0:00:38:**  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Hello everyone and welcome back to the podcast.  
**0:00:45-0:00:50:**  Well today we're very excited to share with you our interview with Adolfo Rosati from  Localitale Piano in Centraliti.  I really hope our listeners, Italian listeners can forgive my pronunciation.  
**0:00:57-0:01:02:**  What I find great about this episode are the many insights he gives us on finding a balance  between the diversity that comes with agroforestry on one hand and on the other the necessity  to maintain a certain economy of scale in your productions to avoid overstretching yourself.  
**0:01:13-0:01:17:**  Through his years of experience he's able to give us tangible examples and advice on  different strategies to navigate bureaucratic constraints but also on the best approach  to start a farm.  
**0:01:23-0:01:27:**  Personally I came out very inspired and with a lot of things to think about.  I really enjoyed his make sense farming approach where trees, animals and other crops are elegantly  combined to optimize for efficiency all whilst providing diversity to his local clients.  
**0:01:40-0:01:45:**  Adolfo shows us how to take advantage of the symbiotic relationships between farm elements  also explaining to us how technical and challenging this can be.  I love it how with small farms you really see creativity of integrating trees on farms  
**0:01:54-0:02:00:**  which may be more difficult to express to such a large extent on larger operations.  But regardless of this in my opinion it remains a real source of inspiration for whatever  the scale with elements that can be cherry picked to fit different contexts.  
**0:02:09-0:02:12:**  So without further ado let's get into it.  Welcome to the podcast Adolfo.  Thank you.  
**0:02:16-0:02:17:**  Thanks for joining us.  Thank you for giving us your time in this busy period.  And maybe as a beginning you could start by introducing yourself as well as your farm  
**0:02:29-0:02:30:**  and the project.  Sure.  My name is Adolfo Rosati.  
**0:02:33-0:02:41:**  I live in Italy and I dreamed of being a farmer as a kid and I didn't have a farm so I had  to find another job.  I thought I might as well be a scientist and study plants so that when I would have my  
**0:02:48-0:02:50:**  farm I would have some knowledge.  And so I did.  I studied agriculture and high school and university and then I became a researcher  
**0:02:57-0:02:58:**  and I studied agriculture.  And in one of my trips to the United States I met my wife who was also interested in animals  and she would be, as a kid she would draw stables to optimize the space for keeping  
**0:03:14-0:03:15:**  her cows and pigs.  And so we decided to have a farm together and because by then I had purchased some land  in Italy we decided to have a farm in Italy.  
**0:03:26-0:03:32:**  And so now I still work in research but when I go home I help my wife who's a full time  farmer and this is how we got to have a farm in Umbria in the middle of Italy.  And how did you then get to know agroforestry or did you get a specific interest in agroforestry?  
**0:03:44-0:03:53:**  Well as a scientist and a farmer-to-be I had land in a marginal area in the mountains and  everything I studied like growing corn and growing wheat it just wouldn't work in my  land.  
**0:03:58-0:04:04:**  There was no way I could make any money or a living growing corn on a place with incredible  slopes and very un-fertile soils.  Clearly I had to find some niche crops with higher value that could be interesting in  
**0:04:16-0:04:21:**  a farm that doesn't have the fertility necessary for the conventional crops.  And also I planted olives in a field and I realized it would take 20 years for them to  fill the space and I thought this is not practical, not good.  
**0:04:33-0:04:38:**  I need to use the space with something in the middle at least during the time the olives  are growing.  So I started planting small fruits like corns and blackberries.  
**0:04:44-0:04:49:**  I started planting the wild blackberries because they were the most suited to the area.  They grew without any help from outside.  And then I thought about the wild asparagus which grows spontaneously in my area but it's  
**0:04:57-0:05:01:**  sold on the market and no one grew it, no one cultivated it.  So I decided to plant asparagus under the trees because there was plenty of light available  and to combine things to get higher production out of the same land but in a sustainable  
**0:05:12-0:05:13:**  way.  And so I started practicing this which later on as I kept reading and studying I discovered  some other people call permaculture, some other people call agroforestry.  
**0:05:24-0:05:30:**  And so I realized what I was doing was agroforestry, I just didn't have the same name for it.  And when I discovered this I became interested in acting in agroforestry both as a farmer  and as a scientist.  
**0:05:37-0:05:45:**  And so I went to the Second World Agroforestry Conference in Kenya and I met people.  And I decided to found a European agroforestry organization which became EURAF, the European  Agroforestry Federation of which I am one of the founders.  
**0:05:58-0:06:05:**  And so basically since then I had a name for what I was doing and I had an opportunity  to learn more about it and how to do it and how to do it better and why it made sense.  And since then I've been working on it both as a scientist and as a farmer.  
**0:06:17-0:06:22:**  And so I would say that most of what we do in our farm nowadays could probably be qualified  under the name of agroforestry.  I love the fact that you kind of discovered agroforestry just out of practical observation  
**0:06:31-0:06:36:**  and just doing things in a logical manner and it's pretty cool that it happened in that  order actually.  I must admit that I am cautious with the user names because I feel like after all it's all  
**0:06:44-0:06:53:**  agriculture and often times there might not be need for a name or for a brand and I often  see people practicing certain kinds of farming being more interested in adhering to the brand  name or to the specific of that classification whereas I think from a farmer's perspective  
**0:07:10-0:07:16:**  we just want to know how to farm better in a more sustainable way both economically and  environmentally and we might not necessarily care what other people call this.  And so I'm conscious to feel strongly about the name rather I'm interested in whatever  
**0:07:33-0:07:38:**  any technique can offer to a farmer and call it agroforestry or whatever doesn't really  matter as much.  Though I like the agroforestry community because of the many different brand names that I heard,  
**0:07:46-0:07:55:**  it seems to be one of the most scientifically based practice or environment and so I like  to stick to facts and good ideas and so agroforestry seems to be a good environment for my way  of thinking but I'm happy to call it any other thing or not care about the name and just  
**0:08:12-0:08:15:**  follow the good practice for the good farm.  I think we can relate to that because with Dimitri we've often had the same conversation  about regenerative agriculture for example and these different terminologies but maybe  
**0:08:23-0:08:28:**  we'll have some time to get back to this because it's a really interesting topic but before  we do that maybe can you give us a bit of an overview of the farm then in terms of your  local context, what are your main products and where you sell them?  
**0:08:37-0:08:43:**  Yes of course the farm is you might say in the mountains the elevation is not very high  but it feels like you're in the mountains because the valley is very narrow and it's  just surrounded by mountains so the fields are really steep.  
**0:08:54-0:09:00:**  Our place is called Il Piano and you might wonder where the piano means the flat area  is and that's because it's a small piece like you know 0.1 hectares in front of our house  which is flat and it's such an exception that it gives the name to the place and so our  
**0:09:11-0:09:17:**  fields are sloped and this also means that fertility slope because you're in the mountains  the soil is not it does not come from different sources and it's not necessarily very deep  most of the time.  
**0:09:27-0:09:34:**  So about nowadays we have a little over 30 hectares and a little bit more than half of  this is forests and the other half was abandoned field that were slowly brought back to cultivation  and we on the main one of these we planted a collection of fruit trees because one of  
**0:09:50-0:09:57:**  our dreams was to save ancient varieties and to collect any other varieties to gather data  about what grows well in our area.  Our idea is that if you don't want to use a lot of external inputs and you want to have  
**0:10:05-0:10:12:**  a more sustainable farming you need to adapt to what grows in your area and this is a concept  that should translate also in the relationship with consumers.  Consumers should consume what is available on that farm and not buy in what I call a  
**0:10:22-0:10:27:**  capricious manner whatever suits your fancy just because it can be available.  Like don't eat the strawberries one month before it's time because that entails greenhouses  eat them when they're ready naturally.  
**0:10:36-0:10:42:**  So our goal was to test as many things as possible so that we would leave a heritage  of knowledge 10 years 20 years later to whomever wants to use it on what grows there without  many external inputs.  
**0:10:49-0:10:55:**  So we collected varieties and varieties of fruit trees we have 450 varieties of apples  and pears and peaches and 80 varieties of figs and persimmons and cherries and black  and white currants and blackberries and mulberries and unusual things.  
**0:11:08-0:11:14:**  And so part of the land is this mixed orchard.  Another part, small part is a forest garden where we collected edible but unusual species  and later can say more about what I feel about forest gardens if you're interested.  
**0:11:28-0:11:34:**  And then part of the land is just fields where animals graze and then animals also graze  in the forest which is indeed the majority of the land.  And we also thin the forest to provide forage for the animals and wood for the house so  
**0:11:44-0:11:47:**  that we can keep warm in winter.  So we have fruits.  We have two cows from the cows we make many varieties of cheese.  
**0:11:54-0:12:01:**  My wife Darcy has taken a real passion on making cheese and she makes anything from  blue cheese, gorgonzola to scamorza to mozzarella to ricotta to cachotta and so on, feta and  so on.  
**0:12:11-0:12:16:**  And so we have a large variety of cheeses, yogurt and milk.  Of course two cows don't produce much but that's the scale that we like.  It's like a production for a few families so that would be our family and that's our  
**0:12:28-0:12:29:**  first income.  We basically don't buy food because we have so many products that we only buy salt and  few other minor things.  
**0:12:38-0:12:41:**  Everything else basically we eat what we produce.  And because you use it at the price of a final consumer, that's a non-negligible source of  income.  
**0:12:48-0:12:54:**  Most people spend close to a thousand euros per month buying food in a family of four  like ours and we basically spend maybe five percent of that and so that is a source of  income.  
**0:13:00-0:13:12:**  And then the extra production goes to friends and customers that buy through our WhatsApp  group so we send a WhatsApp message with what is available and once a week when I go to  work in town I bring the produce and people come and get it.  
**0:13:23-0:13:28:**  So we have ten sheep that clean the orchard.  We don't usually milk them and make cheese because that's too much work but occasionally  we might.  
**0:13:34-0:13:41:**  In other ways we sell lambs and so we have nice vegetable gardens with a lot of different  variety of things.  My wife being American means that we often have seeds and varieties of vegetables that  
**0:13:47-0:13:54:**  are not common here so that it's a nice little niche market where people have not seen a  crook and neck yellow zucchini or a UFO shaped zucchini and this often makes for good sales.  I must say these new technologies really help the farmers.  
**0:14:06-0:14:14:**  You can send a picture of a nice unusual fruit and everybody wants to buy it because you  see a nice image.  So image and telephones and smartphones are really handy and useful for marketing and  
**0:14:21-0:14:23:**  advertising.  And then we host groups in the farms so we have activities, we offer activities.  People can come to learn about wild edible weeds.  
**0:14:35-0:14:39:**  So I am a bit specialized in this sector.  I wrote a couple of books and I take people around the farm showing what is edible, how  you recognize it and how you cook it and what it is good for and traditions and anecdotes  
**0:14:50-0:14:59:**  about those species and then we end up tasting and eating things made out of these greens  and that's one activity that we do with groups.  Others could be go milk the cow, go to the laboratory, make cheese and then turn on the  
**0:15:09-0:15:13:**  wood burning oven and make pizza and use the cheese on top of your pizza.  So you go from the barn to the table in the same morning and people can experience the  whole process.  
**0:15:21-0:15:26:**  We might pick grapes and make juice and so we sell activities, we sell fruits and vegetables  and cheeses and we have an agritourismo with four bedrooms where people can also stay and  they have two large kitchens where they can buy the produce and cook it by themselves.  
**0:15:40-0:15:43:**  So this is more or less the package of the activities.  Just to get a sense of the volume of what you produce, as a big, big estimation, how  many people do you think you sell produce to outside of your family?  
**0:15:53-0:15:59:**  I think we have a list of 50 families in our WhatsApp group that does not mean that we  produce that much because sometimes they don't buy anything, sometimes they're on holiday  so people come and go in waves.  
**0:16:10-0:16:16:**  So every week we might have perhaps 12, 15 families that buy at least something, not  necessarily a lot.  So that is more or less the scale.  
**0:16:20-0:16:26:**  You know when we were discussing before the podcast you were talking about different research  or experiments, agroforestry experiments that you were doing on your farm.  And you mentioned a few now about, for example, you talked about tree fodder from the forest  
**0:16:36-0:16:40:**  and you talked about animals grazing, sheep grazing in your orchard.  Could you maybe elaborate a bit more to explain to us what agroforestry systems are you implementing  on the farm?  
**0:16:47-0:16:49:**  Yeah, very happily.  So we may start with asparagus and olives, which has been the oldest payment I have conducted  in our farm before even it was a farm before even I met my wife.  
**0:17:01-0:17:07:**  In 91 I planted my first olive field and as I said, I saw a lot of space and olives would  take years to fill it out so I planted things underneath them and one of these things were  all these wild asparagus but nobody sold the plants and I tried to plant the seeds and  
**0:17:20-0:17:26:**  the seed did not germinate so I started studying seed germination and it took me a few years  to put together a system to make the seeds grow.  They're just dormant, they take a year and a half to grow basically but once I discovered  
**0:17:37-0:17:41:**  this I was able to produce plants and so I produced my own plants and planted them under  the olive and planted them along the line so that I could still drive the tractor in  between and harvest the olives and so on.  
**0:17:51-0:17:57:**  And then because it was such a neat thing and the market price of the wild asparagus  is really high around 25 euros per kilo, other people saw these things and I also as a scientist  wrote some article about how to grow these things and people started asking for plants  
**0:18:09-0:18:15:**  and so nobody was producing them so as a farm we decided to produce them and so we also  sell wild asparagus plants and have a little nursery.  To clean the asparagus I used the tractor and do flail mowing to grind up the weeds  
**0:18:31-0:18:40:**  but I realized that sheep could do the same job for free and while producing something  else so as soon as we could we started experimenting with animals and I had a chance to work in  a project using chickens instead and so I together with the University of Perugia worked  
**0:18:56-0:19:03:**  on a project with another farmer to grow wild asparagus under olives and use chickens to  weed both because once you plant the asparagus in olive orchard you don't have just an olive  orchard, you have an asparagus and asparagus is a vegetable crop, it's a much more intensive  
**0:19:13-0:19:20:**  system, so weeding an asparagus olive orchard is much more worth than weeding just an olive  orchard because you need to be careful of the asparagus as you drive your machinery  and it's more expensive.  
**0:19:27-0:19:32:**  Of course you get two crops and that justifies the expense but if you can spend nothing so  much better and chickens are small they scratch and if they don't eat the grass they destroy  by scratching and they fertilize at the same time so we basically put together the system  
**0:19:47-0:19:53:**  where if you grow a thousand chickens per hectare, meat chickens that have a cycle of  about 90 to 100 days and you do this in spring and fall when the grasses grow you can keep  your asparagus orchard system weed free and fertilized at no cost and of course you have  
**0:20:07-0:20:10:**  the additional production of chickens.  Of course the chickens need to be fed almost as much as you would without grazing them  because chickens will eat grass but that's not how they grow, they need their feed anyway  
**0:20:21-0:20:27:**  so the benefit is not that you're saving chicken feed but the benefit is that you're weeding  and fertilizing for free and this has resulted in a few papers including on the journal Clean  Air Production where we show that it's way more sustainable to keep chickens outdoors  
**0:20:38-0:20:47:**  grazing in existing orchard because their grazing saves you fertilizing and weeding  of the orchard but sheep do a great job too.  Of course sheep will eat olives and so you need to prune your olives a little bit higher  
**0:20:57-0:21:03:**  so that they will not damage the bulk of the canopy but the other great thing is that unlike  chickens sheep do eat grass as their main feed so compared to keeping sheep in a stable  grazing an olive orchard actually saves you most of the food and the other thing is that  
**0:21:16-0:21:22:**  sheep do eat olives but if the olives are tall they don't do much damage but they eat  the suckers which is free added labor and when you prune the olives the olive pruning  become sheep food so basically an olive orchard has three sources of feed for ruminants grass  
**0:21:38-0:21:44:**  growing naturally because nowadays in most of the world olive orchards are kept with  green mulching because of all the benefit of green mulching and therefore you need to  mow this grass and there's no point of spending gasoline and money to do it if animals can  
**0:21:55-0:22:01:**  do it for you and you get a second production so that's what we do we graze the olive orchard  in the fields and so olives produce feed by producing the grass that grows below produce  feed by producing pruning materials which you can use to feed the animals and when you  
**0:22:17-0:22:25:**  make olive oil you're left with olive cake as a residue and you can take the pits off  the cake and what's left is another product that can be mixed with other feeds and it's  very useful for feeding animals so you've got these three sources that are commonly  
**0:22:36-0:22:43:**  wasted now if you want to produce more in a more sustainable way with fewer resources  we can't keep wasting these resources so olive pruning olive grass and olive cake should  be all used as a feed before they go back to the land as a fertilizer and this makes  
**0:22:56-0:23:03:**  us produce more on the same land in a sustainable way while also saving the cost of fertilizing  and mowing so this is a little bit of what we do in the farm  let me stop you there a bit Adolfo because you've just unwrapped some really interesting  
**0:23:13-0:23:17:**  things there you talked about the chicken inside the orchard and the weeding that they  provide for the orchard and for the asparagus the chickens they don't go for the asparagus  even when it's young or do you have to integrate them after after the asparagus already got  
**0:23:27-0:23:35:**  established yes good points thanks for for giving me a chance to clarify you normally  need to fence the field because you want to keep the chickens in and you don't want to  stand there to look after them so you need to fence the field and the fencing needs to  
**0:23:45-0:23:52:**  go underground by maybe 30 centimeters to prevent foxes and other animals to dig under  and go in or you need some other system like a fencing that bends 90 degree and runs over  the ground for maybe 30 centimeters so that when animals go dig they find a metallic fence  
**0:24:04-0:24:10:**  and they can't dig so that's the first thing for the asparagus yes when you establish the  plan the first year or two the chickens could potentially approve them but asparagus are  long-lived plans once you plan them you have them for 50 years so after the first couple  
**0:24:24-0:24:29:**  of years the plans are adults and well established and they are prickly the wild asparagus is  I'm talking about asparagus acutifolius and it's a prickly plant so the chickens don't  go too close because it's a rigid and prickly plant and so they they can't scratch too close  
**0:24:43-0:24:51:**  to the to the root because the canopy of the plant keeps them away and of course you keep  the chickens out during the time where the new spears emerge the spears are the new asparagus  coming up so when the new shoots emerge you don't keep the chickens there though I have  
**0:25:03-0:25:08:**  noticed they do not eat them but for sanitary reason it's probably better that there's no  chickens for a month before you pick the spears and so you put the chickens after and after  means in my climate about beginning of May when the harvesting stops then you put the  
**0:25:20-0:25:27:**  chickens in the asparagus by then are opened they turn into a prickly vegetation the plant  is safe and the chickens clean out all the weeds you do your three-month period and then  stop because it's summer and the weeds don't grow anyway and then you start a second period  
**0:25:39-0:25:45:**  of chickens in fall when rains come again and the grass starts growing again so that  you harvest the chickens before Christmas before it's too cold for them to be outside  anyway and you do these two cycles in combination with the two moments where the grass grows  
**0:25:57-0:26:02:**  but the asparagus are already harvested it's really very interesting and going back to  what you were saying before with the sheep it's the same question would apply there do  the when you integrate the sheep in the olive orchard is it also the same olive orchard  
**0:26:10-0:26:18:**  that has the asparagus in between do the sheep other sheep also interested in the asparagus  same story the sheep don't browse on the prickly asparagus but you definitely don't want to  put goats there nor donkeys nor horses horses might be okay but they're heavy animals and  
**0:26:32-0:26:39:**  they compact the soil a lot and so small animals are much better but sheep will not eat the  asparagus and so you you can graze them and and again this is an important concept animals  as we as a tool to weed and fertilize should be used like any tools with management and  
**0:26:56-0:27:02:**  intelligence some people think that you fence a an orchard you throw in a couple of sheep  and you're done of course that doesn't work that way what that will result is in over  grazing compacted soil and the animals are out of boredom will start damaging asparagus  
**0:27:15-0:27:19:**  and olives because there's not enough grass and not enough to do grazing must be done  like you would on a flail mower you go through the field when the grass is tall and then  you you do your mowing and then you're out of there until it's needed again so the animals  
**0:27:32-0:27:38:**  must be managed the same way they need to have intensive short rotational grazing where  they go in they do their job and they're out until needed again so this is fundamental  you they need to be managed for the system to be successful if you just throw a few animals  
**0:27:50-0:27:55:**  in a fence and leave them all the time that's a disaster in a typical year the sheep would  be how long in the olive grove well in rotation which means you take the sheep in an area  and then move them to the next area and then to the next area but the sheep could be there  
**0:28:09-0:28:15:**  in in the case of olive orchard the sheep could be there basically could be rotated  through the system basically any time during the year except this those two months march  and april where you would pick the asparagus the rest of the time they can be there of  
**0:28:26-0:28:31:**  course in the summer there's not much for them to eat unless you're pruning water sprouts  from the trees in which case you can bring the sheep in to eat the water sprouts that  you're throwing to the ground and the same thing in winter once you graze through the  
**0:28:41-0:28:46:**  fall not much is growing during the winter unless you prune in the olives in which case  again you can bring the chickens in the the sheep or not the chickens they don't need  olive prunings the sheep in to eat most of the prunings consider that olive prunings  
**0:28:57-0:29:08:**  are about 50% leaves and or leaves plus tender twigs and 50% wood so when you prune about  50% of the biomass you remove from the tree is something that the sheep can actually eat  and this means that you're feeding the sheep but if you end up grounding the rest of the  
**0:29:21-0:29:27:**  wood as a fertilizer to leave in place you have to ground half as much the mass as you  would so you're still saving fuel and work and so the sheep could be there most of the  year if there is something to eat most likely there is more grass in the spring and in the  
**0:29:40-0:29:47:**  fall the chickens probably shouldn't be there in winter because at least in our climate  it would be too cold unless they had a good housing for cold days and there's not much  reason to be there in the summer because you don't need them and so they would soon over  
**0:29:58-0:30:03:**  graze the area so with the chickens I would advise two cycles per year in spring and fall  whereas with the sheep anytime there is grass or pruning material they can always go but  always with the idea that you keep them until for for as long as there is something for  
**0:30:15-0:30:20:**  them to eat and as soon as there isn't you move them out otherwise the mice are doing  damage and they compact the soil unnecessarily and they're getting nothing out of it anyway.  Talking about the compaction of the soil one of the issues with sheep that we often hear  
**0:30:31-0:30:36:**  about or with animals is when you're on a slope like you are you know they create erosion  they push the soil down they open up the soil is this something that you've seen happen  on your on your slope on your sloping fields with the with the sheep or even even more  
**0:30:45-0:30:53:**  so with the cows due to their weight? Yes this is the main problem if you don't manage  them well even if you manage them well you might see that they have preferential ways  of going every day and on those paths you might get a little bit of that a little bit  
**0:31:05-0:31:11:**  of potential erosion because they'll walk out of the night place always in the same  spot but if you move them frequently this is not a big problem because they might they  might not stay in a given place more than a few days and in a few days that's that's  
**0:31:22-0:31:27:**  not gonna be a problem if they stay there a month and it rains then on their path you  start seeing water erosion but but if you do intense and frequent grazing they are not  there enough to do the damage the the important point is that when you when you move them  
**0:31:41-0:31:47:**  you move them so that there is no area in common with the previous area and then the  problem is not is negligible. But I was thinking once you diversify that much and all of a  sudden you go from olive to having olive plus asparagus and then adding in chicken and maybe  
**0:31:59-0:32:04:**  sheep is that something that you were able to sell easily and as well I'm thinking in  terms of chicken to have the local infrastructure and the abattoir? Yes absolutely this this  was this is the downside of all the excitement we've talked about so far which I was certainly  
**0:32:16-0:32:24:**  going to get to because it's the most important limiting factor. For chickens in the project  that I mentioned we try to address this and University of Perugia is trying to study a  system of an abattoir on wheels that has all the certification and then the farmer doesn't  
**0:32:40-0:32:48:**  own it it just pays for the service so you pay it comes to your place and you have a  legal framework to butcher your animals and then this this should help solve the problem  because when you have a small number of animals it's not worth your while to bring them to  
**0:33:03-0:33:09:**  an unofficial abattoir that might be 300 miles away from you and it wouldn't it wouldn't  make economic sense. And this problem of scale I find applies to most things. Fruits and  vegetables you can sell without much paperwork as a farm so it's not too difficult even if  
**0:33:25-0:33:31:**  you are on a very small scale farmer selling fresh fruits and vegetables you can sell the  stuff and there's not many requirements so that that's relatively straightforward but  as soon as you turn your fruit into a jam you need a laboratory and a laboratory costs  
**0:33:45-0:33:50:**  a lot of money and it's not justifiable on a small scale. True you can bring your fruit  to an existing laboratory and have it do the work for you and have your jam with a perfectly  legal label and everything else it can have your name and it will say processed by this  
**0:34:04-0:34:13:**  laboratory for your farm and so that works. For chickens that's the most difficult thing.  It's true that in our my region because Italy has certain rules that are by region and not  by state by country and so in my region you can have up to 250 between chickens and rabbits  
**0:34:29-0:34:41:**  which you can process in the farm without needing an abattoir and you can sell it to  customers. So these are very small numbers 250 chickens could clean perhaps a small area  which could be the area where you're going to grow your vegetable garden next year in  
**0:34:57-0:35:01:**  rotation you know when you plow that little bit of land you put the chickens in to clean  all the pests and insects or it can be a small vineyard or a small orchard or olive orchard  but as I said before to really clean one hectare of an olive orchard or any other orchard you  
**0:35:15-0:35:21:**  probably need at least a thousand animals in a year and that becomes a scale where you  need official abattoirs and all of that and so you have to bring the animals to a place  and find an arrangement. The farmer we work with found a different solution he keeps the  
**0:35:36-0:35:46:**  animals on contract for a larger company that sells organic free range animals so they bring  the animals to him he keeps them for a month in the olive orchard and then they come and  get the animals he gets what he gets which probably is not much but he doesn't have to  
**0:35:58-0:36:02:**  deal with all the paperwork they just bring the animals and then a month later come and  get them so that's another solution. But yes in general the problem of diversifying your  farm is that you multiply the paperwork and the troubles of processing and selling many  
**0:36:18-0:36:28:**  different things and with the current legal framework this is a huge burden because this  framework is designed for the current system which is usually made of large industries  and so if you have a thousand chickens for one hectare or you have 10 million chickens  
**0:36:39-0:36:48:**  the requirements are the same. So what we need to make clear is that if Europe and the  world wants a small scale more sustainable localized agriculture it also needs to adjust  the rules to this scale you can't ask the same of a farmer with a thousand chickens  
**0:37:04-0:37:14:**  and one with a hundred thousand or ten millions you need a scale that is the burden the bureaucratic  and infrastructural burden must be proportional to the scale because the risks are also different  with a few chickens the risk of health risk of food are not the same as with a huge farm  
**0:37:27-0:37:35:**  so there's no need for the same strict rules and so to help farmers we really need to provide  this kind of simplification of rules and assistance in how to comply with the requirements like  writing a label for a jam is really difficult in fact you can't call it jam because jam  
**0:37:51-0:37:59:**  or marmelata in italiano only applies to citrus products so the fruit products everybody calls  it marmelata jam but legally it's a compote so you know you need assistance to do all  these things and on a small scale you can't pay that assistance so I would really vote  
**0:38:13-0:38:20:**  for stopping giving farmers subsidies to keep doing what they have been doing for 100 years  and it doesn't stay on the market and rather help them when they have ideas providing the  infrastructure and the assistance the bureaucratic or policy assistance for them to overcome  
**0:38:35-0:38:42:**  all the burdens so as I said fruits and vegetables are the easiest but when it comes to yogurt  and cheese and stuff so we were able as an agriturismo and only because we have an agriturismo  not because we're a farm but because we have an agriturismo and we can serve our food to  
**0:38:54-0:39:02:**  the guests then we were able to process up to 50 kilograms per week of say cheese or  jams and this was great because 50 kilograms a week it's a good scale and it's enough for  a small farm to work but then they changed the rule and now apparently according to the  
**0:39:16-0:39:22:**  new rule we can process something like half a kilo per week instead of 50 kilograms half  a kilo is like teasing a farmer it would be more honest to say don't do it because telling  me I can process half a kilo fruit or milk every week it's just ridiculous so this is  
**0:39:35-0:39:40:**  a way of killing the farmer pretending then that you give them a chance well indeed you  don't give them a chance and so now it's not really clear whether we can sell the cheese  to our customers but only if they eat it on the farm but if they take it home the same  
**0:39:54-0:40:02:**  cheese becomes illegal so these are huge problems and if we ever stop farming it's not because  our system is not technically or sustainable environmentally sustainable but because the  bureaucracy is killing us.  
**0:40:11-0:40:16:**  On this topic of infrastructure I mean one thing that's happening here in France and  I'm sure it exists in Italy as well is collective transformation I don't know how you say in  English atelier workshops or you know labs and I've seen this recently being on a farm  
**0:40:29-0:40:35:**  where they have a kind of like a cooperative but just that they collectively own these  machines and it means that they're able to diversify very quickly with a little risk  because you know you're not investing in huge amounts of machinery but you're actually you  
**0:40:44-0:40:47:**  know testing out different things and then if your product works you upscale it and that's  absolutely necessary because indeed we can talk as much as we want about ecological diversity  but the basis of that is having the proper infrastructure.  
**0:40:58-0:41:08:**  Absolutely I was in the Netherlands for the in 2018 for the fourth European Agroforestry  conference and I visited some farms and that's what some farms were doing like they were  experimenting very interesting things like in one case some city folks purchased a land  
**0:41:23-0:41:31:**  and pay somebody to be a farmer for them so they just pay the farmer and he tries to produce  what they ask and there might be some beef and some vegetables and some fruits and then  basically they own the place and the farmers arranges for them to pick up the produce.  
**0:41:45-0:41:50:**  I don't know if this would work everywhere but it's a great experiment and other experiments  could be in Italy you have the possibility of creating what is called a cultural club  so basically you belong to the club so I'm not giving you my milk but I'm milking your  
**0:42:09-0:42:16:**  cow because it belongs to the club and so you can eat your very own milk at your very  own risk because it's yours just like anybody can have a cow and drink the milk without  having a laboratory it's not illegal because you're the owner and you're not selling it.  
**0:42:25-0:42:33:**  So if you can study this kind of framework to overcome some of the limitations and we've  been thinking about this for the time being we haven't acted on it but this is a possible  solution basically find a legal framework for which the buyers are not buyers they're  
**0:42:45-0:42:51:**  paying the cost of growing their own food and you're just working for them and then  it's their cow and it's their pig and it's their jam and they can come and do it if they  want to or you make it for them but it's their jam so yes these ideas could really help a  
**0:43:03-0:43:10:**  farmer overcome some of these limitations but it would be nice if the policy would change  so that you don't have to go crazy about finding a solution and it would be just easier to  do things on a small scale with burdens that are proportional to your scale and not to  
**0:43:22-0:43:24:**  an industrial scale.  Adolfo this is a very interesting topic on infrastructure and just taking it a step back  do you think that diversifying the way you are diversifying at the moment notably with  
**0:43:37-0:43:41:**  the chickens in the orchard and the sheep and the asparagus what's the impact of that  economically speaking does that improve the economic position of the farm or is it something  that you do for ecological reasons?  
**0:43:49-0:43:58:**  Yeah thanks that's a great point because we find that diversification is really a coin  with two faces on one hand it's great because you always have something new and when  something fails there is always something else that didn't so having 450 varieties of  
**0:44:12-0:44:21:**  apple means that from June to April next year you always have something.  On the other hand it also means that when you taste an apple and it's good you might  not have enough to sell and the next apple tastes differently and you never know when  
**0:44:32-0:44:40:**  they're ready when to harvest which ones are worth selling and so it takes a huge amount  of experience and a long time to gain this experience in order for you to do the best  of what you have when you have so many different products.  
**0:44:49-0:44:56:**  But on the other hand sending a picture on whatsapp of an apple that people have never  seen before it's a very important attractive advertising and people want to try them.  And again five out of ten varieties fail one year but there is always one that does something  
**0:45:13-0:45:19:**  and when you don't spray them hardly prune them keep the weeds with the animal don't  spend much money on them it's an extensive system it doesn't matter that you grow ten  apples and sell fruits for the equivalent of one tree the rest falls on the ground and  
**0:45:31-0:45:38:**  the animals eat it and that's fine because that's a scale you are not spending the way  you normally would spend on the tree you're spending an amount of money and care that's  equivalent to one tree and you get the crop of one tree but it's a more extensive system  
**0:45:46-0:45:50:**  and you can afford to do it that way the rest is grazing anyway.  And so with experience the variety and the diversification turns out to be a good thing  to always have something it makes for a resilient system with every week there is something  
**0:46:05-0:46:12:**  to sell it's amazing how basically all year we always have something that's in season  and people come to us because we promise something fresh that's been picked few hours before  and it's unusual and it's in season and it's not always easy to find that or to trust that  
**0:46:25-0:46:33:**  what you buy is that and so this is a strong point but the diversification also means that  there's a lot of apples that you don't sell because you did not pick them the right time  or they don't have the flavor that people like a huge problem is that most customers  
**0:46:46-0:46:53:**  despite potentially being interested or declaring themselves as interested in sustainable issues  and local and whatever chemical free or whatever in reality they're used to eat in a certain  way which is an industrialized way and when they're faced with a product that doesn't  
**0:47:08-0:47:13:**  look and doesn't taste like anything they know they might be curious once but they're  not gonna buy regularly so we have cornelian cherries we even have improved varieties of  cornelian cherries people might be interested in knowing about them once but they're not  
**0:47:26-0:47:32:**  gonna be regular consumers of these things you know they're used to an apple and a pear  and an unusual fruit is not something they're likely to to pay for more than once or twice  so it's hard to sell a lot of diversity to a market that's not used to that diversity  
**0:47:50-0:47:59:**  it would be important to include the consumers in a closer contact with the farmer investing  in more education of the consumers where you send more information or you invite them to  participate in activities and make them learn but taste is something that people develop  
**0:48:12-0:48:20:**  as children and once they're adults they're not as open-minded about new new products  so very few people accept that an apple with no chemicals has a little grub inside and  then you open it up with a knife and discard the grub but then you are eating an apple  
**0:48:33-0:48:37:**  that's not been poisoned if the grub is not there that means somebody killed it and this  was by using chemicals so some people understand this and overcome the instinctive repulsion  for an apple that has a grub inside and they're willing to pay for it but most people despite  
**0:48:52-0:48:57:**  their interest in stability are not interested in doing that of course there are ways around  them that so when you harvest your apples you can think of making apple cider apple  cider can be done with apples that are not perfect and have a grub inside so you may  
**0:49:08-0:49:15:**  select your apple sell the one percent best apples as fresh fruit and the rest goes to  cider and the worst part of it goes to animal feed so you always have a use for it because  you have so many things that you make cheese you have whey the whey goes to the pig into  
**0:49:28-0:49:39:**  the chickens you process apples to make cider you get the leftover cake of squeezed apples  that goes to the pigs and cows and sheep and so you you always get a full utilization of  every product and every leftover product and every part of the process so that's the beauty  
**0:49:54-0:50:03:**  of this system that there's enough variety of species of plants and animals that nothing  goes to waste and everything can be optimized the backdrop is the difficulties in dealing  with all of this from both in natural agricultural point of view and especially from a market  
**0:50:16-0:50:22:**  and even worse from a bureau bureaucratic point of view but with experience I think  that overall by direct sale to people that understand the value of this a family could  probably get to a point where this can be their job but it does take 10 years of experience  
**0:50:40-0:50:42:**  to get to the point.  And here you see with your descriptions it's possible to see the importance also of the  animals in the system as the cyclers right and so linking it back to what you were saying  
**0:50:53-0:50:58:**  earlier on about how the animals they also provide labor for you by for example pruning  the suckers of the olives mowing the grass do you sometimes wish you were using a machine  a tractor to do this what's kind of the challenges or what's the benefits compared to the challenges  
**0:51:13-0:51:18:**  of using animals in the system compared to what somebody else would probably do which  is use machines.  Okay let me clarify that I use a tractor too so I'm working we are working and studying  
**0:51:27-0:51:37:**  the system and with the goal of reducing more and more the use of the tractor and using  the local resource of the farm the animals and what you have in place of the tractor  as much as possible but you always need eventually to go through with a tractor maybe you can  
**0:51:51-0:51:58:**  rotate animals like for instance if you graze fields eventually you get thistles because  the sheep and cows don't eat them and yes you could then use a donkey to eat the thistle  but then you have a donkey too and the donkey will damage the fruit so you can't put the  
**0:52:07-0:52:13:**  donkey in the orchard so eventually you have to use a tractor anyway so we're not talking  about a radical system where you don't even have a tractor anymore we're talking about  a system that uses a smaller tractor because the needs are reduced to 20% of the otherwise  
**0:52:28-0:52:33:**  system but you probably still need it and we're not even to the point where we needed  20% maybe we can we reduce it 50% right now but we still use it and so yes I don't know  if I have answered enough your point.  
**0:52:48-0:52:57:**  Yeah I wanted to this is definitely a part of the answer but maybe another way to phrase  this question is you know what's the how valuable are the animals as a source of labor on the  farm and how much because I can imagine for example you've got animals on the farm on  
**0:53:09-0:53:13:**  Massey farm we didn't we didn't work yet with a lot of animals so we don't have that intimate  experience with them but they are for example providing benefits in terms of the fertility  in terms of the mowing and etc but at the same time they're also involving a lot of  
**0:53:22-0:53:26:**  labor in terms of managing them moving them making sure they're in their fence when they  get ill taking care of them feeding them so I wanted to kind of know if it balances out  at the end if it's worth having the animals in there based on the fact that you've got  
**0:53:35-0:53:37:**  a product etc.  Yes I think it's worth it if the animals are already worth their while like if your purpose  is just to weed the garden and otherwise you have no interest clearly it's not worth it  
**0:53:54-0:53:58:**  it's cheaper to have a tractor that doesn't eat all year you just use it when you use  it and then it rests and it doesn't consume fuel and doesn't take management doesn't take  fencing doesn't take the vet it doesn't get sick so you you you need animals that are  
**0:54:09-0:54:20:**  useful or on their own and economically worthwhile on their own once you do that combining them  might provide some saving on both the animal and the plant side and then again it's useful  if you have enough of a scale like if you have to every day or every few days move a  
**0:54:32-0:54:41:**  fencing to move 10 sheep and this costs you an hour of time you know it will cost you  an hour time even if there were a hundred sheep and so again there is some scale economy  in there where it might not be convenient if you have only 10 because the system works  
**0:54:53-0:54:59:**  beautifully from a natural point of view but it's not sustainable economically or or from  a hand labor point of view so you can decide that you have animals for your own family  use and you don't deal with rules and lusts and abattoirs and you just do your own family  
**0:55:14-0:55:19:**  use maybe your own family use can include few friends that somehow you feed without  going through all the legal framework and if you are to that scale then you can use  this animal on small areas like intensive areas near the house like a vegetable garden  
**0:55:32-0:55:38:**  and where you don't need a lot of time to move them around if you want to clean the  olive orchard which is a little further away and it's a little larger scale and it needs  more animals maybe you don't want to do that step because then you get into selling chicken  
**0:55:48-0:55:55:**  meat and that's a whole other scale and you might not want to go that far so there are  different scales and different uses that you can choose and if you do the next step the  next step must be worthwhile by itself it wouldn't justify to have the chickens just  
**0:56:09-0:56:13:**  to clean the orchard clearly they're not that would not pay back but if you're interested  in keeping a thousand chickens and selling them and that's a possible source of income  and you envision that that's going to work in your farm then clearly do put your chickens  
**0:56:23-0:56:32:**  in your orchard because you're saving some money so animals do bring an incredible layer  of complication because they don't go on holiday they're they are not well chickens they have  cycles you buy the chicks and three months later you saw the chickens and you're done  
**0:56:42-0:56:48:**  so you're free you can also go on holiday if you have a cow clearly you can't and so  this is also another thing to consider if the animals are permanent animals you don't  get a day off in which case you might want to share your farm with at least another family  
**0:56:57-0:57:05:**  so you can alternate and you know go somewhere for Christmas every other year if if you have  meat chickens this is not a problem if you have egg chickens this is a problem you need  to keep them all year chickens can be kept in an indoor space with enough food and water  
**0:57:18-0:57:25:**  and without any care for maybe up to a week ten days so you could have chickens and still  allow yourself a holiday if you have a milk cow you clearly cannot do that I didn't want  to interrupt that I was thinking it'd be great to leave us a bit of time to have an overview  
**0:57:34-0:57:44:**  of some other of your systems as well yeah so other systems I wanted to say that we send  the animals in the forest now in Italy you cannot send goats into the forest but the  wild goats or wild deer or caprioli they grow naturally and then didn't used to be there  
**0:58:01-0:58:07:**  until 15 years ago but now there is plenty as well as the wild pigs the wild boar which  was a rare thing 50 years ago and now there is so many to the point that they crossroads  etc they can all go in the forest and that's legal and the hunters can harvest them so  
**0:58:19-0:58:27:**  basically you're growing this animal on your land for the hunters which pay a fee to the  region but not to you so you as a farmer you are maintaining the land so that other people  can go hunt on your land and reap the produce and you cannot send your own goats on the  
**0:58:40-0:58:48:**  land but you can send sheep and cows as long as you haven't just cut the forest but of  course in an adult forest there is not much that sheep and cows can eat and when you cut  the forest there is re-sprouting but the forest cannot be grazed for eight years or whatever  
**0:59:04-0:59:10:**  so what we found though is that you can ask for a thinning cut a thinning cut means that  you go in the forest and choose selectively the best specimens and thin out the rest because  they're not going to grow well or they're too crowded or they're sick or whatever and  
**0:59:24-0:59:28:**  as long as you respect certain rules you can do this thinning and because it's a thinning  you can do it in any season so by applying for this kind of cut you can cut the trees  during the summer where there is not much forage and then by cutting by felling the  
**0:59:42-0:59:47:**  tree the animals get access to its leaves and you can actually get a lot of feed that  way so this is one thing that we're doing we apply for cutting small areas of the forest  and we thin the trees in the summer and feed the cows and the sheep with the fallen trees  
**1:00:01-1:00:07:**  so that they can access their vegetation and then we cut up the wood for heating and so  again we make scale economy of our hand labor because you cut the trees for wood anyway  might as well feed the animals with the same operation you're getting an extra bonus of  
**1:00:21-1:00:26:**  feeding animals for something you will be doing anyway which is make firewood for the  house and so this is another thing that we're doing is using the forest to feed the animals  in the summer and I haven't had a chance to experiment but I would love to actually plant  
**1:00:39-1:00:45:**  forage trees a varieties of them on open fields that we use for grazing it would be good if  these open fields had lines of forage trees which you could top and hedge with a machine  to knock down the vegetation that needs it's needed to feed animals but this is a more  
**1:01:00-1:01:06:**  large larger scale experiment that I'm not sure we can afford to do our own cost in our  own farm but as researchers I'm in touch with other colleagues that are interested in trying  to experiment this kind of system which would be a way to modernize an ancient practice  
**1:01:20-1:01:28:**  of cutting tree leaves for feeding animals both fresh and as a preserved forage which  you can store in winter farmers used to cut branches collect them in bundles and dry them  for winters but this is this requires too much hand labor and it would not be convenient  
**1:01:41-1:01:49:**  nowadays for economic reasons but if you mechanize it and optimize the system then it can be  a way to pick up an old design and turn it into a modern design by adjusting it to modern  needs of costs and labor.  
**1:02:01-1:02:07:**  Other agroforestry or also permaculture things that we do in our farm would be to again use  the chickens in the vineyard we put fencing along the line of the vineyards every other  row and we're building a chicken mobile where the chickens barn is on wheels and so it can  
**1:02:24-1:02:30:**  be moved and they're very very effective in weeding the vineyard our vineyard is a small  area about a tenth of an hectare and on that scale a few animals can just do all the weeding  for you without much problems.  
**1:02:41-1:02:48:**  Another interesting thing that I found is that the tree Ailanthus altissima which is  considered a pest tree by everybody and everybody hates it when it comes out as a sapling the  animals don't eat it the leaves appear to be toxic and the animals leave it alone but  
**1:03:02-1:03:09:**  it turns out I discovered that if you cut the tree when the tree is become big enough  that it's out of reach of animals then and only then if you cut the tree they actually  love the leaves it might be that the tree has some toxins that protect the tree when  
**1:03:19-1:03:25:**  it's small but when it's big it doesn't need those toxins and so evolutionarily it learned  not to make them and if you cut it then then it provides forage but when the tree is young  you don't have to protect it you know agroforestry is a big problem about tree guards and how  
**1:03:37-1:03:42:**  to protect trees from the grazing animals because if you keep the animals where the  trees grow the animals will damage them so you have to spend money to protect the tree  well this tree protects itself and it grows bigger and it grows really fast faster than  
**1:03:53-1:04:01:**  any local indigenous species and then you cut it and they actually eat it and you make  firewood for the house it's not good quality wood but to burn inside a wood burning stove  it's a fine source of fuel so we found that this tree is actually a very great source  
**1:04:14-1:04:18:**  for agroforestry because it provides forage and it defends itself when it's young you  don't have to spend money to protect it so you just have to thin it out and cut it.  When you do thinning cuts and you let the animals in are there specific varieties of  
**1:04:30-1:04:35:**  trees that they find more nutritious or maybe you could go a bit more in detail on the tree  fodder and even maybe saying what you would plant if you had the opportunity to test out  including trees in the pasture.  
**1:04:44-1:04:55:**  Yes our forest is mainly one species of oak, rovarela is quercus pubescens and in America  they say that oaks are toxic for animals that you have to be careful I do not find that  we have a problem maybe our oaks are what they call white oaks in America and so they  
**1:05:06-1:05:13:**  are not as rich in tannins but when we cut oaks the animals eat in large quantities and  don't seem to have problems in fact probably it's good for the tannins and the parasites  but I don't know enough about this and unfortunately I don't think anybody knows enough about it  
**1:05:24-1:05:30:**  but this will be very interesting understanding what medicinal properties the different species  have on your livestock because maybe we could do without so many warm medicines for the  livestock if we could feed them the right kinds of plants that with the tannins or with  
**1:05:47-1:05:55:**  whatever act as a warm controlling agent but anyway oaks are fine we have one species of  ash, fraccinus hornus which like all the ashes the animal love when we do have elm of course  elm was the preferred forage tree for the farmer but nowadays with the Dutch elm disease  
**1:06:13-1:06:19:**  most elms are gone but when you do have it the animals love it then we have hornbeam  ostraegarpinifolia which they eat just fine what else we have these are the main species  oh and many maples minor apple field maple mountain maple they all eat it so when I think  
**1:06:41-1:06:46:**  the forest I try to cut every day perhaps one tree of each species to give them a different  diet and they seem to happily gobble it all up probably ashes would be among the favorite  but they eat it all whenever there is the availability so almost every tree in the forest  
**1:07:07-1:07:12:**  is something they eat I don't cut other trees like sorb trees or something because if I  have any I let them grow big and hope to get some fruit from them so they would eat it  otherwise oh and we have a wild cherry it's a bitter cherry but they eat the leaves as  
**1:07:24-1:07:31:**  well as the fruit again in America they have a different species pruno serotina which is  toxic and they recommend not to cut trees for those animals because you poison them  with our species which is not pruno serotina there is no problem at least I have for no  
**1:07:45-1:07:50:**  problem they eat it all up and it's interesting it smells like almonds when you cut it you  can smell the amygdalin but the animals eat it just fine and if I had to plant trees in  a field I would think more of trees that sprout back really easily there would be mulberries  
**1:08:04-1:08:16:**  there would be willows of course if you have the right soil with water poplars but also  black locusts probably is a fantastic tree for feeding animals as well as producing biomass  and maybe linden trees I did say mulberries among the mulberries there are some vigorous  
**1:08:32-1:08:41:**  varieties and they sprout back really well so yeah linden mulberries black locust willows  poplars probably a few more I found that redbud trees are also you can cut and hedge and top  them and they just come back but I found that the sheep eat the leaves and the goats too  
**1:08:57-1:09:04:**  but the cows don't so again this is a field where there is a lot of experience to be made  and there's not enough research and trials going on but it would be very nice to see  more experimentation going on to figure out more details.  
**1:09:16-1:09:22:**  And when the animals are eating tree leaves does that represent all of their diets or  is it always something that comes as a supplement and as a source of tannins in addition to  pasture?  
**1:09:28-1:09:37:**  Well in the literature people perhaps cautiously tend to state that you only want these forages  to be a small fraction of the total but I find that one it depends on the kind of animal  and what kind of production level they have so if you have high performance animals like  
**1:09:53-1:10:00:**  moss farms nowadays then these products probably can't provide too much a percentage of the  food because the rumen would be enough to hold enough material to feed these animals  but take sheep they have lambs in winter you milk them during the spring then you dry them  
**1:10:15-1:10:21:**  up during the summer for one because the cheese goes bad with high temperature and two because  there's not enough grass so in that moment of year you're just maintaining the weight  of the mothers they're not even getting pregnant because it's too early so if you have a rustic  
**1:10:30-1:10:38:**  sheep that's producing neither milk nor meat at the moment then you can use that forage  for a greater percentage of the diet which could easily be 50% I find and also we have  selected animals that eat what we normally feed them nowadays if those animals are not  
**1:10:53-1:11:00:**  good to eat forage tree forage perhaps they are not just the right animals if three forages  what we have or what we should have to be more sustainable then we should select animals  that can eat more of it and certainly there is room for that selection but to be more  
**1:11:11-1:11:17:**  specific about our farm I find that in the summer for sheep I would estimate that they  probably eat they can go up to 60% of tree forage and then I always give them hay at  night so depending on how much hay they use and how much they left over they leave uneaten  
**1:11:31-1:11:37:**  then I know if I'm starving them or if I'm feeding them appropriately so I always give  them enough hay perhaps not great quality hay but enough so that they need to leave  some behind if they finish all the hay even though it's not great hay perhaps you're giving  
**1:11:48-1:11:55:**  them too much tree forage and they need to eat something else I find that if animals  have a choice they will tell you what they want it's important that you give them a choice  so that if they don't want something they are not starving they don't have to eat it  
**1:12:07-1:12:16:**  and then they self limit a lot but give them always enough of something else to make sure  they have a choice and they'll tell you how much they can eat.  That's fascinating and going back to what you said earlier on does it only make sense  
**1:12:26-1:12:34:**  to use tree as forage economically speaking if you also harvest wood out of it for your  house for example or you know because you said that it doesn't make sense to have that  on your small scale it would need to be in your pasture to have some tree forage trees  
**1:12:44-1:12:47:**  there because you would need to mechanize it.  What I would say is that again when you consume a product as a final consumer for your own  use you're saving the full price and you don't have transportation and other expenses for  
**1:13:04-1:13:12:**  selling a shop or all of that so I find that producing many things for self consumption  is actually worthwhile because you're saving the full price when you're trying to sell  it then you have added costs and sometimes lower prices then sometimes on a small scale  
**1:13:23-1:13:29:**  it's not worth doing it but I do produce wood for my own house and I'm saving all the heating  for the house you know maybe a couple thousand euros in a year and to save that amount of  money I work certain amount of hours but I find it worthwhile.  
**1:13:38-1:13:45:**  So because for self consumption I find it worthwhile to cut my own wood it makes more  sense that I cut it the way I described because then I also save a few euros to feed the sheep.  If I had to go on a bigger scale I would if I had enough land to do it I would say and  
**1:14:00-1:14:06:**  if that was my job I would say that there are people that make money by cutting wood  if they do it then having sheep to use the forage would be possible on the bigger scale  too but in that case it could be questionable whether your labor to feed the sheep would  
**1:14:21-1:14:28:**  be worthwhile depends how much you need to spend to keep the sheep near the forest versus  wherever you have a barn.  So if the forest and the barn are nearby and it's easy to take the sheep there it's already  
**1:14:34-1:14:39:**  fenced maybe it's worthwhile on a larger scale too.  If you have to put the animals in a truck and bring them into a forest and fence the  forest so that you can feed them only part of their diet definitely it's not worth it.  
**1:14:50-1:15:02:**  So as usual there are limitations if you can organize your farm or if your farm is already  happens to be designed in a way that it's easy to move the animals and the infrastructure  is there the fencing is there then I would say that it's definitely worthwhile and it  
**1:15:14-1:15:18:**  could be on a self-consumption on a bigger scale.  Otherwise it would have to be on a large scale to justify it but to be honest I don't have  the economic numbers to calculate whether this would be more convenient than buying  
**1:15:30-1:15:33:**  forage and keep the animal in a stable.  Of course the animal that grazes the forest compared to one that stays in a stable it's  a different animal it's a different product it's a different animal welfare so the trick  
**1:15:44-1:15:49:**  is to market your product and marketing the product makes a difference.  If you sell your meat at twice the price you can do things that you wouldn't be able to  do otherwise and so the marketing part is really important.  
**1:15:58-1:16:03:**  Can we have added value by doing things in agroforestry or whatever you might call it  in a certain way rather than conventionally.  If you don't have that element a lot of things that make sense from a natural sustainable  
**1:16:13-1:16:17:**  point of view might not be economically sustainable.  We find that our customers are all high end well educated people that tend to understand  the value of something special.  
**1:16:30-1:16:35:**  If we had to sell tomatoes at the average price of conventional produce we probably  wouldn't find it convenient.  We tend to apply prices that are close to the supermarket price for organic produce  
**1:16:46-1:16:53:**  and we do have an organic farm but we don't bother certifying the product because our  customers trust us more than they trust the label.  We don't need to go on the label route to guarantee our products they know us and they  
**1:17:03-1:17:08:**  trust us and that probably has more of an impact on these kinds of consumers.  They've been to our place, they've seen the place, they're friends and they trust us and  so they're willing to pay those 3-4 euros for a kilo of tomatoes and the tomatoes might  
**1:17:19-1:17:32:**  be orange, yellow, striped, dark, red and light bulb shaped, round with ribs or smooth  and it's worth their while to pay extra to buy tomatoes that are colorful, flavorful,  completely chemical free and they trust us, they know what they're eating and they're  
**1:17:49-1:17:53:**  not discussing whether it should be 50 cents cheaper or not.  That's not a big issue for them.  If you want to hit a different target then you need to be more careful at your cost and  
**1:18:02-1:18:04:**  your scale economy.  Everything has to be calibrated for your system, your customers but you can choose your customers  by organizing your communication.  
**1:18:18-1:18:31:**  If you use images, send recipes, explain what you do, make a splash on the news, have interviews  like this or whatever else you have, explain what is important.  If you're a well educated communicator that knows how to explain the added value, you  
**1:18:42-1:18:46:**  will find those customers that will pay a little extra.  If the market is not there, that limits a lot what you can do with these systems and  not because potentially we couldn't get one day to produce things in a more sustainable  
**1:18:57-1:19:05:**  way using these techniques on a lower price but to get there we need to spend as many  years of research as we have spent so far studying a conventional system.  For a century now we have optimized conventional agriculture with chemical, fertilizers, pest  
**1:19:21-1:19:27:**  control and all of that, buying expensive equipment and all of that and now we've come  down to producing food at a very cheap price.  We could probably do something similar with alternative systems but we don't have the  
**1:19:35-1:19:43:**  one century of research behind us to make us adopt the right techniques.  So we're all pioneers of a new way of doing things and pioneers test things at their own  cost and on their own shoulders because no one tells them how to do it.  
**1:19:56-1:19:58:**  They're pioneers by definition.  For the time being, pioneers need added value and added price and once we will have that  expense we might be able to lower the price and do this for everybody.  
**1:20:10-1:20:15:**  If you have apples that are not perfect and have a grub inside, you can still make apple  cider which will look conventional enough for everybody to want to drink even though  the apples were not perfect.  
**1:20:24-1:20:33:**  So this concept can be applied to other things like sometimes we don't have perfect tomatoes,  we make tomato soup.  Sometimes we don't use the milk for making cheese because it's not enough request.  
**1:20:43-1:20:52:**  We feed the milk to the pig or to the chickens and still get something out of it.  You can make fruit leather, you can dry figs when you don't sell them fresh.  So there are ways with imperfect products to make perfect looking products like instead  
**1:21:04-1:21:11:**  of selling wine which is a very competitive field with very little margins because everybody  is super specialized in making wine, but hardly anyone makes grape juice.  So we don't make wine, we make grape juice.  
**1:21:19-1:21:28:**  So these are a little bit of concepts and tips that the farmer can think of to make  these unusual diversified products reach the market in a way that is acceptable for the  consumer.  
**1:21:37-1:21:41:**  So these are important ways of thinking about your products.  We're convinced with Dimitri that mistakes are the basis of all learning and that they're  actually the most precious things to share.  
**1:21:48-1:21:54:**  So we were thinking, are there some big mistakes that you remember or that you learned especially  from in designing or implementing or managing your agroforestry systems that you would like  to share with us and the listeners and that we can all learn from?  
**1:22:04-1:22:05:**  Yes.  The biggest mistake is we were excited about planting apples and we planted too many at  once and we totally completely underestimated that one, the soil was very poor and we needed  
**1:22:19-1:22:21:**  to take better care of fertilization.  And as we didn't want to use chemical fertilization, we should have invested a lot more in fertilizing  the soil by buying manure or buying straw or organic matter or some kind or guanito  
**1:22:34-1:22:42:**  or other organic products but it was a mistake to plant too many trees on a soil that was  too poor without taking good care of it.  The other mistake was I was convinced that on a very vigorous rootstock the apples will  
**1:22:49-1:22:53:**  become self-sufficient in terms of water within three, four, five years.  So I did not invest in a drip irrigation system because I thought we'll water them by hand  for a few years and then they'll be fine.  
**1:23:00-1:23:05:**  But the climate has been getting warmer and drier and this is no longer true.  In fact, I don't think I will ever be able to keep my apple trees despite being grafted  on MM-111 which is one of the most vigorous rootstocks you find on the market.  
**1:23:16-1:23:20:**  I don't think I'll be able to keep them without some irrigation in the summer.  So this year I finally, after 10 years, build a drip irrigation system.  So my advice would be start with perhaps many things but on a very small scale.  
**1:23:34-1:23:36:**  Plant a handful of trees.  Plant a small vegetable garden and do your best to do it well and be patient to learn  from the mistakes.  
**1:23:43-1:23:53:**  Don't make the step longer than your leg because you need those years of experience to do things  well and right and see what works for you and for your environment and for your customers.  So experiment a lot of things but everything on a small scale so you next year can say  
**1:24:05-1:24:08:**  okay this doesn't seem to work, I won't do it again.  This I'll try again but again on a small scale see if I have a luckier year.  This worked very well.  
**1:24:16-1:24:21:**  I'll do it a little bigger but not too much because I can't assume that that's the rule.  Perhaps that was a special year and the next year is not going to come out well.  So do many things on a small scale and give yourself time to learn from what you've done  
**1:24:31-1:24:40:**  so that you can grow slowly but constantly, consistently in the direction that seems to  work.  That would be the biggest mistake we made and the biggest advice I would give.  
**1:24:47-1:24:57:**  Another advice if I may is make sure you don't get overworked to the point where you're too  busy working to discover how to work less.  This is a typical problem with farmers.  
**1:25:04-1:25:10:**  They get excited, they get their hands full and then they don't have a minute to think  or to visit another farm or to read on internet or to listen to a podcast such as this.  The consequences of that is that they don't do as well as they could because they don't  
**1:25:22-1:25:24:**  have the ideas and the knowledge.  We visited farmers in Missouri and it was a good farm.  They were selling cheese and they were giving the way to a friend for the pigs without doing  
**1:25:35-1:25:36:**  ricotta.  Ricotta is another cheese you make after you made cheese and before you give the way to  the pigs you can extract another amount of sellable product and they just didn't know  
**1:25:49-1:25:50:**  it.  It was amazing that they could not know this and not make ricotta out of the milk.  They went to the market to sell the cheese.  
**1:25:58-1:26:02:**  They could have sold the ricotta as well and they just didn't know it.  And so they didn't explain with doing yogurt.  Now yogurt is the easiest thing in the world.  
**1:26:09-1:26:11:**  One liter of milk is one liter of yogurt.  One liter of milk may be 150 grams of cheese but it's one liter of yogurt.  If you sell yogurt you're selling milk with hardly any work added and you're selling it  
**1:26:25-1:26:26:**  at a much higher price than milk.  So that's a great opportunity.  They never knew about it or they never wanted to experiment.  
**1:26:32-1:26:38:**  So make sure, remember that knowledge is fundamental and we don't have the knowledge.  We just said before we need 100 years of experimenting in this direction before we'll be able to  produce food on a large scale at a lower price sustainably.  
**1:26:49-1:26:56:**  And that knowledge is absolutely needed both to produce and to sell and to create added  value.  If you're stuck in a vicious circle when you don't have the time, you're going to work  
**1:27:01-1:27:03:**  harder and harder for less and less.  You need to invest in your own education, visiting other farms, reading books, trying  different products.  
**1:27:12-1:27:18:**  Make sure that happens because this is a knowledge intensive approach to life and agriculture  and without that knowledge you can't be successful.  Thank you.  
**1:27:23-1:27:27:**  If no one else does, at least I'll follow that advice because it's great to have that  perspective from years of experience and it's really appreciated.  I'm sure Dimitri has some last questions.  
**1:27:35-1:27:39:**  I've been kind of hanging on to my questions and hanging on to you for the last 10 minutes  but there was one last question I wanted to ask which I think is important.  I heard you mention earlier that after 10 years of experimentation maybe a couple could  
**1:27:51-1:27:56:**  live from such a diversified farm and that's what I wanted to ask.  If there's a young couple that came in to see you with a similar context and that told  you we want to start an agroforestry based farm or I say agroforestry but it could be  
**1:28:07-1:28:12:**  not agroforestry, I mean just a small scale diversified farm using alternative farming  methods, could you look them in the eyes and say you can live from it or do you think we're  still at a stage where you need a side job and it's too risky?  
**1:28:20-1:28:24:**  I would look at them in the eyes to understand who they are.  I have seen people that are excited that I wouldn't bet that they make it because they're  excited in a naive way and they're perhaps not ready to work hard and to be stubborn  
**1:28:40-1:28:44:**  and to face the failures and stuff.  Depends on the character of the person but if I saw an intelligent person with an open  mind with enthusiasm but not a naive enthusiasm, a person that's willing to spend a year going  
**1:28:58-1:29:05:**  around farms working, volunteering for them just to learn before even trying and if I  saw a person like this then I would say you can make it and it's going to be hard, it's  not going to be like a lot of money and an easy life, it's not going to be ideal like  
**1:29:17-1:29:23:**  people think of living in the country, it's ideal when you come on holiday on our place  then you sleep until 11, you wake up and I bring you raspberries, that's fantastic but  I wake up at 6 to do the cows and the pick the berries and so most people are not up  
**1:29:33-1:29:38:**  for this but if you put yourself in the situation and decide that you enjoy that kind of life  and being the boss of yourself and you accept the challenge and you are not just excited  but also realistic and smart then I think you can do it and then I would suggest start  
**1:29:50-1:29:55:**  with a vegetable garden with or without trees so it can be agroforestry or not but start  with a good vegetable garden because in a small area with a lot of labor you can sell  a lot of crops and once you start from there that's probably the most intensive and successful  
**1:30:07-1:30:08:**  thing to do.  Start with a vegetable garden with many varieties of vegetables, start experimenting with what  grows and what people want to buy and get a group of people that follow you, keep up  
**1:30:17-1:30:23:**  with the social, I know it's annoying, I know it's in a way silly but that's how the world  is working right now and if you keep up with the social people will remember about you,  will buy your produce and will be your faithful customers and from there you start planting  
**1:30:37-1:30:42:**  a few trees and experimenting and maybe start with chickens.  I would start with a vegetable garden and with chickens and then later on when you see  it working, when you are determined that that's a life you want to have you can start adding  
**1:30:53-1:31:00:**  perhaps sheep or perhaps a cow or perhaps fruit trees and then maybe get into a forestry  area and all of that but you know the concept of permaculture, the things you are most intensive,  you keep them near the house and the fruit orchard at an intermediate distance and the  
**1:31:11-1:31:18:**  forest staff are further away, that should also apply in terms of priorities and temporal  strategies.  Start with the intensive things near the house and then most importantly don't spend money  
**1:31:27-1:31:31:**  until it's proven that that thing is worthwhile.  Do what you can with as little money as you can.  To have a small vegetable garden you don't need a lot of money, you might have to buy  
**1:31:38-1:31:44:**  some manure or some organic matter to start with but it's not a big investment.  You don't even have to till the soil, you don't even have to own a machine, you just  put 20 centimeters of manure on a strip of grass, it will kill the grass and you can  
**1:31:54-1:32:00:**  plant the tomatoes right in the soil between the manure and you don't even need to own  a tractor.  So I would start with a WhatsApp group and a group of customers that buy in a CSA kind  
**1:32:08-1:32:14:**  of approach, a community supported action where your customers are those every week  and with that scale I would think that a young determined couple that is willing to put the  time to gain the experience could probably get to a point where this can work for them.  
**1:32:28-1:32:31:**  Adolfo, thank you so much.  Well, thank you guys, I think you're doing a really important mission here and I wish  you all the success because this kind of detailed understanding and experience sharing is exactly  
**1:32:45-1:32:46:**  what we need.  I am tired of reading principles on agriculture books that with the excuse that because every  farm is different you can't apply the same detail to every farm, they limit themselves  
**1:32:59-1:33:06:**  to stating a list of nicely educated principles that as a farmer I never found helpful.  So yes, the concept is obvious and we can make it look fancy but it's a simple concept.  Of course, if you save money by having an animal do the work for you, it's great, yes,  
**1:33:16-1:33:22:**  but which animal, how, how many, what do they eat, why do they get sick?  Chickens are on the door, it's a great concept but they actually get more parasites than  if they're indoor and so we need this kind of practical information to move on and I  
**1:33:30-1:33:38:**  think that your initiative is one of the few that gets into the very details of this kind  of needed information.  So I really wish you the best and hope that this podcast is successful and people will  
**1:33:47-1:33:50:**  discover it as an incredible source of information.  You can always visit another farm but you can definitely listen to a podcast like this.  So it's going to be very useful I'm sure.  
**1:33:59-1:34:01:**  Thanks for making it this far into the podcast.  We hope you enjoyed it as much as we did.  So please contribute by giving us feedback and suggesting questions.  
**1:34:08-1:34:13:**  It's really important for us that we're able to include everyone and the more brains we  have the better the content will be.  So you can find us through our social media or websites and all the usual places.  