---
title: 50 Hedges And Trees As Pillars Of A Viticulture Agroecology Transition With Jean Baptiste Cordonnier
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2022-11-04)  

**0:00:00-0:00:23:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:23-0:00:33:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  these challenges.  
**0:00:33-0:00:49:**  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Hello and welcome to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:00:49-0:01:02:**  I'm your host Dimitri and today we have the immense pleasure of welcoming Jean-Baptiste  Cordenier on the podcast to talk about something we've been meaning to discuss for a long time  and that is vitiforistry.  
**0:01:02-0:01:16:**  So Jean-Baptiste is the owner and manager of Chateau Antonyc that produces fantastic  wine and as the name suggests, vitiforistry means the integration of agroforestry practices  in viticulture.  
**0:01:16-0:01:33:**  Jean-Baptiste has a fascinating story alongside Chateau Antonyc that he's been managing for  the past 20 years in an active agroforestry transition for the past five years.  So once again we are here sitting down with a farmer, a land manager that is giving us  
**0:01:33-0:01:50:**  some feedback as to the successes and the challenges around bringing trees into the  landscape and diversifying his operation, diversifying his ecosystem, especially in  the context of a very intensive production system which is viticulture.  
**0:01:50-0:02:06:**  So in this episode you're going to be hearing a lot about hedges, we're going to be talking  about planting trees inside the plots, inside the vineyard as well as the integration of  cover crops and how all of these three play together to form an agroecological system.  
**0:02:06-0:02:19:**  So we really hope that you enjoy this episode as much as we did.  Hello Jean-Baptiste, it's really really nice to have you on the show today.  Hello Dimitri, thank you for receiving me.  
**0:02:19-0:02:40:**  So you are our first guest on the podcast to talk about vitiforistry, which is the integration  of trees into a wine or a chateau or wine producing context.  So yeah maybe we could start by you telling us a bit of the story of where you work at  
**0:02:40-0:03:04:**  the moment of Chateau Antonyc and how you came about managing Chateau Antonyc and its  vineyards and giving us a bit of context about your story and the amazing story of your chateau.  So Chateau Antonyc is a family estate that my father bought in 1977, so almost 50 years  
**0:03:04-0:03:35:**  ago.  And I took over the estate in 93, June 93, so it's my 30th vintage this year.  And when I started to manage the estate, it was after a long period of seven years living  
**0:03:35-0:04:04:**  very far from the estate because I've left the estate in 1986 for my student period.  I spent that period in Belgium where I was born.  I was a student in agriculture, agronomy, engineering in Jean Bleu and I've made the  
**0:04:04-0:04:27:**  water and forestry school as a specialty at the end of my student period.  And then I spent two years in Central Africa, in Congo for technical cooperation.  And so it was a long period of seven years almost not visiting the estate and it was  
**0:04:27-0:04:48:**  a long haul and during that haul my father had to face some very difficult vintages.  The worst one was 87 vintage with a lot of rain from the beginning to the end of the  season.  
**0:04:48-0:05:22:**  And so he was technically in organic agriculture but without certification and he switched  that year to chemical products and to herbicides on the soil from one year to the other.  And so I spent my childhood running through the ditches following the parcels, visiting  
**0:05:22-0:05:45:**  all the biodiversity inside our environment and I was very curious and passionate about  wildlife and so it was a very rich environment because it was preserved with no chemicals.  And I had that long haul of seven years and when I was back from Africa, when my father  
**0:05:45-0:06:09:**  asked me to take over, it was quite shocking because all that biodiversity had almost completely  disappeared.  The insect populations were very poor, the orchids that were quite abundant close to  
**0:06:09-0:06:38:**  the parcels or inside the vineyard were only reduced to small spots and it was quite shocking  to see that.  So that was my start point at the estate but I also was quite a modern agronomist, fresh  
**0:06:38-0:07:12:**  from school and convinced that a compromise was possible between all that chemistry and  preservation and I've tested a lot of dead ends during the next two decades and I've  experienced that it was, following my opinion after almost two decades, that it was not  
**0:07:12-0:07:34:**  possible to come back to a balanced system without cutting the link with chemistry first  and without reintroducing wildlife corridors and cover crops and trees inside the system.  That was the only answer to come back to a balanced ecosystem in my vineyard.  
**0:07:34-0:07:50:**  So that was the beginning of this story of agroforestry in Antonique.  But I'm curious as to what were those dead ends that you met.  Maybe you could tell us a bit more about how you arrived to the conclusion that you needed  
**0:07:50-0:08:07:**  to break the link with chemistry.  So it was a long, very long process.  The first thing I've seen is that I've made soil analysis, the two first years of my new  
**0:08:07-0:08:35:**  life in Antonique as the manager of the estate and I was quite surprised to receive the lab's  result with organic percentage of the soil at an average of 2%, something like that,  1.8 to a bit more than 2%.  
**0:08:35-0:09:00:**  And always with the same comment, standard, normal, good.  And I had in my hands the first analysis that were made when my father bought the estate  and all these parcels they had that time, 5, 6%, sometimes more, sometimes a bit less,  
**0:09:00-0:09:21:**  but at least it was at 4%, average 5.  And so it was a strong decreasing and I was quite surprised to receive the message, it's  normal without any thought about the past of the parcel, no question about that.  
**0:09:21-0:09:46:**  And so I've tried to recover.  So my opinion was, my feeling was that we were on a slope and it was decreasing quite  fast because the first analysis were made maybe a decade or max 15 years ago.  
**0:09:46-0:10:10:**  So it was a short period.  And so my feeling that we were on a very bad slope and so I've tried things like crushing  the branches of the vines after the pruning because that time they were burned outside  
**0:10:10-0:10:24:**  the parcel, that was the common practice.  And so after one year I bought a machine to crush the branches and I was feeling that  okay, we will solve the problem with that, no results.  
**0:10:24-0:10:54:**  So we have started some cover crops with the natural grass that was present on the parcel  and on some parcel that was quite productive but it was only two parcels.  We have seeded some artificial grass to make competition with the vineyard to decrease  
**0:10:54-0:11:16:**  the production but most of the cover crop was natural grass with no competition with  the vineyard.  And so my intuition was that it was possible to add some organic materials to the soil  
**0:11:16-0:11:36:**  with the branches, with the cover crop, the natural cover crop and the results was quite  low, almost no change.  So it was possible to stay at that low level but not to recover the old percentages.  
**0:11:36-0:12:15:**  And so after years and years like that I've increased the addition of manure, the addition  of organic fertilizers and so it was not possible to climb the slope back.  And so after a lot of experiences like that my feeling was that it was maybe a good question  
**0:12:15-0:12:40:**  was to ask is the conventional system good for the life of my soil and so I started to  think about organic viticulture at that time but it was quite risky with our climate and  so I first started to plant some edges.  
**0:12:40-0:13:10:**  That was the first step in 2010 and then I've made some experiences with the branches of  the hedges, with the life of the soil that was visibly better close to the edges and  then step by step we have developed the project and we have also changed the cover crop by  
**0:13:10-0:13:26:**  seeding, some dynamic cover crops on the parcel to feed the soil.  But it was a very very long process.  And so you started seeing results when you stopped applying chemistry, then you started  
**0:13:26-0:13:40:**  seeing that, was it the stopping applying chemistry that started to create results or  was it overall you realized that you had to invest a lot more?  My first step was to plan to install the hedges.  
**0:13:40-0:14:02:**  That was the first step.  And then I've some results on the biodiversity were visible quite fast.  The agronomic results are on the long term but the wildlife, the biodiversity results  
**0:14:02-0:14:28:**  are coming quite fast when you plant hedges.  The first thing I've seen for the, I've discovered for the agronomic impact was with the frost  we had in 2017 because the only Merlot I've produced, that vintage, were produced quite  
**0:14:28-0:14:42:**  close to the edges.  They were protected by the edges.  That varietal is very fragile facing the spring frost and we had some protection close to  
**0:14:42-0:15:03:**  the edges.  We also had some impact facing the drought on the parcels.  When we had the drought in the old time it was more impacting on the limit of the parcel  
**0:15:03-0:15:20:**  than inside the parcel.  But with the hedges the impact of the drought on the side of the parcel was much lower because  they had the protection of the hedge.  
**0:15:20-0:15:42:**  And so it was also visible that we had a lot of fungi that were growing at the base of  the hedge.  And my idea was that they were maybe also protecting and making some micro-resis not  
**0:15:42-0:16:12:**  only with the edges, the trees inside the edges, but also with the vines.  And the consultants I was working with for the edges told me that they were sure that  we could have some impact close to, on the lines at the limit of the parcels.  
**0:16:12-0:16:35:**  So then I started to think about introducing trees inside the parcel and to feed the soil  with some cover crop, dynamic cover crop, to feed the soil and to encourage the development  of fungi everywhere in the parcel, not only at the limit of the parcel.  
**0:16:35-0:16:48:**  So the first step was the hedge, the second the cover crop and the third one the trees  inside the parcel.  I'm curious about the consultants you're working with because it's quite obvious that planting  
**0:16:48-0:17:06:**  hedges goes against the logic of modern agriculture that we've been developing since the 60s.  And so the natural response or the natural kind of opinion that I would expect to see  in consultants that are following a traditional agriculture would be competition.  
**0:17:06-0:17:31:**  But it was not my analogies, it was not an agronomist.  The first consultant I've met and the one I've started the edges with was an association,  Arbre Péisage, so trees and landscapes.  
**0:17:31-0:17:51:**  And they encourage, they visit agricultures and they talk with them and they encourage  them to reinstall hedges at the limit of their parcels.  So they have met my technical director at a meeting somewhere and they talked about  
**0:17:51-0:18:08:**  their business and Jean Bernard told me, oh I've met some nice people, they help agricultures  to plant hedges.  Are you interested in making a test?  
**0:18:08-0:18:26:**  I know that you like wildlife, birds and maybe it could be a good opportunity to reintroduce  birds inside the parcels.  The first idea was there, visible biodiversity, not invisible biodiversity with the mycorrhizas.  
**0:18:26-0:18:49:**  And so we have started LIDAR, planting in 2011 100 meters of edge with a quite fast  result on visible biodiversity.  The first year because we had a few months later baby snakes, baby gash snakes that were  
**0:18:49-0:19:11:**  coming under the mulch protecting the roots of the edges.  So the first result, quite happy, quite encouraging us was that one.  So we were not thinking about agronomy at the base but some decisions to have more biodiversity  
**0:19:11-0:19:38:**  and wildlife corridors inside the estate and it was like opening a door on a new world.  And then through them I've met some agronomists like Konrad Schreiber that were talking about  cover crop and not only green manure, it's not exactly the same thing.  
**0:19:38-0:20:02:**  And so step by step we have developed the system.  But at the same time I was living sort of quite coming back to my old diplomas of water  and forestry that I had forgotten during my viticulture life.  
**0:20:02-0:20:13:**  Very interesting.  And also I really enjoyed when we had the prequel together you explained to me that  as a young child you were passionate about the biodiversity and the insects and the birds  
**0:20:13-0:20:27:**  and the snakes and you would go around and you had actually seen in your lifetime the  decline in those species that's with the hedges and with your work at the moment you're seeing  them come back but you're very attuned to the landscape you're working in since you  
**0:20:27-0:20:38:**  grew up here.  So you're visibly observing these things year on year.  Yeah and I remember when I started my diploma in agronomy the first year we had to make  
**0:20:38-0:21:06:**  an insect collection of 50 species and the same with plants, a collection of 50 species.  Quite large in the same ecosystem but with a maximum of families and genders.  And it was very easy in 86 to do that in Antonique in a few days.  
**0:21:06-0:21:23:**  And when I was back to the estate seven years later I tried to do the same, to find the  same species and to make a new collection and it was almost impossible to do that in  a so short time.  
**0:21:23-0:21:49:**  It was much longer to do the same and a lot of species were not present.  They had disappeared or they were at a very low level and so it was the same for birds  and things like that and snakes and frogs and the biomass was so low.  
**0:21:49-0:22:13:**  The biodiversity was so low it was impressive and now we see that it is coming back very  fast and the most important result we have today in agroforestry is that biodiversity  and that has almost no cost.  
**0:22:13-0:22:33:**  For the agronomic results it's something longer and we are only at the beginning of our experience.  We will just drop our mics, everybody has understood the message.  We just need to go out and plant hedges because with the experience that you have just come  
**0:22:33-0:22:44:**  back to us with we can transform biodiversity relatively fast with hedges and this is also  something that science is backing up.  We just have to get out there and start planting more trees really.  
**0:22:44-0:22:55:**  But of course that's not what we are going to do.  What we are going to do is understand the details of how you have planted them, what  species you have used, what spacings so we can have a bit of an understanding of the  
**0:22:55-0:23:10:**  practical design of those hedges.  I would love to know more about how many species you have included, what species, why.  Maybe you could tell us a bit about the design process.  
**0:23:10-0:23:30:**  So first we use local species.  That's very important.  You cannot talk about biodiversity if you introduce exotic species in your ecosystem.  
**0:23:30-0:23:53:**  Second you need to make a mix.  It's not a green concrete.  So we need diversity and we use something like 18-20 species in the hedges at least.  
**0:23:53-0:24:15:**  Some trees and some bush.  So the dominant species if you go to associations or to pepinerist, I don't know the word in  English.  
**0:24:15-0:24:39:**  Nursery.  To nurseries, they will deliver you mostly some maples, the European maples and mostly  acare campestris, les rables champêtres.  
**0:24:39-0:24:50:**  That's the base.  It's a good base because it's local and it's the natural companion of the vineyard, of  the vine.  
**0:24:50-0:25:16:**  They grew up together in the same ecosystem, the narrow forest following the rivers.  So the tree helping the vine to climb with water enough in the soil and light higher  in the canopy.  
**0:25:16-0:25:42:**  So they had a coevolution and so they were living together.  They have some genetics together and they share the same mycorrhizas.  So the first species you will introduce in vitreoforestry in the hedge will be obviously  
**0:25:42-0:26:01:**  the maples, acare campestris.  But you have a lot of trees that you can also use, some alms, le fraine in French, I don't  know the word in English.  
**0:26:01-0:26:08:**  Le charm.  So what's the Latin name?  Fraxinus.  
**0:26:08-0:26:19:**  Ah, so ash.  Ash.  And so we also use the elm.  
**0:26:19-0:26:37:**  That is if you let a hedge grow in Bordeaux on the limes and clay soils, the elms will  come first, naturally.  Because they are everywhere with the graffios, the disease that is affecting the elms and  
**0:26:37-0:27:05:**  they almost disappeared everywhere in Europe, they survive at a young stage like a bush.  And if they are in a hedge, they stay like juveniles because they are pruned every year  and they stay juvenile and they don't have the graffios and they survive like that.  
**0:27:05-0:27:18:**  And they are quite abundant.  If you let the hedge grow in Chateau Antony, you will have alms at 80%.  Is that the correct name?  
**0:27:18-0:27:36:**  Yes, it is.  They will be dominant.  We also use wild roses because they also make good micro-resis and a lot of some wild fruit  
**0:27:36-0:27:58:**  trees, wild prunes, some epineuar.  I don't know the names in English but we have a mix of 20 species, trees, but trees from,  mostly trees from open landscapes.  
**0:27:58-0:28:20:**  And some very small trees, bushes that will make quite diverse ecosystem.  The idea is to make a maximum of micro-resis.  So with a maximum of species, you will host a maximum of fungi.  
**0:28:20-0:28:38:**  To host a maximum of birds, so you need to feed them.  A maximum of insects, so you need diversity.  So what we need to avoid is invaders, exotic trees.  
**0:28:38-0:29:00:**  And when you have planted some hedges, if you want to increase the network, you don't  need to plant anymore because the animals will do the job.  The wine will do the job.  
**0:29:00-0:29:19:**  They will transport the seeds and today when I plant and replant a parcel where I have  no hedge, I let the nature do and I don't clean the limit of the parcel and the hedge  will come.  
**0:29:19-0:29:33:**  I only have to prune it.  That's very simple and I see what is coming.  And then if it's too poor, I will take seeds inside the rest of my hedges and I will enrich.  
**0:29:33-0:29:52:**  And these hedges are starting faster because they are not planted, they are seeded and  it's much more efficient.  But at the beginning, in a poor landscape with only vines for decades or almost a century,  
**0:29:52-0:30:12:**  you have to start with plantations.  So the second rule is follow your landscape.  You don't have to create a new network and to open highways.  
**0:30:12-0:30:27:**  You have to observe your estate first.  Do I have rivers?  If I have one, the first thing to do is to plant following the river.  
**0:30:27-0:30:48:**  If you have ditches, you follow the ditches.  These are some of sort of lost spaces apparently because they are lost for agriculture but  we need them to extract water by drainage.  
**0:30:48-0:31:12:**  If you have a river, you cannot cultivate the river.  So you can use these lost spaces and they will build a network and that will be current  because it's already a network.  
**0:31:12-0:31:37:**  So the first years, I've only followed the existing ditches bordering my parcels and  only planting this, I had more than 80% of my network.  So this is the second base.  
**0:31:37-0:31:53:**  And the third one is not too fast.  You need to learn.  So go step by step and if you learn quite fast, then you go faster every year and you're  
**0:31:53-0:32:09:**  able to plant more than one kilometer in one year if you want but don't start like that  at the beginning.  Start small with only a few hundred of meters or only 100 meters like I started and you  
**0:32:09-0:32:34:**  discover how to prune the first hedge and then you make your own experience.  And when the hedges are becoming strong, they are not becoming strong altogether because  then you have to learn how to prune and to make holes inside the older hedges and when  
**0:32:34-0:32:44:**  you learn, you make mistakes and you don't make the same mistakes on the whole network.  So step by step, that's another rule.  Very interesting.  
**0:32:44-0:32:54:**  You're providing some phenomenal feedback here.  I'm just going to ask a few questions to dig a bit deeper on a few elements.  Do you plant a single row or a double row?  
**0:32:54-0:33:16:**  I've planted single row but today when I have more space, I think that I will try to plant  double row because I think that for biodiversity, a larger hedge is much more impacting and  faster impacting.  
**0:33:16-0:33:31:**  But when you visit my hedges, the oldest ones, they are now 10 years old, they become larger.  That's the natural way they expand and so it's the way you prune them that will limit  them.  
**0:33:31-0:33:41:**  Only that.  And the second thing is about the ditches.  I started to plant both sides of the ditches.  
**0:33:41-0:34:05:**  Planting a hedge on one side and planting some salics on the other side.  You take a branch like that, you leave it in the soil and it's making roots.  It's very easy to do and if you miss it one year, so maybe one third will die, it's nothing.  
**0:34:05-0:34:35:**  You will plant the next winter and they will survive the next year.  And I try to cover my ditch with a closed canopy that is protecting my ditch or my river  from the sun and then the idea is to avoid to come with a machine inside the ditch to  
**0:34:35-0:34:54:**  clean it because with no light you will have no grass growing inside the ditch.  And this is a fantastic closing canopy that is starting to build in the first ditches  I've planted both sides.  
**0:34:54-0:35:14:**  I think that for biodiversity it's very interesting and for the cost to manage that is I believe  the same than the standard because you don't come with a machine inside the ditch.  You only have to prune the hedge and it's the same job.  
**0:35:14-0:35:22:**  Very interesting.  And coming back to the early phases of the establishment of the hedge, how did you manage  the planting?  
**0:35:22-0:35:39:**  Are you planting mechanically or are you planting with humans?  How are you using let's say volunteer people for this like open days?  How are you organizing planting the hedge at the start?  
**0:35:39-0:35:56:**  So we work a lot with the Agri-Paysage, so they come with a team and you pay them the  service that's one way.  As I told you most of my hedges today I don't plant them, they are natural and then we enrich  
**0:35:56-0:36:14:**  and I do that myself.  So enriching, I don't need a team to do that.  My workers, they know the job now and I also plant some trees with Les Vignerons du Vivant  
**0:36:14-0:36:30:**  when they come.  It's a school we have founded with some other estates in Medoc and with Les Apprenti de  Pérez and sometimes we have students that are coming and they make one or two days of  
**0:36:30-0:36:45:**  experimenting how to plant a hedge and so if we have to install a hedge and if it's  the week they need to make that experience they can come to my estate or to another one  and to help.  
**0:36:45-0:36:57:**  So we have several ways but mostly by Agri-Paysage.  In terms of the weed management at the start, what's been your learning experience there,  what's the process?  
**0:36:57-0:37:14:**  So first we make mulch, I did not talk about the mulch for the hedges and for the trees  it's the same.  When you plant a hedge or a tree they need a mulch.  
**0:37:14-0:37:31:**  All the mistakes I've made, all the trees I've lost, it was always the same reason no  mulch or not enough.  So that's important because we never have the time to give them water.  
**0:37:31-0:37:47:**  When we have to give water to them we are occupied to give water to the baby vines and  so when it's a line inside the parcel we can give water to the trees but not to all the  hedges it's not possible.  
**0:37:47-0:38:11:**  So the mulch is very, very important, it's a basic.  And so management of the trees at the beginning we do nothing.  When I started with my two first hedges I was quite anxious about the fight and the  
**0:38:11-0:38:32:**  competition because it was, as you told me, for the agronomist, the consultants, all the  analogists and my colleagues they were all talking about you plant hedges it will make  a competition for minerals, for water and for light with your vines.  
**0:38:32-0:39:00:**  So with that pressure I was self-limiting my experience and the two first years I've  shortened my hedges at the height of the vine and that was not good.  Today I don't do that because you damage them quite low so now I let them grow and I prune  
**0:39:00-0:39:30:**  them when they are higher than me.  The trees inside the hedges I try to prune the low branches on the first 35% of the tree  and then I let the canopy complete and when they grow up then I cut a new verticillis  
**0:39:30-0:39:44:**  of branches and that's it.  It's quite limited.  The only decision you have to make when you plant a hedge is from place to place you let  
**0:39:44-0:40:05:**  a tree grow higher than the hedge and you choose if you have place enough to leave it  in free growing or if you prune it like a... like a...  how?  
**0:40:05-0:40:11:**  Tête-artre in French.  Like a pollard.  Like a pollard, yes.  
**0:40:11-0:40:20:**  That's a good word.  So that's the only question.  Let him free or prune it like a pollard.  
**0:40:20-0:40:51:**  If you have no place, if you risk a competition for your machines, for the light, for... if  you want to limit the tree you prune it like a pollard and you will give him stronger roots  and you will open holes for more biodiversity and for birds and for bats and for insects  
**0:40:51-0:41:01:**  and for frogs, climbing frogs.  So it's good.  That's the two questions you will ask for the trees.  
**0:41:01-0:41:33:**  And for the bush, some of them we prune them very short at the base when they are basitonic.  If you cut them at the base, they will make a lot of new branches starting from the base.  So the hazelnut is living like that and with a hazelnut you can do that.  
**0:41:33-0:41:45:**  You prune it completely at the base.  You only keep one branch and you have a hole in your hedge and the hole is closing in one  year because they restart quite fast.  
**0:41:45-0:42:10:**  That type of small trees you can prune them like that.  And we manage the edge when it's at the low limit of the parcel and if we are facing some  spring frost and we need to make openings to let the cold air go through the parcel,  
**0:42:10-0:42:21:**  we open holes inside on key places inside the hedge like that.  But it's not a lot of work.  Interesting.  
**0:42:21-0:42:38:**  And so this pruning, how often on a line of hedge, how often do you prune?  Is it every year or every three years?  Yeah, that one I started to do it in the first hedges after seven years, six years, something  
**0:42:38-0:42:48:**  like that, depending on the strength of the starting of the hedge.  So it depends.  But it's not very early.  
**0:42:48-0:43:10:**  And the general pruning of the hedge, because we have to do that to limit the width and  the height of the hedge, you have to do that every two years, every year, depending on  the... if it's very vigorous, very strong, you have to do that every year.  
**0:43:10-0:43:28:**  But in some parcels, in some hedges, it's only every two years.  And you can't really do that mechanically because if you do that mechanically, you will  be cutting some of the long trees that you've decided to leave in the hedge, right?  
**0:43:28-0:43:45:**  How do you do it quite efficiently?  Because you now have four kilometers of hedges, if I understood well.  So what I do, I work with a small independent company that is cleaning my hedges.  
**0:43:45-0:43:56:**  And so they have all the machines you need for that, and they can control a hedge with  that.  So I make a color.  
**0:43:56-0:44:08:**  I use a color on the trees I want to keep.  And I tell them, when you cut a hedge, when you see the color on a tree, you stop.  You don't cut it.  
**0:44:08-0:44:17:**  You can... and then I give them the instruction, you limit the hedge at that large and that  high.  And when you see the color, don't cut.  
**0:44:17-0:44:38:**  So if you talk with them, and if you are very clear, they can do that.  But I only do that on the hedges that are limiting a ditch that they are cleaning.  But for all the other hedges, when I have no space enough to come with a tractor between  
**0:44:38-0:45:00:**  the hedge and the vine, and if I have no trail limiting on the other side the parcel, then  I come with a worker, only with a small electric hand pruner.  And it's quite fast.  
**0:45:00-0:45:06:**  It's very easy.  So it's not a big problem.  It's not taking a lot of time.  
**0:45:06-0:45:24:**  You're making me think about how close is your hedge from your vineyard?  Typically it's at least two meters.  But I have some edges that are very close.  
**0:45:24-0:45:37:**  I've made my experience in one parcel.  I've planted the edge at one meter from the last wall.  And I make a plaissé in French.  
**0:45:37-0:45:56:**  So I will take every plant in the hedge.  I take a branch, very supple, and I make a knot with the next one.  So I make the branch horizontal to the next plant in the hedge.  
**0:45:56-0:46:03:**  You bend the branch down.  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  And I do the same with the vine.  
**0:46:03-0:46:20:**  So some branches of the vine, they will grow inside the hedge.  It's only an experience in one row, just for fun, because I can harvest the grapes behind  the hedge because I have a trail there.  
**0:46:20-0:46:45:**  So it's just for fun.  I have another parcel where I have a ditch and no place to plant the hedge on the right  side of the ditch and almost no place on the left side because it's between the ditch and  
**0:46:45-0:47:01:**  the first line of the hedge.  And I've tried to plant that hedge in that very narrow space so the edge is at one and  a half meter from the first row.  
**0:47:01-0:47:13:**  It's too close, so I have to prune that hedge more often on that side.  That's it.  And so I have two or three places like that.  
**0:47:13-0:47:26:**  But the standard is at least two meters or three or four meters when I have a trail and  I want to come with a machine between the hedge and the parcel.  Very nice.  
**0:47:26-0:47:36:**  There's lots of things to break down here and delve into, and we'll get there.  I just need to zoom back about 10 minutes when you said that the most important thing  to do was to mulch.  
**0:47:36-0:47:49:**  And the biggest mistakes that you made was when you lacked mulch.  So I can just hear the future listeners of this podcast asking themselves, so how much  mulch, what type of mulch do you prefer to use?  
**0:47:49-0:47:59:**  What kind of height and width do you aim for around the single line of hedge that you've  planted?  Taking into account here that of course we're talking about the planted hedges and that  
**0:47:59-0:48:11:**  the new hedges that grow on their own, it's another logic.  This is another type of system.  So maybe you could give us a bit of feedback as to your experience with mulching.  
**0:48:11-0:48:25:**  So we were talking only about the hedges.  That is only one of the three basics of phagophore history.  The two others are the trees inside the parcels.  
**0:48:25-0:48:50:**  So I plant trees now inside the parcels to have a max distance between every vine inside  a parcel and another species of tree of 15 meters.  But the third basic is the cover crop.  
**0:48:50-0:49:14:**  You are not building a complete agroforestry project only with the hedges and the trees.  If the soil is nicked, something is missing because the branches of the hedges that you  will crush, the branches of the pruned trees inside the parcel that you will crush and  
**0:49:14-0:49:39:**  send back to the soil, they will not produce biomass enough to feed the life of the soil.  You need the cover crop to do more than 80% of that job.  And in a nedled parcel, it's quite easy to install a cover crop with a mix of cereals,  
**0:49:39-0:50:01:**  legumes and some mustards and plants like that and radishes.  So different families that will explore different horizons and that will take different minerals  in the soil and that will altogether produce a lot of biomass that you will crush on the  
**0:50:01-0:50:29:**  soil to make natural mulch when you will destroy it.  We were teach, when we were teach about that in agriculture schools, about green menus.  You plant a cover crop and you destroy it and you incorporate it to the soil.  
**0:50:29-0:50:56:**  The other way is to plant a cover crop and to roll it on the soil to let it die and if  it's re-growing to come back to do it again, to make a natural mulch covering the soil  and feeding the soil slowly respecting the complete trophic chain of all the microorganisms  
**0:50:56-0:51:26:**  that will eat all that vegetal biomass and transform it step by step in minerals.  So in an eddled vineyard, it's possible to do that, to make cover crop with your own  mix or with a mix from you can buy complete.  
**0:51:26-0:51:41:**  I do both.  I make my own mix.  I also buy some premix like a wolf or things like that and the idea is to feed the soil  
**0:51:41-0:52:03:**  that will feed the vine.  And I believe that it's a very interesting way for eddled parcels that have their root  system complete, installed quite deep because they will never suffer of the competition  
**0:52:03-0:52:26:**  because the roots are deep enough and the system will be balanced.  But in a young vine, I've tried to make a cover crop the same year I was planting the  vine and that was very difficult.  
**0:52:26-0:52:53:**  I've made bad experiences with that, almost killing the baby vineyard in one parcel because  when you have a severe drought like I had in 2019 in the one and a half hectare I have  planted that year, the competition between my cover crop and the baby vines was too high  
**0:52:53-0:53:12:**  and a lot of vines never survived to that experience.  And we had to replace most of them the next year.  And a lot of seeds were invading the line under the vines, covering the vines and it  
**0:53:12-0:53:37:**  was, we were suffocated by all the work it was representing and so now I'm more careful.  When I plant a vine, I don't make a cover crop but I hate naked soils and I know that  I want to avoid that, I make a green manure.  
**0:53:37-0:54:00:**  So I choose to plant in autumn, to seed in autumn and I completely destroy and incorporate  my cover crop to the soil in spring before the starting of the new vine.  And then I control by cutting it quite short or by letting the natural grass being dominant  
**0:54:00-0:54:14:**  again and I control the size with a machine and that's it.  And I work the soil, I plug the soil under the line of vines only but not between the  two rows.  
**0:54:14-0:54:36:**  For the young vines, they need to make their roots with no competition for everything,  minerals and water, mostly water.  And you have to avoid the risk to be suffocated by too much biomass that is covering your  
**0:54:36-0:54:50:**  plant and they need light, they will not survive.  So it's too risky.  The two, three first years, they need to make their roots and then you have to make a compromise.  
**0:54:50-0:55:15:**  Yes, naked soil is not living enough but first, your first aim is to plant the vineyard and  then you will make a compromise.  It will be covered in winter, beginning of the spring and not in summer or very short  
**0:55:15-0:55:29:**  grass, that's it.  And after two or three years, when you have your roots, then you can start something different  with a real cover crop.  
**0:55:29-0:55:57:**  And I believe a lot in that practice because my feeling is that the model where you produce  a lot of vineyard, a lot of biomass that you crush on the soil, covering the soil, is the  best copy of the natural soil in a forest system.  
**0:55:57-0:56:06:**  The name agroforestry is not coming from the trees inside the parcels, from the edge following  the parcel.  A forest is not an edge.  
**0:56:06-0:56:27:**  The name agroforestry, the name of the concept is we try to copy the living soil of a forest  but without a forest covering your parcel.  And how copying the forest soil, you have to have the starter with the branches of the  
**0:56:27-0:56:56:**  vines, of the edges, of the trees you are pruning so they will give the basic lignin  to the soil, that is the next human starter, and you will complete by all the grass, you  will cultivate, all the species you will cultivate in your cover crop.  
**0:56:56-0:57:15:**  And these will produce most of the biomass with the starter inside.  And if you make a good mulch with that, then you will have a good copy of a forest soil  and you will be practicing agroforestry.  
**0:57:15-0:57:21:**  That's fascinating.  That's very interesting.  So you're covering the layers above the vine and below the vine in a way.  
**0:57:21-0:57:30:**  You're right.  We create different horizons.  We introduce verticality in the system.  
**0:57:30-0:57:44:**  A conventional agriculture system is very horizontal.  You cultivate potatoes or corn, it's only one level.  But when you have hedges, it's a second level.  
**0:57:44-0:58:03:**  When you have the vine, the hedges, the trees and covering the soil, the cover crop, you  will have four different levels.  So it's a much more complex ecosystem and you will completely use the whole volume of  
**0:58:03-0:58:18:**  your ecosystem.  And you can produce a lot of things.  So when I seed my parcels, we have finished the harvest this morning.  
**0:58:18-0:58:28:**  What are we doing tomorrow morning?  We will work the soils not deep, only a few centimeters on all the parcels and we will  seed.  
**0:58:28-0:58:40:**  Every parcels, every two rows we seed.  And we plant our mixture with the three big families and we will let the crop grow the  whole autumn.  
**0:58:40-0:59:01:**  So it's still warm in October.  So we have water again because the rain is back since last week.  So it will grow quite fast and we will have quite a cover crop within three or four weeks.  
**0:59:01-0:59:24:**  If November is quite soft, and that's the standard of Atlantic climate in Bordeaux,  we will have a second month where during the whole month of November, the cover crop will  continue to grow slower, but it will grow.  
**0:59:24-0:59:39:**  Then the herd of winter, December, January, it will grow slowly and it will restart in  February, March.  March, it will grow quite fast.  
**0:59:39-0:59:53:**  And when will the vineyard start?  In April.  So we can let it grow if we are lucky, quite fast, two months in autumn and two months  
**0:59:53-1:00:09:**  at the end of the winter, beginning of the spring.  And when the buds of the vines will open, then we need to come inside the parcels to  make the first treatments against the rot.  
**1:00:09-1:00:20:**  We will have to work to cut the double branches and make the green things and things like  that.  So we will work inside the vineyard.  
**1:00:20-1:00:38:**  And the vineyard will need a lot of water and a lot of minerals for his own growing.  So we need to reduce the competition with the cover crop.  So then we crush it on the soil.  
**1:00:38-1:00:52:**  But if we are lucky, if we are successful, we have behind us four months of, four complete  months of growing.  And it can be higher than the vineyard that time.  
**1:00:52-1:01:02:**  And it's a lot of biomass.  It's tons of biomass per hectare that you are giving to the soil and that will feed  the vineyard.  
**1:01:02-1:01:31:**  So then we have to make a compromise.  Sometimes we will need to feed the grass, the cover crop.  You will have to give nutrigene to 20 or 30 points of nutrigenes to the grass to feed  
**1:01:31-1:01:42:**  it because if you don't do that, they will eat the nutrigene that the vines will need.  For sure.  Okay?  
**1:01:42-1:02:00:**  Yeah, yeah.  When you destroy your cover crop, all the microorganisms, all the batteries that will  eat all the organic materials you give back to the soil, they will need for their own  
**1:02:00-1:02:08:**  growth, they will need some nutrigene.  They will take it in the soil.  So you can have a competition with your vine.  
**1:02:08-1:02:30:**  So you have to feed the vine, to help the vine that time.  So to feed your mulch with nutrigene if you want to avoid the competition with the vineyard.  So these key moments are maybe important to manage.  
**1:02:30-1:02:49:**  But when you do that, when you avoid that risk of competition for nutrigene, you only  have advantages.  You have a cover crop that is protecting your soil against UVs, against drought because  
**1:02:49-1:03:07:**  it will limit water evaporation and it will slowly feed all the trophic chain until the  last minerals that will feed the vine.  So it's a very interesting practice.  
**1:03:07-1:03:20:**  Feeding the soil with plants that will feed the vine herself.  It's fascinating stuff and it's interesting to understand that it's also working super  well in your context in the vineyard.  
**1:03:20-1:03:36:**  I wanted to talk a bit about as well the trees.  This is the last element of the system, your agro-cological system that you've described.  So now you are pushing the limits even further in a way and you've already started including  
**1:03:36-1:03:48:**  trees inside the vineyard plots.  So it's not just on the edges like you've done with the hedges but actually inside.  So what kind of species have you chosen to plant inside?  
**1:03:48-1:04:02:**  How are you managing competition with the vine which is something that clearly as you've  described has a certain risk?  Maybe you could explain to us a bit about that system.  
**1:04:02-1:04:27:**  About the trees.  They are very important in the system because what we try to do...  One of the keys in microforestry is that we are coming back to the herd of the forestry  
**1:04:27-1:04:49:**  soil that is the fungi.  In forestry, in pure forestry, we have never forgotten the fungi.  I was teaching in forestry school that chemistry minerals in forestry are not good because  
**1:04:49-1:05:15:**  they destroy the fungi and we need the fungi to have healthy trees.  So mycorrhizae is something quite familiar in forestry.  In agriculture, we have for decades completely forgotten microphysis.  
**1:05:15-1:05:45:**  We were feeding the soils for decades with mineral fertilizers that were toxic for the  fungi, we were practicing a lot of plugging of the soils, working the soils too much that  was not good for the fungi and we were using a lot of chemicals that were selected to kill  
**1:05:45-1:06:12:**  all the fungi that were developing disease of our crops but when coming on the soil,  they were also killing the fungi inside the soil and because they were systemic, they  were also killing the microphysis inside the plant.  
**1:06:12-1:06:40:**  So we have slowly built a system where all the plants we were cultivating in agriculture  were orphans or almost orphans of most of their microphysis and the system we want to  build again in agroforestry is to give the microphysis back to the plants and to reintroduce  
**1:06:40-1:07:02:**  the fungi in the heart of the system.  So to make a link between, to have that link between the vines and the trees, we know that  we need a max distance between a vine and a tree of 15-20 meters.  
**1:07:02-1:07:20:**  So that's the reason I plant a row of, in every parcel I'm planting or replanting, I  plant a row of trees every 30 meters inside the parcel.  So I lose space.  
**1:07:20-1:07:43:**  I lose because I cancel two rows, I plant 20 rows, one and a half meter between two  rows, so I plant 20 rows, 30 meters, then I cancel two rows, so I lose two on 22, I  lose 9% of my surface with no vine on that surface.  
**1:07:43-1:08:02:**  But I have my vines back because I increase the density inside the lines.  Between two rows, between two vines inside the row, I had previously one meter and today  I have only 90 centimeters.  
**1:08:02-1:08:16:**  So I win 11%.  So I even increase the density with that.  And then I adapt my pruning to have the number of buds I need.  
**1:08:16-1:08:35:**  But it's possible to do that and in theory it's quite difficult to apply, but it's possible  to have the same potential of production to preserve it.  So the idea is to have a network with trees from place to place.  
**1:08:35-1:08:53:**  I have my hedge, 20 rows, a line of trees, 20 rows, a line of trees, etc. and then a  new hedge at the end of the parcel.  And every vine will be at the max distance of 15 meters from another species of trees.  
**1:08:53-1:09:17:**  And so they will make richer connections, they will have more opportunities for micro-resis.  And the idea is to increase the biodiversity in the soil and we suppose that it will be  positive for the life of the soil and for the agronomy.  
**1:09:17-1:09:36:**  I have no proof of that.  I have no analysis to tell you it's true, it's efficient.  But what I see about the impact of the hedges, what I see about the impact of leaving cover  
**1:09:36-1:09:51:**  crop year after year on an old parcel, I'm sure that the trees will have the same positive  impact.  You mentioned earlier on, you talked about the ecological result of bringing in these  
**1:09:51-1:10:01:**  trees into your farm through biodiversity, etc.  But you also mentioned the agronomic results that will take much longer to start being  visible.  
**1:10:01-1:10:07:**  So of course, we're in a space here where we don't have a lot of visibility and science  on this.  There's not a lot of people that have done this before.  
**1:10:07-1:10:21:**  So our best shot is for somebody like you that's already been doing it for 10 years  now or 11, what are the expected agronomic results that you expect?  You alluded to some at the beginning already, but it's worth repeating them and it's worth  
**1:10:21-1:10:34:**  kind of reinstating this idea and delving a bit deeper.  So what are the expected agronomic results that you are expecting to see with trees inside?  Now I'm focusing on trees, less on the cover crop.  
**1:10:34-1:10:50:**  This is more clarified.  So both together, trees and cover crop, we need both.  So first, when you see a tree, you only see the visible part of the iceberg.  
**1:10:50-1:11:13:**  So a large part of the biomass of the tree is in the roots.  So when you see biodiversity that is increasing in the air, in the tree, in the edge, you  can be sure at 100% that you increase the biodiversity inside the soil.  
**1:11:13-1:11:21:**  You can be sure about that.  So what are the...  But the question is that we don't see it.  
**1:11:21-1:11:32:**  So we cannot measure that with our eyes.  You have to make analysis and we are practitioners.  We are cultivators, so we are not scientists.  
**1:11:32-1:11:44:**  We are not spending our time to make analysis.  And I could be happy to have students that are coming to see what is happening inside  the soil.  
**1:11:44-1:12:06:**  So what are the expecting results?  First, more species that are completing the trophic chain, transforming all the organic  inventory of the soil in minerals, a repeated cycle with a long chain of species.  
**1:12:06-1:12:24:**  I want to...  So I expect that we will enrich that cycle.  Second, increasing the organic percentage of the soil and living organic material that  
**1:12:24-1:12:45:**  is recycled, not stored and dead, but something living and transformed.  So we want to increase the organic percentage of the soil and we expect to do something  quite efficient facing that.  
**1:12:45-1:13:07:**  And for that, I have some measures because the first parcels I've resized with the hedges,  the trees inside and the cover crop, after four years of practicing the cover crop, I'm  now climbing the slope back.  
**1:13:07-1:13:26:**  And I observed that from two percent after four years, I'm at three percent on some parcels.  So that's good, that's positive.  Another thing we are expecting is that we will protect the soil, again, too much evaporation  
**1:13:26-1:13:43:**  in summer.  Another thing we expect is that the network of the roots of the trees, they will help  us to make a natural drainage of the soils.  
**1:13:43-1:14:12:**  And it's visible that the prisms of the trees can help because they have deeper roots.  And when you prune the trees, most of these roots will die and they will open some trails  for air, water inside the soil.  
**1:14:12-1:14:30:**  So that's good.  And the last thing I can talk about, the expected results, and it's an evidence, all these trees  we are planting, they fix a lot of carbon.  
**1:14:30-1:14:50:**  So long-term impact.  Fixing carbon is good for environment and I believe that we have to do that, to plant  hedges, trees, to build and cover crop to build a new agriculture, fixing much more  
**1:14:50-1:15:12:**  carbon from the air, facing the global warming we have today, it's very important.  And the trees in the parcels will be very positive for facing the heat waves because  they will act like natural air conditioners.  
**1:15:12-1:15:32:**  They take water quite deep in the soil and they evaporate at three, four, five meters  high, they evaporate water.  And that has an impact on the microclimate of the parcel and it's possible to decrease  
**1:15:32-1:16:05:**  the peak, to erase the peak of the heat waves by two, three Celsius and sometimes more.  And you have experienced that in other cultures when you are practicing agroforestry in serials.  I've heard that you have measured, you have experimented this impact on the microclimate  
**1:16:05-1:16:10:**  of the parcel.  And I try to do the same in my parcels.  No, that's very interesting.  
**1:16:10-1:16:24:**  And so what you're saying is that you're expecting, and again, I'm taking your words from before,  it's more of a medium long-term result.  You're expecting the soil to be more fertile, your vineyard to produce more because your  
**1:16:24-1:16:34:**  soil is richer, right?  You're expecting there to be a microclimate effect.  And as you had commented earlier on with the hedge to be kind of buffering the extremes  
**1:16:34-1:16:48:**  of cold and hot.  And so, and all of this, you're expecting that the competition effects through soil  water, soil water, nutrients and light will be lower than the benefits.  
**1:16:48-1:17:04:**  I'm sure about that because of the trees, we can prune them and control their size.  So competition for light is not a big problem.  We prune the vines, we can prune the trees how we want.  
**1:17:04-1:17:25:**  So it's, so and I'm sure by 100% that we can avoid the light competition.  The water competition, I'm sure with a good cover crop that we limit the evaporation on  the soil.  
**1:17:25-1:17:45:**  So it's good for saving water in the soil.  The trees that are taking water quite deep in the soil, if they refresh the atmosphere  like a natural air conditioner will help us.  
**1:17:45-1:18:15:**  So I don't see where we will lose, so more with competition than we win with the advantages.  We are not planting pines.  We are planting species that can grow close to the vine without competition with the vine.  
**1:18:15-1:18:28:**  So they share the same mycorrhizas, they live together because they had the evolution to  live together.  So if you do that with pines, it will be a problem.  
**1:18:28-1:18:36:**  Of course, that's naturally going to be something that's really important.  But what it's making me think right now what you're saying is that it's really a system  as well.  
**1:18:36-1:18:48:**  You can't just be planting trees in the middle of your parcel without adapting also, for  example, including cover crops to be reducing evaporation without the, I mean, they all  kind of work together and the overall result.  
**1:18:48-1:19:01:**  And it's also, it's important to not be separating and simplifying these things too much.  We're trying to imitate an ecosystem which is highly complex.  And so by including all these elements, but again, being careful with variety choices,  
**1:19:01-1:19:14:**  management in terms of pruning, planting methods, when we integrate these things or not, being  careful about many agronomic details, which you've gained quite a lot of experience with  and expressed some here in the podcast, then you can have a system which is more resilient  
**1:19:14-1:19:28:**  to the future stresses that we're expecting from current and future from climate change  and just generally the stresses that we experience in farming.  That's really, really interesting.  
**1:19:28-1:19:41:**  I'm going to just shift the conversation a bit now towards the economics.  I think this will finish off the interview with this topic.  And this is something we had started talking about at the beginning in our prequel.  
**1:19:41-1:20:00:**  And one of the things that you were saying is that currently these practices that you're  describing, planting the hedges, managing the hedges, planting the trees, et cetera,  that they're costing you money, but they're not necessarily generating a direct income.  
**1:20:00-1:20:10:**  So I don't want to put words in your mouth at all here, but I just wanted to set a bit  the context of the conversation we started having.  I mean, maybe we could talk a bit, you could express to us a bit the economics of it.  
**1:20:10-1:20:21:**  Do you see this as being an economical, profitable venture at the end to be including these things?  Could it be more so and how?  Do you think your neighbors would be looking at this and wanting, taking into account that  
**1:20:21-1:20:34:**  many of the people that will be engaging with agroecology in the future will be doing so  because of economic reasons, not because of a necessarily strong belief for it?  Do you think this is relevant to people that are looking towards agroecology and agroforestry  
**1:20:34-1:20:45:**  for financial reasons?  Maybe you could elaborate more on this.  It's a bit complex to answer that question.  
**1:20:45-1:21:02:**  The fact is that we are producing wine.  So wine, you do not need wine like you need wheat or corn or it's not the basic of your  life.  
**1:21:02-1:21:18:**  It's a pleasure.  And we are producing premium wines.  So they have a certain price and people that are buying that kind of wines, they accept  
**1:21:18-1:21:40:**  and they prefer to pay the price to have a wine that is grown in a natural environment,  to encourage a vine that is preserving his environment.  And a lot of clients are ready to help for that, to pay the price.  
**1:21:40-1:22:06:**  So I'm convinced that if I tell the story to my clients, they will follow us if it's  reasonable.  And because we were among the pioneers of the agroforestry, the vitiferous tree in Bordeaux,  
**1:22:06-1:22:26:**  the many mille-grélier were, I believe, the first one to start that years before me.  And I was the first one to start it in Medoc, at the scale of the estate.  So yes, it has a cost.  
**1:22:26-1:22:50:**  The hedges, it's a cost, but it's a small cost facing the total income of the estate.  The cover crop, yes, it has a cost, but I save some fertilizers.  So it is a partial compensation of the cost.  
**1:22:50-1:23:18:**  The trees, yes, they have a cost, but it's minor facing the total production cost I have.  And the benefits I have today in terms of image is higher than my cost.  But if everybody is doing that, it will be a standard, and for the image, it will maybe  
**1:23:18-1:23:36:**  not be the same balance, so I'm quite careful when talking about that.  You cannot talk about the economic model when you take an advantage for your image and you  cannot tell to your colleagues.  
**1:23:36-1:23:48:**  For sure, you will have the same advantage.  I don't know their own story, how they are able to sell it to their clients.  So you understand that I'm quite careful about that.  
**1:23:48-1:24:13:**  But I believe that if we have a look at a very long term, the term of the live duration  of a tree.  So when we plant a vine, we plant it for half a century, 40 years, 50 years, something like  
**1:24:13-1:24:44:**  that, if we work well.  And if I plant my hedge following the parcel and 50 trees per hectare in my model, when  I will replant the parcel and restart from scratch with a new parcel, I can keep a certain  
**1:24:44-1:25:07:**  percentage of my trees and replant the parcel.  And maybe I can cut the largest trees, one half of the trees, one half of the line, so  I cannot imagine because I planted my first trees in 2016, so they are quite small.  
**1:25:07-1:25:32:**  But the idea is if we cut one half of the trees when we plant the parcel, 50 years later,  and the second half, 50 years later, after one century, these trees will be large enough  if they are pruned at three and a half meters high, you will have a trunk.  
**1:25:32-1:26:13:**  And if you work well with no branches, so no nuts inside, quite pure, and with rare  species that are not abundant on the wood market, like the home is quite rare, the wild  cherry, the wild cherry, the market is quite low today, but some trees like the, also I  
**1:26:13-1:26:32:**  don't remember the names in English, so no interest, but some of these trees, the wood  has a good value.  And if you have thousand of hectares of vineyards with the trees inside, we will build a new  
**1:26:32-1:26:49:**  market, build a new offer.  Alone, I will not be attractive to sell that wood because the wood merchants, they will  not come to my estate to buy 20 or 15 trees.  
**1:26:49-1:27:19:**  But if we are dozens of viticulture doing the same, they will have a market facing them  with larger volumes, and I'm sure that it's possible to dream about and to build a new  market with rare trees produced inside the vineyard that will give value to the producer  
**1:27:19-1:27:39:**  when a new income, when he's replanting the parcel.  And that time, we need a lot of money to replant a parcel.  Replanting a parcel has a cost of at least 30,000 euros per hectare, 40,000 euros per  
**1:27:39-1:27:52:**  hectare.  So if you have a new income with the trees you are cutting, it can pay a part of the  replantation you are currently doing.  
**1:27:52-1:28:07:**  So it's only a dream, but I'm sure it's also a possible market, and we need that for future.  We need diversification.  So I know another model.  
**1:28:07-1:28:17:**  Domaine Emile Grelier, they plant more fruit trees, and they have a production, jams, things  like that.  They sell the fruits.  
**1:28:17-1:28:28:**  So it's another side production.  It's their model.  I don't want that one in my estate because I'm focused on my premium wines, and we have  
**1:28:28-1:28:45:**  a lot of things to do for the harvest, for the green things and things like that.  And if we are disturbed by the fruit season in the trees at the same moment, it's not  good.  
**1:28:45-1:29:01:**  So when I have fruit trees, I lose the trees, they feed the soil.  It's good for that, for biodiversity, and I eat some for my personal use to make a few  boxes of jam.  
**1:29:01-1:29:19:**  That's it.  So I'm more on the wood side if we are talking about economy because I'm a forester also.  So I'd like to build a new market, but alone I will never do that.  
**1:29:19-1:29:36:**  But if we are hundreds of viticulturists doing the same, we will build a market together.  That's very interesting.  And also in terms of the, maybe I'm repeating some of the things you've said, but in terms  
**1:29:36-1:29:49:**  of the management of the trees, what you're saying is that it's quite marginal, the cost  of pruning the trees, even the trees that are inside the, it's quite marginal as compared  to the other costs that you have.  
**1:29:49-1:29:58:**  It's something that the team that you currently have, you don't necessarily need to hire an  extra person for it.  No, no, no.  
**1:29:58-1:30:25:**  We have in winter, we have some lost days and we can do things like that, that period.  When it's too cold, too hard to prune the vine, why not?  It's possible to prune the trees and when we have to stop the pruning because we are  
**1:30:25-1:30:46:**  too fast and we have to slow it because we want to keep some hectares for late pruning,  facing the risk of frost, we can manage some holes inside the winter period to work the  trees.  
**1:30:46-1:30:58:**  Nice.  Do you imagine your neighbors that are not necessarily working or colleagues that aren't  necessarily working with a speciality wines that have got, you know, maybe they're working  
**1:30:58-1:31:13:**  on finer margins or that are working more on scale.  Do you imagine that they could be interested in the type of practices that you have been  implemented on Chateau Antonique?  
**1:31:13-1:31:25:**  Some of them they can.  I'm sure that it will not be the standard quite fast but some can.  The edges are spreading now.  
**1:31:25-1:31:41:**  A lot of producers are planting hedges when they will plant a parcel because it's coming  back in our culture.  For the trees inside the parcels, it will be longer because people are hesitating.  
**1:31:41-1:32:07:**  We were teaching in agronomy schools that trees inside the parcels were the enemies  because they were hosting some fungi that were quite, that were killing the vineyards.  And so now we are more experimented.  
**1:32:07-1:32:33:**  We know that the problem was that before, so a century before the pouridiers, I don't  know the name of the fungi, so he's developing that disease, was the cause of that disease  was not the tree.  
**1:32:33-1:32:50:**  It was the presence of a tree that was ill.  If your trees are healthy, they live together with the vineyard and they don't have that  disease.  
**1:32:50-1:33:13:**  If they are not healthy, if they're ill, they will be weak and then these porosite  fungi will develop a lot and that will be a problem.  So if your ecosystem is balanced, if you have a lot of biodiversity, fungi's biodiversity  
**1:33:13-1:33:26:**  in your soil, you will have a competition between fungi's and they will compete the  powers of fungi's.  They will occupy the ecosystem and they will limit their presence.  
**1:33:26-1:33:35:**  So the problem is not the trees, it's the ecosystem.  Is it balanced or not?  And are the trees in good health or not?  
**1:33:35-1:33:48:**  Yes, very interesting, very, very interesting.  This is a fascinating stuff and I guess I'll finish off with one last question as a speciality  wine producer.  
**1:33:48-1:34:02:**  I'll say something and maybe you can confirm what you're seeing and what you're expecting  with the trees, notably the trees inside the parcel that have going to have quite a strong  influence on the area through the mycorrhizal network, but also through the light and the  
**1:34:02-1:34:14:**  water and the nutrient flows and the organic matter.  You're expecting this to have a positive effect on the quality of your wine to have zero effect  or what's the effect that you're expecting it to have?  
**1:34:14-1:34:20:**  On the wine himself?  Yes.  And of course connected to the quality of the grape.  
**1:34:20-1:34:50:**  So, on the vine and on the wine, I can talk about both of them.  Today I'm happier in the vineyard I see around my home and inside the estate because that  life, that biodiversity that is back is a result that is very visible and that takes  
**1:34:50-1:35:07:**  nothing to me in terms of volume.  So my average production is the same than my closest neighbor and they are not organic,  they are not in agroforestry and we produce almost the same volumes.  
**1:35:07-1:35:29:**  Sometimes I produce more, sometimes less.  The most important risk is the spring frost with the cover crop because if you are not  good enough managing your cover crop, you can lose a lot with the spring frost.  
**1:35:29-1:35:42:**  When it's high enough to cover the vineyard, it's a protection.  When it's too short at the limit of the buds, you have to destroy it a few weeks before  the frost season.  
**1:35:42-1:36:08:**  It's too risky.  But except that point and the question of the new plantations, it has no impact on your  volume and I think that the positive effects we are expecting will be more important than  
**1:36:08-1:36:24:**  the negative impact.  Talking about the wine himself, a lot of clients are telling us that the style of the wine  change a lot in Anthony, that the wines are fresher.  
**1:36:24-1:36:44:**  Even with the global warming we are facing like everybody, vintages are warmer, the droughts  are longer, so the alcohol levels are higher than before and the acidities in the wines  are lower than before.  
**1:36:44-1:37:01:**  And today, we are able to produce wines that are lower in alcohol than our neighbors and  higher in acidity.  It's a small percentage but the balance with combination of the impact of lower alcohol  
**1:37:01-1:37:22:**  and higher acidity is very important and the freshness of the wine is much better.  And the style change a lot and so the wines are more delicate, they are expressing more  fruit and they are more resilient facing the global warming and I think that it's quite  
**1:37:22-1:37:41:**  surprising because I was not expecting an impact like that so fast.  But the clients are talking about that, they feel it, and they are not dreamers, they are  professional buyers that are talking business with me every year.  
**1:37:41-1:38:05:**  So I am in the competition when I sell them the wine so I cannot give them stories, they  need something quite solid and when they make that comment it's solid, yes.  That's amazing, that's fantastic.  
**1:38:05-1:38:21:**  Jean-Baptiste, thank you so much for taking the time today to share your amazing experience  at Chateau Antonique and I am going to put all the links below of where people can find  out about your website, if they want to look into your wine, if they want to hopefully  
**1:38:21-1:38:32:**  buy some agroforestry wine bottles which I don't think there are many going around at  the moment.  And, yeah, so thank you so much for taking the time to talk and sharing so openly and  
**1:38:32-1:39:03:**  freely.  So thank you so much for the time you gave to me and so as you know I am passionate about  this agroforestry project and I hope that we will meet again.  