---
title: 51 Feedback From 30 Years Of Research On Alley Cropping Systems With Christian Dupraz
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2022-11-16)  

**0:00:00-0:00:16:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  
**0:00:33-0:00:34:**  these challenges.  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Hello and welcome to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  I'm your host Dimitri and today we are super happy to be able to bring Christian Dupras  
**0:00:53-0:00:54:**  on the show.  We just spent an hour walking around the Restainclière site which is a 30 year old agroforestry experiment  on 40 hectares, one of which has been the source of multiple papers and basically one  of the founding areas of agroforestry.  So we've just been walking around with Christian Dupras, asking him questions and understanding  
**0:01:15-0:01:17:**  a bit more about alley cropping.  So this is a very special episode for us and also one where we're with our guest in person  underneath the walnut trees that we're going to be discussing in our interviews.  So I really hope you enjoy it as much as I did.  Bon Christian, bienvenue sur le podcast.  
**0:01:34-0:01:35:**  Bonjour!  We should actually be speaking in English.  Yeah, okay.  But that's fine.  We've just been walking around the agroforestry areas together, speaking in French and this  
**0:01:48-0:01:53:**  is one of the rare interviews where we're actually with our guest on site.  So we are at Restainclière at the moment in Montpellier with Christian.  So Christian again, I'll welcome you again in English.  Welcome on the podcast.  Really nice to have you here.  
**0:02:04-0:02:06:**  Really nice to be able to share your story.  And underneath these 27 year old walnut trees that you've planted yourself.  Yeah, it's a long story.  Now almost 30 years that we work here and when we started I never thought I would be  there for such a long time.  
**0:02:23-0:02:29:**  But it's nice to see it from the seedlings up to these major trees that we have on our  heads now.  So that was quite a story.  Yes.  When we started and we planted this experiment because it's an experiment.  
**0:02:40-0:02:44:**  It's not a commercial farm, a usual commercial farm.  It's an experiment.  There was no alley cropping in Europe.  Almost no place with alley cropping.  And foresters were really against planting trees in field crops because they said that  
**0:03:01-0:03:10:**  the trees would be killed by the herbicides and the machinery of the farmers and so on.  And the farmers were really against planting trees in their fields because they said well  the crops will not produce because of the competition by the tree of the shade and everything.  And we will not be able to crop as usual.  So everybody was quite pessimistic.  
**0:03:26-0:03:33:**  But three decades later we see that the trees are beautiful and the crops are still producing.  So that's a victory.  That's amazing.  And we'll share.  I'm going to take lots of pictures today and share them to everybody.  
**0:03:44-0:03:48:**  There's lots of different systems set up here but maybe we could start by you telling us  a bit how you got into agroforestry in the first place.  Okay.  When I started to work with INRA, the French institute for agronomical research, I was  focusing on silvopastoral systems.  
**0:04:04-0:04:12:**  I was mostly working with fodder trees, trees to feed the animals with the leaves or with  the fruits.  And also I was working on ways to plant trees without danger from the animals.  So ways to protect the trees against animal browsing and grazing.  And I designed at that time a tree shelter that was later commercialized by TUBEX, the  
**0:04:38-0:04:39:**  TUBEX company.  We had a patent.  We designed a tube shelter that allows you to plant a tree, protect it and keep the animal  grazing around.  Because formerly when you plant a tree, when foresters plant trees, they exclude animals.  
**0:04:55-0:04:58:**  They exclude animals for years, for decades.  And when you exclude animals, you create conflict, conflict between foresters and farmers.  In France, we even have what we call the La Guerre de Moisele, the war of the missus.  I don't know how to translate that, but it was a war between breeders, between sheep  breeders and foresters.  
**0:05:23-0:05:30:**  And they were fighting for accessing the land to make the animal grazing.  And that was because foresters, as soon as they plant the tree, they put the animals  out.  And that was really a big, big concern.  So I designed these tree shelters.  
**0:05:41-0:05:48:**  They were really tailored to best protect the trees and increase their growth because  there was a chimney effect.  They had holes at the bottom and the air was flowing inside the shelter and bringing CO2  to help the photosynthesis of the tree.  So these shelters were quite useful and we sold about, I don't know, hundreds of millions  
**0:06:06-0:06:08:**  of them since then.  And they are very useful tool to establish silvopastoral systems.  And then I switched to silvoparable systems, systems with trees and crops, because we made  a survey of traditional agroforestry systems in France in the 90s, in the early 90s.  And we discovered that there were a lot of traditional systems with trees and crops,  
**0:06:37-0:06:45:**  such as poplar and maize or walnut trees and different cereal crops, a lot of different  systems in France.  But almost all disappeared with mechanization, with the common agricultural policy of the  European common agricultural policy that was really against having trees in your plots.  So after having surveyed those systems, we decided to try to build modern systems, modern  
**0:07:10-0:07:17:**  alley cropping systems that are compatible with machinery, with modern ways of growing  the crops and so on.  And that was the start.  In 1994, the local consil, the Conseil Departementale de l'Éro, which is the local government,  purchased this farm, because this farm is a very special place.  
**0:07:36-0:07:43:**  It's a place where we have the water, the source, the spring that brings all the water  for Montpellier is located.  It's just the river just behind us here.  And so this place is of very high importance for the region and for the people in Montpellier.  So the consil purchased the farm and they were looking for a different way to manage  
**0:08:04-0:08:08:**  the agricultural part of the farm, which is about 50 hectares.  They made a call with the scientists in Montpellier, the agronomists in Montpellier.  So I suggested to turn that into an agroforestry experiment.  And they were convinced and they gave me the green light.  And in 1995, in January and February 1995, we planted 10,000 trees of 40 different species  
**0:08:33-0:08:36:**  in the plots of the farm.  That was the start.  Fantastic.  Amazing.  And this represents about 40 hectares scale, right?  
**0:08:44-0:08:46:**  So we're talking about a large scale experiment.  Yeah, it's not very big, but it's large enough to make a lot of experiments.  And one very key decision that we made at that time is to have each time we plant an  agroforestry plot to have a control plot without trees and to have another control plot with  only trees, a forestry control.  
**0:09:11-0:09:18:**  So that way we can compare really how the crop and the trees behave when they are mixed  together in agroforestry and when they are separated in agriculture and forestry.  That's very important point because a lot of experiments elsewhere in Europe did not  include those controls.  And 10 years later or 20 years later, it's very inconclusive.  
**0:09:41-0:09:43:**  It's very difficult to say.  For example, if the trees don't grow in your agroforestry plot, you say, oh, it's agroforestry  is not worth.  But maybe the trees will not grow in the forestry plot either.  The reason is something different.  
**0:09:55-0:09:56:**  It's not agroforestry.  Maybe you have the wrong tree species in the wrong place.  So it's very important to have those controls.  Previously I had another experiment, a large-scale experiment across the region with about eight  different sites.  
**0:10:11-0:10:14:**  It was silvopastrol agroforestry.  We had plantation in grasses, in lands.  And we had those controls.  And in three or four of those places, the trees did not grow.  But they did not grow in the forestry and in agroforestry.  
**0:10:29-0:10:32:**  So that was not an agroforestry problem.  That was an ecology problem of the wrong tree species.  So that's very important to have those controls.  And we are very happy to have them today.  The importance of setting up experiments well from the start, especially with tree crops,  
**0:10:47-0:10:48:**  right?  I mean, as you were telling me when we were walking here, this is quite a unique space  because we have 30-year-old walnut trees that are, I mean, again, I'll show the pictures,  but the canopies are nearly touching themselves, like touching each other between the lines.  They're having a significant influence on the area.  
**0:11:04-0:11:09:**  So now the experimentation that you're doing now is really able to see what is the impact  of trees on crops and vice versa, right?  Exactly.  Well, we decided at the time to plant the trees on tree rows 13 meters apart.  13 meters is quite close.  
**0:11:22-0:11:26:**  But when you plant very small trees, you want the trees to have an impact.  So you put the trees closer.  And today the trees are more than 12, 13, 14 meters tall, which means that their height  is bigger than the width of the alley.  So we have what we call an H to D ratio, height of the tree to distance between the tree rows  
**0:11:51-0:11:53:**  that's above one.  And when it's above one, all our models, simulation models and crop models show that the crop  yield will decrease a lot.  So why did we choose to have those tree lines so close together?  To have an impact earlier because we wanted to have that impact to study it, of course.  
**0:12:14-0:12:21:**  And also because the farmer that is working here had a three-meter-wide seeder.  So he could do four times the seeder, 12 meters of crops.  So 12 meters of the crops, one meter of tree row and so on.  So that was quite good.  And the harvester was also six meters.  
**0:12:34-0:12:37:**  So you can do two times the harvester.  So that was quite a good compromise.  If we had to do that experiment again today, I would say that I would not plant the trees  so close.  I would do that every two rows, every 26 meters.  
**0:12:53-0:12:56:**  But it was really interesting for an experiment to do that.  So it allowed us to have impact of trees earlier.  So that was not a bad decision.  But today, if I would recommend the farmer to do alley cropping, I would not recommend  to do those close tree rows, but to have something larger.  
**0:13:17-0:13:20:**  And I guess it also really depends on what's being planted underneath.  So maybe you could tell us, well, just to clarify things a bit, we've got walnut trees  here as one of the main system, the main trees at the moment.  You also said you had poplars, which you've harvested.  So the walnuts are pruned to have a clear trunk for about four to six meters to be able  
**0:13:35-0:13:37:**  to sell for high quality timber.  Yeah.  Right?  That's right.  Well, we should say that those trees grew very fast.  
**0:13:46-0:13:52:**  And what is interesting is that they grew faster in agroforestry than in forestry.  Today, we have about 30 to 40% bigger trees in agroforestry than in forestry.  So that makes a difference.  And they grew very fast.  And we should say that we have winter crops here.  
**0:14:12-0:14:21:**  We have a rotation of winter crops, mainly with durum wheat, wheat for pasta.  We have barley.  We have pea.  We had canola.  So that's a typical Mediterranean winter crop system.  
**0:14:33-0:14:38:**  And what is quite interesting with walnut trees is that walnut trees are a very late  leafing tree.  The tree buds open at the end of April here.  And the cereal is flowering before the tree puts the leaves.  So we have a very low competition for light between walnut trees and winter crops.  
**0:14:57-0:15:07:**  And the consequence of that is that you have a competition for water in spring that is  in favor of the crop.  I mean, the winter crops, they do grow in February, March, April very fast.  And when the tree is starting to leaf out in April and May, the crop has already extracted  most of the water in the first meter of soil.  
**0:15:30-0:15:38:**  So the tree is obliged to go down to put the roots deeper to get water for the summer.  So from the start, those trees have been forced to have deep roots.  And when they have deep roots, they are really at ease during the summer.  So the difference between the walnut trees in agroforestry and the walnut trees in forestry  is that the walnut trees in agroforestry have very deep roots, and the walnut trees in forestry  
**0:15:58-0:16:00:**  have superficial roots.  So they really look similar from outside, but below the ground, they are very different.  That's super interesting.  And I was curious as to whether you were also using root pruning strategies to kind of emphasize  that root stratification.  
**0:16:16-0:16:21:**  Yeah, we do some root pruning sometimes.  We have done that mostly with the vineyard agroforestry, where we have different tree  species, we have pine trees, we have evergreen trees, who are growing in winter.  So that makes a big difference.  So we have been some root pruning experiments that were not very conclusive with the walnut  
**0:16:43-0:16:50:**  tree because it has very deep roots, but much more efficient with the pine trees, for example.  And this year, we will do a new experiment with root pruning because we are working on  climate mitigation, climate adaptation with the crops, and we need to protect the crops  from water competition, so we will do root pruning for that experiment.  That's fascinating, really interesting.  
**0:17:11-0:17:18:**  And one of the main things I wanted to ask you was the impact of the agroforestry on  the quality of the wood.  And that's something that can come about a lot, especially from foresters, is the question.  And so, based on maybe the different crops as well that you've seen, I was super interested  in poplar as well with agroforestry, and so what kind of impact did you see there on this?  
**0:17:36-0:17:43:**  You mentioned a faster growth rate, so does that imply also lesser dense wood?  Well, we don't know really at the moment.  No, there is not that much difference in the wood quality so far, but we still need to  wait because when you sell high quality timber like these walnut trees, those walnut trees  are hybrid walnut trees between the European and the American one.  
**0:18:05-0:18:08:**  So they are not for the fruit, they are for the timber.  And when you sell this kind of tree, you need to have a lot of hardwood.  And at the moment, we still have a lot of softwood, so we need to wait for that.  But so far, the studies are telling us that the wood quality, the quality of the timber  is quite similar in agroforestry and forestry.  
**0:18:32-0:18:38:**  But the tree growth is faster in agroforestry, and this is quite interesting because when  you do high quality timber, you prune the tree.  So you have wands, wands of pruning, and what's very important is that the wands disappear  as soon as possible.  And trees growing fast, they are really healing very fast from those pruning, and that's very  
**0:18:59-0:19:00:**  interesting.  So you see the trunks behind us, there is not a single wand of pruning on them.  They are really high quality timber around the core, and there is a knotty core in the  middle, in the center.  But around that, it's what we call clear wood with no scars, and that's very important when  
**0:19:20-0:19:25:**  you do slicing for the wood to use the wood.  That's very interesting.  And what about the impact on this much wider spacing?  So we're about at 13 by how much on the line?  It was 4 meters on the line at the beginning, so 200 trees per hectare.  
**0:19:38-0:19:45:**  Now we thinned the stand, we cut half of the trees 10 years ago, so at the moment we have  100 trees per hectare.  It's a spacing of 13 by 8 meters.  Okay, and so including this thinning, what's the impact of this agroforestry pattern and  management with the thinning there on being able to produce a straight trunk?  
**0:20:04-0:20:06:**  What are some of the things that we need to watch out for?  Or is it harder to create a straight trunk than in a forestry context?  What has been your experience on this site?  Well, when it comes to walnut trees, it's about the same in forestry and agroforestry.  You have to prune the trees.  
**0:20:21-0:20:28:**  Forestry trees are easier to manage when they are planted at high density, above 1000 trees  per hectare, so you have self-pruning.  But for those high quality timber trees, you never plant 1000 or 2000 trees per hectare.  So for walnut trees, there is not a big difference between agroforestry and forestry to manage  the trees.  
**0:20:49-0:20:50:**  That's the point.  I would say that it's easier to prune in agroforestry because you have a very easy access to the  trees.  We usually use an elevator to prune the trees with a chainsaw.  So it's very fast in agroforestry because you can drive in the plot more easily than  
**0:21:09-0:21:11:**  in a forestry plot.  So in the forestry plots, it's very uncommon that you prune up to 6 meters here.  It's quite easy to do.  And the trees are quite straight.  We have a lot of wind, but they look nice.  
**0:21:26-0:21:30:**  They are not too straight.  This is definitely something I had noticed on the other plots.  And you mentioned that you were planting durum wheat in between the tree rows.  So what's the impact of this shading, especially at this 13 meters row spacing, on the quality  of the wheat, on the yield of the wheat?  
**0:21:50-0:21:53:**  Does it vary a lot from year to year?  Does it vary between varieties?  I'm expecting that you guys have put everything between the tree rows in these last 27 years.  Not everything because the crop is managed by the farmer.  And he's a commercial farmer.  
**0:22:09-0:22:11:**  He makes a living from the crops.  So what we do is that he's allowed to grow what he wants.  So for many years, he used the same wheat variety.  So we didn't change much the varieties.  But what was quite funny is that during the first 20 years of the experiment, until maybe  
**0:22:31-0:22:44:**  2010, we had a lot of trainees here that measured with us the crop yield, trying to show if  the tree would compete, reduce the crop yield, and so on.  And for almost 20 years, we never demonstrated any decrease in the yield.  So that was quite funny because we are all expecting that competition.  In fact, we sometimes measure the decrease in the crop yield.  
**0:23:08-0:23:12:**  But there was something strange about that.  The strange thing is that when we had missing trees on the tree row, sometimes you have  missing trees because they died at an early stage.  Well, the decrease in the crop was the same.  So that was not the fault of the trees.  
**0:23:30-0:23:32:**  That was something different.  And the explanation was more subtle than that.  It was because when you do alley cropping, you have to manage a small area of land between  the tree rows.  And it's quite difficult to prepare the ground, prepare the soil in a very homogeneous way.  
**0:23:55-0:24:02:**  If you do some, how do you say it, the tilling?  Yeah, the tilling, the harrowing.  If you do that, on one side of the alley, you have a furrow.  And on the other side, you have a mount, you know, something.  And it's quite difficult to put that really plain so that the seeding is of the same quality  
**0:24:23-0:24:26:**  everywhere, the seeds at the same depths and so on.  So that problem of crop decrease close to the tree line some years was mostly due to  a poor seeding of the seeds of the crop because of that difficulty to have a plain ground  at seeding.  But, you know, now that the trees are 27 to 30 years old, and that the canopies are so  
**0:24:48-0:24:55:**  developed, are you still not noticing a competition there in terms of a light or has it started?  Now we have big trees very close together, almost a closed canopy.  And there is a decrease in the crop yield.  For the winter crops, we have about 30% decrease.  And for the summer crops, we tried some summer crops, we have more than 50, 60% decrease.  
**0:25:15-0:25:22:**  So at the moment, it's not a good idea to grow summer crops in such a forest because  now it's almost a forest.  It's too dense.  What we should do, if it was not an experiment, but a farm, a commercial farm, we should cut  one tree row every two tree rows.  
**0:25:38-0:25:42:**  And that would allow to have good crops again in the system.  We would have more light and that would be the right place.  But here it's an experiment.  And what we do, we study the extreme that we could do.  And doing that, we see what are the limits of the system, what we should not do, and  
**0:25:57-0:25:58:**  so on and so forth.  So it's not a problem for us.  But when we have visitors here, I must tell them, okay, what you see is not exactly what  we recommend.  It's an experiment.  
**0:26:09-0:26:15:**  We have a lot of trees, big trees, just to know how far we should not go.  But that's it.  But now we have simulation models and I can tell you if we had half the density of trees,  we would have that crop yield and so on.  So that's interesting.  
**0:26:28-0:26:29:**  Fascinating stuff.  And you would attribute this loss in yield mostly to light or to also, because you know,  we're also talking a lot about underground competition with water and nutrients.  What has been your feedback in these types of systems?  Okay, here we have deep soils.  
**0:26:47-0:26:53:**  On those deep soils, it's like competition that is really a limiting factor at the moment.  We have also water competition and nitrogen competition because the trees do like nitrogen.  The trees are really junkies for nitrogen.  So they just take the nitrogen.  But usually you put fertilizer on the crops.  
**0:27:13-0:27:21:**  But yeah, I would say that light competition is now dominating the system and it can be  managed by pruning the trees, pruning the canopies, trimming the canopies.  And we have tried something different, which is pollarding the trees.  When you do a pollard, you take all the branches off.  We did that at four meters elevation above the ground.  
**0:27:38-0:27:41:**  And then the tree is regrowing a new canopy.  And during those two, three years after pollarding, you have a lot of light for the crops.  And what we are studying is if that pollarding will really decrease the growth of the trunk,  because the trunk is the most valuable part of the tree in that experiment.  And so we have been doing that pollarding every four years, already four times, three  
**0:28:06-0:28:08:**  or four times.  And the result is quite impressive.  The trees recover very fast and the trunk growth is decreased, but not that much.  Very interesting.  So in that case, we have more crop yield and almost the same timber yield.  
**0:28:26-0:28:31:**  And that's a very traditional management of trees.  Formerly in Europe, in France, you had a lot of pollarded trees on the farms.  Pollarded ash trees, mulberry trees, a lot of in the mountains where I'm coming from,  in the Alp mountains, all the trees in the mountains are mostly ash trees.  And they were pollarded for fodder for the animals.  
**0:28:54-0:28:56:**  And that's very traditional way.  And it seems to be one of the best management practice that you could do with trees.  The only problem is that it takes a lot of labor to do that.  And today it's not really appreciated because of that.  It's a lot of work.  
**0:29:14-0:29:20:**  Well, this is a kind of parenthesis, but maybe the droughts that we're seeing and the impact  on pasture would suddenly make it valuable and worth it to go in and to pollard trees  in order to feed and to reduce costs of feed.  Because what we're seeing is that when there's a drought in a region, well, everybody wants  to go buy some, needs to buy some hay and the prices of hay explode.  
**0:29:37-0:29:39:**  This is what we've seen this summer.  So it could also be suddenly become more and more interesting.  It happens every time we have a summer heat and farmers, breeders are short of forage  and they cut again trees.  That's exactly the point.  
**0:29:55-0:29:58:**  My question was, what is the impact?  Because my understanding was that a pollarded tree will quickly create a hollow center.  And so, you know, when you're looking at a pollarding a tree over 30 years, maybe more,  what are you expecting is going to be the impact on the quality of the trunk for timber?  Yeah, I don't think we can extrapolate from one tree species to another one.  
**0:30:24-0:30:29:**  And also I think pollarding is valuable when you have fast growing trees.  We have trees that grow well, that with good soil and not to, if the tree is growing very  slowly it will not recover fast.  And you may have those problems of hollow trunks and so on.  No, here we did not notice any health problem with the pollarded trees so far.  
**0:30:56-0:30:58:**  So that's a good point.  Very interesting.  You know, we've discussed many of these things now around the interactions and the competition  and the value of the trees, etc.  What's the difference that you've seen with the poplars that you told me you harvested  
**0:31:10-0:31:17:**  after 13 to 14 years as compared to walnuts, which you're expecting to harvest after 35  to 40 years approximately, correct me if I'm wrong.  Do the rules that you kind of defined, not the rules, but kind of the principles that  are emerging here about alley cropping, does it apply the same to very fast growing trees  like a poplar as compared to a walnut?  
**0:31:32-0:31:33:**  Yeah, exactly.  I told you about this ratio of height of the tree to the distance between the tree rows.  It seems to be a universal ratio.  You should not allow the trees to grow higher than the distance between the tree rows.  As soon as they are higher than the distance between the tree rows, the crop yield is really  
**0:31:54-0:31:55:**  dropping.  So I think that indicator is quite valuable.  If you want to keep a normal yield of the crop, keep that ratio a bit somewhere around  0.5.  So it means that with poplars that are very tall trees, poplars could be, well here they  
**0:32:17-0:32:25:**  were 30 meters tall when we cut them, you need tree rows to be at least 30 meters apart.  When you have a smaller tree, here we have a lot of service tree, which is Sorbus domestica.  It's a very, very interesting tree with a high quality timber and producing fruits also  that are valuable for doing drinks, schnapps and so on.  When you grow a service tree, it's a smaller tree.  
**0:32:45-0:32:51:**  It's a tree that will be maybe 10 meters tall at the most.  So you can put the tree lines closer.  So it really depends on the shape, on the size of the tree, of the major tree that you  expect.  So I think that rule is quite universal and you can apply it any place.  
**0:33:06-0:33:08:**  Very interesting.  I want to talk a bit about the farmer that you're working with here.  Because the farmer has needs of, he needs to plant his grain every year, he needs to  do it at a specific time, take advantage of opportunities in terms of climate, of windows  of opportunities based on the humidity on the soil, etc.  
**0:33:27-0:33:33:**  And this may collide or, what I wanted to ask actually before I put words in your mouth  is, how does he interact with the agroforestry system?  Does the agroforestry system limit his work as a row crop farmer?  And if so, in what way, what are some of the feedback that has come back from this farmer's  experience with agroforestry?  
**0:33:53-0:33:55:**  Looking at a practical sense.  Well, it's a history now, almost 30 years and three different farmers.  One died and was replaced.  The other one went on, La Rotret, he retired and we have a new one.  So you know, the trees have a long life expectancy, longer than the farmers that are growing the  
**0:34:23-0:34:24:**  system.  So you have to take that into account.  Well, here it's quite a special place because it's an experiment.  It's an experiment and you have a scientist working on the place and we have always fancy  ideas, fancy ideas that could be a problem for the farmer.  
**0:34:51-0:34:58:**  So I must say that sometimes working with a commercial farmer was not that easy.  I give you an example.  One year we had an experiment with Jerome Wheat and we measured better yields in some  places of the plot and we had no explanations.  And that was very strange.  
**0:35:16-0:35:22:**  And after discussing and discussing with the farmer, he finally told us, oh yes, when I  did the seeding, I was short of seeds.  So I took another variety and I finished the plot with another variety and that was not  expected.  So we were trying to explain that, but the explanation was just that he was short of  
**0:35:36-0:35:39:**  seeds and he never mentioned that before.  So that's the kind of problem that you have when you work with commercial farms because  here it's a commercial farm, even if it's an experiment.  So on the other side, well, I would say that the farmers sometimes complain because you  have branches that fall down.  
**0:35:59-0:36:06:**  You have some problems like that, but I would say that in 30 years there has been not a  single accident really, a meaning accident.  Almost no trees were hurt by the tractors, for example.  The beginning we thought that trees would be hurt and destroyed, some would be destroyed  and so on, but it never happened.  
**0:36:23-0:36:27:**  So we don't have wounds on the trees caused by the tractors.  So that's it.  They work quite normally.  We don't ask them to change their habits for that.  The two first farmers were conventional, they were not organic farmers.  
**0:36:40-0:36:43:**  The new one is an organic farmer.  So they do their job as they usually do.  We thought that putting trees in the system is already, has a big impact on the system  and on the farmer.  So we don't ask him more.  
**0:36:58-0:37:04:**  We ask him just to grow the same crop in the controlled agriculture and in the agroforestry  plot.  That's all that we ask.  Okay, very interesting.  So basically it doesn't require a big change in the farmers' practices just to have some  
**0:37:17-0:37:21:**  tree lines spaced out every 13 meters.  Every 13 meters it's quite narrow, so it made some concern.  But if it was 24 or 30 meters, that would be really easy.  I'm going to throw a question at you here that was not part of what I had planned to  necessarily talk about, but I think is important to mention.  
**0:37:39-0:37:42:**  Here we're talking about timber species.  And what's your take on working with fruit or especially, not necessarily fruit, but  more nut species, walnuts that are producing walnuts for the nuts.  And it could be a variety and a plethora of different tree crops used in this sense that  are semi-horticultural intensive.  
**0:38:03-0:38:04:**  What's your take on this?  Is this something that you think could work in alley cropping or it's just too complex?  Oh no, it works.  It works perfectly.  We don't have fruit trees except those apple trees here.  
**0:38:14-0:38:19:**  But on this farm, because it's not a local production fruits here in the area at the  moment, but we have a lot of other experiments with fruit trees, including olive trees or  different tree fruits.  And it works, of course.  Alley cropping with fruit trees is perfectly viable.  
**0:38:37-0:38:39:**  It does work.  And there are a lot of experiments on fruit trees in alley cropping and in agroforestry  in the Rhone River Valley, not far from here.  It's not me, it's not Inrai that's doing the research, but it does work.  And we are considering replacing the poplar that we harvested.  
**0:38:58-0:39:00:**  And since then, there are no trees back.  We are considering to put fruit trees now at that place.  So that's it.  Here, fruit trees, those apple trees are understory trees, under the story of the big walnut trees.  But they could be also the upper story for an annual crop in between.  
**0:39:17-0:39:22:**  So all the possibilities are interesting.  And mosquitoes are eating us.  Yes, a bit.  I've got, now I've bitten so much that I've lost sensitivity.  Use mosquitoes.  
**0:39:28-0:39:32:**  I can tell something new about the mosquitoes here.  If there were no trees here, there would be many more mosquitoes, because those trees,  they are very favorable to bats.  And we have five different bat species here in this farm, including some quite uncommon  bats that are protected.  
**0:39:55-0:39:57:**  And bats need echolocation.  They need something to give their radar, their eco back to fly at night.  And trees are very important for bats.  If you have an open field with no trees, bats will never go there.  When you have trees like that, they come back.  
**0:40:15-0:40:18:**  And when they come back, they eat mosquitoes.  They eat a lot of insects that could be damageable, that could be a problem for the crops.  And we are surveying the bats with radar devices.  And it's very funny to see that they do all the alleys one after the other at night.  So I think that's an important aspect that we also study here.  
**0:40:45-0:40:55:**  It's the impact of those agroforestry systems on a lot of different animals that are really  favored by the presence of the trees.  So for example, here we have a vineyard agroforestry on the northern part of the farm.  And in vineyards you have a very damageable disease that's the name of it.  Boteritis.  
**0:41:18-0:41:19:**  Sorry?  Boteritis.  No, no, no, no, no.  No, no, those are not a problem.  But I'm just trying to find the name again.  
**0:41:33-0:41:37:**  Flavescence d'Orais in French.  We need to translate it later.  But when you have some plants of vineyards with that disease, it's compulsory by law  to destroy all your vineyards because it's a very, very damaging disease.  This disease is transmitted by small insects that are called in French cicadelles.  
**0:42:03-0:42:07:**  And those insects are eaten by bats.  So bats regulate the population of cicadelles and that prevents the disease to be disseminated  further.  So that's very important to have more complex trophic chains that control the explosion  of some animals and trees help in that aspect.  
**0:42:28-0:42:29:**  Definitely.  And so are you seeing other, beyond bats, are you seeing some noticeable benefits in  terms of biodiversity and especially functional biodiversity?  Well, it's very difficult to extrapolate.  For example, here we have been working a lot of aphids, wheat aphids.  
**0:42:49-0:43:01:**  Wheat aphids could be really damaging for the crops and they are controlled by lecoxynel,  by ladybugs.  Ladybugs, they are controlled by serf, another surface.  They are controlled by, well, a number of other animals that have insects that I don't  know in English.  
**0:43:15-0:43:21:**  So we have been surveying aphids and their predators in those plots and the conclusion  that it was not efficient.  There was not more predators of aphids in the agroflossy plot than in the control, agricultural  plot.  So you see, it's not always just the conclusion that you expect.  
**0:43:37-0:43:39:**  On aphids, it was not conclusive.  On other, it could be we have more beetles, we have more earthworms, we have more, a number  of other animals.  We could have also more rabbits and we could have more birds and so and so.  So it's a complex system and the conclusions are not always straightforward.  
**0:44:04-0:44:07:**  If it was so easy, we should know.  Nice.  I'd love to know some of the core, not the core, sorry, some of the main mistakes that  you've made, again, we're talking to farmers here, that you've made at this site through  your experimentation, some of the things that nowadays with your colleagues you laugh about  
**0:44:27-0:44:35:**  and you think that it's worth to discuss with us and to tell potential agroforestry practitioners.  Well, we planted some funny tree species that never grow, so that was of course a mistake.  But it's always difficult to say that it would be not recommendable because probably some  of them did not grow for a specific reason of that year and if we had planted that two  years later, it would be different.  
**0:45:01-0:45:10:**  I give you an example, when we put that experiment, we planted some palm trees.  Those palm trees were for ornamental use, you know, in gardens, in cities, but they  are very slow growing palm trees like the Chilean palm tree that's beautiful that we  have in Montpellier, but it's not really produced by the nurseries because it takes 30 years,  40 years to get a valuable one.  
**0:45:35-0:45:40:**  So I said, okay, in agroforestry we have time, we can plant palm trees and we will harvest  them in 40 years for ornamental.  So we planted palm trees and they were old, stolen by people.  That's it.  If your trees are too valuable and you have a lot of people running around the place,  
**0:45:58-0:45:59:**  it's difficult to protect them.  So it's a different story.  It doesn't mean that palm trees were not a wrong idea, but in that case it was not a  success.  So I said, well, we tried some fancy trees, we had some problem, we even planted sequa  
**0:46:16-0:46:22:**  adandron giganteum, the biggest tree on the planet and there are only two still living.  So, besides that, I don't see too many mistakes per se.  I would say no, at the beginning we, for example, we grew canola, what's the name of canola?  I don't know the name.  Anyway, and it was not a big success because the seeds are very, very small.  
**0:46:53-0:47:01:**  So when the seeds germinate, the seedling is very tiny and it needs light, a lot of  light to survive.  And in the shade, it's not easy.  So when you see that, it's at the end of August, beginning of September, the tree has their  leaves on, so the shade is heavy and that germination was not easy.  
**0:47:19-0:47:20:**  Interesting.  But these are design considerations rather than necessarily mistakes, right, in terms  of what they've become, design considerations that things need to be slightly adapted to  this new setting.  And we're talking about adaptation.  
**0:47:37-0:47:44:**  Do you think that these alley cropping systems are adapted to all farms or all types of farms,  looking at, of course, row crops and all conditions?  Are there certain minimum requirements that are necessary for this to work, maybe in terms  of soil depth, but also maybe in terms of farmers' abilities, looking a bit beyond just  the physical factors here?  
**0:48:03-0:48:08:**  Well, let's talk first about the physical factors.  To do agroforestry, you need trees that grow fast because you can't wait for 200 years  to have significant trees.  So there was a common mistake at the beginning with farmers.  When you told to farmers about agroforestry, they just think, oh, OK, I will put trees  
**0:48:32-0:48:38:**  in the back farm there where the soils are very poor and I can't grow much there.  So they put the trees there and the trees never grow.  And that was a common mistake.  And it's still a common mistake to think about agroforestry and to say, OK, I will locate  the agroforestry plots on my very poor soils where the trees will not grow.  
**0:48:58-0:49:00:**  And if they don't grow, there is no agroforestry.  So my advice is really to put agroforestry plots in the high quality or good quality  soils where you have enough water reserve in the soil for the trees to grow.  A tree will never grow if you have only 20 centimeters of soil.  Or it will grow very, very slowly and it's not encouraging for people just to do that.  
**0:49:32-0:49:39:**  If your tree after 20 years is one meter tall, well, you do something else.  So that's probably a common mistake that needs to be avoided and that people do and do again  to think about trees about the very poorest places on their farm.  That's not a good idea.  And sometimes you can't do agroforestry because the soil is too superficial or is too dry.  
**0:50:02-0:50:05:**  You can do a summer crop, but you can't do a tree.  A tree should live during the summer.  And if during the summer you are below the wilting point in the whole soil, the tree  will die.  That's it.  
**0:50:20-0:50:25:**  So that's the main constraint, I would say physical constraint.  Regarding human aspects of management of agroforestry, yeah, you need to be interested in trees.  You need to be interested in doing something different.  Some farmers do that because they say, oh, I like the landscape.  I want to change my landscape.  
**0:50:48-0:50:49:**  Probably we made a mistake.  Here in the south of France, we have a lot of trees already.  We have a lot of abandoned land that has regrowed to forests.  So we have a lot of trees and putting more trees is not essential.  But when you are in big plains with not a single tree for hundreds of kilometers like  
**0:51:12-0:51:20:**  we have in France or in the center of France, putting a tree is something much more powerful  than here where we have already a lot of trees.  Just the same idea for vineyards.  Vineyard agroforestry in the plain here near Béziers, you have vineyards for hundreds  of kilometers and nothing else.  
**0:51:37-0:51:40:**  So when you put a tree there, it has an impact.  Here we have a lot of trees already, so it has less impact.  So I would say in places where in open field areas, agroforestry has really an impact.  And the complexity or let's say the knowledge required by the farmer, the new knowledge  that needs to be acquired to manage such a system, especially with timber crops, if he's  
**0:52:03-0:52:07:**  well advised at the start, he or she is well advised at the start, it won't make, we're  not talking about crazy knowledge like trying to suddenly manage an apple orchard.  I would say it's not that difficult.  Of course foresters and advisors in forestry say, oh, it's difficult, you need to help  people to do that.  
**0:52:26-0:52:28:**  Of course you need to learn.  But it's not beyond the knowledge of any average farmer.  Pruning a tree is something that you learn, but you learn that in two days and that's  it.  So it's not that complicated.  
**0:52:47-0:52:49:**  I would not say that's complicated.  But you need to be interested in the trees.  That's the big point.  Here for example, trees belong to the landowner, not to the farmer.  The landowner is taking care of the trees, not the farmer.  
**0:53:02-0:53:05:**  Sometimes it's the farmer when he's the landowner.  So you have the two different possibilities.  The farmer could be only growing the crop or could be also the landowner and then the  tree owner.  And does that setup work well?  
**0:53:18-0:53:22:**  Does it a setup that creates some tension or is it quite smooth?  So far here it's the case.  We have a landowner and we have a farmer and it works well.  Of course when you are the owner of the two, you do the compromise by yourself.  You just say, okay, I will cut some trees because I have too much shade or I will...  
**0:53:41-0:53:42:**  And so and so.  Or you will, you know when to prune the trees not to destroy the crops.  So you do that at the right time and so and so.  But I think the two options are valid, are working well.  There are people in the agroforestry space that prefer to plant trees.  
**0:54:01-0:54:07:**  Of course they believe in planting trees on farms, more trees on farms, especially in  these areas where there's a lack of trees as you've just described.  But they believe in kind of separating things more.  Creating not such, not putting trees everywhere on the matrix of the landscape, but kind of  separating things and planting them in areas where they're more concentrated, where they  
**0:54:25-0:54:27:**  will not create so much risk.  So much risk, what I mean is for example, if it's a really good year for soy or for  corn, summer crops, very good prices, the farmer in an agroforestry system, a mature  one will not have that option anymore and will have to stick to winter grains.  And so that kind of flexibility can be reduced just as an example of some of the constraints  
**0:54:47-0:54:49:**  that can come about.  What's your take on this?  If you have the right number of trees per hectare, which is something around 50 trees  per hectare, not 100 trees that we have there, you can grow anything.  You can change your rotation, you can change your crop every year.  
**0:55:06-0:55:10:**  There is not much concern about that.  So I would not say that's really a problem of flexibility.  It's only a problem if you have too many trees, too much shade, and in that case you can't  grow summer crops for example.  So I would say it's a design problem and you don't need to have too many trees on the place,  
**0:55:35-0:55:36:**  if there are big trees.  If there are small trees you can have many more of course.  No, that's not really a problem.  Very interesting.  So one of the things that we're noticing in the agroforestry space is that it's not growing  
**0:55:49-0:55:51:**  as fast as we'd like it to.  All right, so this is common knowledge and we all agree to it.  And so you've been here in this space for 30 years now, have one of the oldest and you've  been part of one of the oldest agroforestry experiments that we have, maybe in the world  even.  
**0:56:11-0:56:15:**  And so you have quite a lot of visibility here on this.  So maybe you could help us to understand why are we not seeing agroforestry systems, and  let's focus on alley cropping here.  Why are we not seeing it be used so much by farmers if it makes so much sense?  It makes sense on the long term.  
**0:56:35-0:56:43:**  It doesn't make much sense in the very short term, I mean in 10 years or 20 years for slow-growing  trees.  So the benefits will be put for the next generation and not so many farmers are able to invest  for the next generation.  That's the big problem.  
**0:56:55-0:57:02:**  If you invest for yourself, you better invest in something that gives you a return the next  year or two years after or three years after.  Here if you plant these walnut trees, they will be harvested at the age of 40, 40 maybe  50.  It's for the next generation.  
**0:57:16-0:57:26:**  So the idea is that those systems will be viable and reproduced when they reach their  maturity.  When you earn the money by selling the trees or by harvesting the fruit of the trees, you  can invest to replace them.  And that's what happened for the traditional agroforestry system in France.  
**0:57:41-0:57:47:**  Who were the first farmers in France who were able to buy a tractor?  They were agroforestry farmers.  They needed to sell 100 walnut trees and they could buy a tractor.  So those walnut trees, they were the bank of the farm at the time.  And those systems are still into operation in the Isère Valley near Grenoble.  
**0:58:07-0:58:11:**  You have a lot of farmers who have a lot of walnut trees and when they harvest the trees,  they replant the trees and so on.  So what's difficult with agroforestry is to initiate the process, to change the farm system.  And it takes time and you don't have returns in the next years.  It takes time for the trees to grow, for the trees to have an impact.  
**0:58:30-0:58:38:**  You know, when you have a tree that is maybe 4 meters tall, it's already a tree.  The impact of that tree on the soil, on the biological cycle is almost negligible.  When the tree is 10 meters tall, it changes a lot.  From one year to the next year, the increase is huge.  Now we have a return of biomass by the tree leaves, by the root decay that is extremely  
**0:59:03-0:59:04:**  high.  But during the first 20 years, it was almost nothing.  So the impact of the tree is just negligible during the first years and it increases on  a parabolic shape.  So that's the problem with trees.  
**0:59:20-0:59:27:**  They grow slowly, they increase slowly and their impact is just coming years and years  after.  So that's the main problem I would say because we have demonstrated that the crop yield could  be maintained.  Of course you lose the tree row which could be 1 or 2 meters every 30 meters but that's  
**0:59:43-0:59:45:**  not the main reason.  You still have the crop yield.  So I would say farmers have better profit with other investments than trees.  If they put their money in improving the machinery, improving the process, selling in a more efficient  way, it's more profitable for them than planting trees.  
**1:00:11-1:00:14:**  So that's the big problem.  And does this also apply to fast growing trees?  I've recently been to north of Spain where they are planting poplars, they have been  traditionally planting poplars but now they're planting even more, that are harvested after  12 years and that are sold at, I mean the average is 120 to 150 a tree.  
**1:00:37-1:00:43:**  But they've been selling them this year at 250 sometimes depending on different factors.  And so I did the maths on this and it generates an internal rate of return of about 15 to  16%.  Which suddenly that is an interesting investment to put your money in.  We are all expecting the price of wood to increase for the last 30 years.  
**1:01:05-1:01:07:**  Up to now it was not the case.  So that's the big problem.  For example here we have 100 walled trees per hectare.  We always said ok you could sell those trees about 1000 euro a tree.  Which means if you have 100 trees per hectare it's 100.000 euro per hectare.  
**1:01:25-1:01:26:**  That's huge!  That's really huge!  With 1 hectare of agarose tree, 1 agarose, you have 100.000 euros.  That's attractive.  That's attractive.  
**1:01:35-1:01:38:**  But is that realistic?  We still don't know.  The timber price is not increasing as fast as we expected.  Because it's a renewable product.  It should be increasing in the mid term but so far it's not.  
**1:01:59-1:02:05:**  So if in 10 years the price of timber has increased that will be the jackpot for the  farmers, agarose tree farmers.  If it doesn't that's the problem.  We can't assure that.  But that price for this timber is very special for few tree species.  
**1:02:17-1:02:23:**  Walnut trees, Sorbus Domestica trees, Prunus Avium trees.  Trees with very high value timber.  For most of the other trees the prices are much lower.  Poplar is just 30 euros per cubic meter of wood, something like that at the moment.  So what could change the life of agarose tree is the increase in the price of wood.  
**1:02:45-1:02:48:**  Who knows what will happen.  Normally with the decrease of the production of oil and oil derived products and plastics  and so on, wood should be increasing in relative value in the future.  So my opinion is that the future of agarose tree is bright.  You will have a lot of value in your trees.  
**1:03:09-1:03:15:**  But we hope that for the last 30 years that did not really happen so far.  Let's see what's happening in the future.  Fantastic.  I think that it's a good place to stop our conversation here or to stop me relentlessly  asking you questions is what I mean.  
**1:03:29-1:03:35:**  And you know I was very much inspired by a book that you wrote with a colleague of yours,  Fabien Liagre, called Agroforestry.  Is that the name of the...  And then there's a...  When is it going to be available in English?  
**1:03:45-1:03:46:**  It's translated.  It has been translated by Gary Rosen but it's not commercialized.  But we should do that.  We should update the book because we wrote that book 12 years ago now.  More than that.  
**1:04:04-1:04:07:**  It should be updated but we will do.  But at the moment I'm working on something similar to agroforestry which is agrivoltaism.  So you press the trees with photovoltaic panels and it's also a very efficient system.  And I'm writing a book on agrivoltaism at the moment.  So that could be also an option.  
**1:04:27-1:04:36:**  But in agrivoltaism the revenue from the panels is much higher than the revenue by trees.  So it makes the system very attractive.  Okay, very interesting.  Well I'm sure that many of our listeners would love to have an updated in English version  of the book.  
**1:04:48-1:04:53:**  When you feel like it's the time it may be an interesting...  When the price of the wood rises.  And it'll be time.  If the price of the wood rises I think people who took the chance to do that will be happy.  That's my hope for the future.  
**1:05:10-1:05:11:**  For sure.  Thank you so much for taking the time to speak with us today.  It was a pleasure to welcome you here because I spent almost all my life here.  So it's always a pleasure to meet people there.  