---
title: #6 Managing a 25 year old alley cropping system with David Wolfe
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.

---

### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2020-09-30)  

**0:00:00-0:00:16:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:23-0:00:27:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  these challenges.  
**0:00:33-0:00:38:**  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Hi everyone, welcome back to the podcast.  
**0:00:45-0:00:48:**  We're your hosts Etienne and Dimitri.  This week we're super excited to share with you an interview with David Wolf from Wakelands  Farm in the east of England.  
**0:00:55-0:00:59:**  Dimitri and I were super excited to have this interview because he's managing a 25 year  old agroforestry system.  And for us it's a great opportunity to see what that looks like.  
**0:01:04-0:01:08:**  We're often talking about young systems and there's so much innovation going on, but there  we get an opportunity to understand what it means to work among 25 year old trees and  the issues that might arise in terms of management.  
**0:01:16-0:01:20:**  So we're able to go into some detail with him on machinery and different management  techniques.  Yeah, Etienne, I think it's super important to have this conversation with more mature  
**0:01:26-0:01:33:**  systems because when we're designing and implementing systems now we're having an influence and  we're making decisions that are going to last 20, 25, 30 or even 40 years in these agroforestry  systems and you need to get it all right at this point.  
**0:01:42-0:01:50:**  So the conversation with David really helps us gain some visibility on that front.  The other thing I thought was really interesting is he explains to us how he's transitioning  this farm from basically a research farm, which was the initial project his parents  
**0:02:01-0:02:07:**  created and that now he's taking that towards a farm with more diversified income streams  and different enterprises.  For sure.  
**0:02:11-0:02:18:**  And all of the natural capital that was planted by his parents 25 years ago, that's enabling  him now to build a huge diversity, as you said, of enterprises, from agro-tourism to  on-farm restaurants, market gardens, grain production, biomass production and lots of  
**0:02:30-0:02:31:**  other things.  So it's incredible how this tree and natural capital, this wood natural capital is enabling  him to build a business.  
**0:02:40-0:02:42:**  So without further ado, let's get into it.  Hello, David.  Welcome to the podcast.  
**0:02:45-0:02:47:**  Thank you for having me.  Maybe we can start today with a bit of an overview of who you are and how the farm got  started.  
**0:02:56-0:03:01:**  OK, so my name is David Wolf.  My parents, Anne and Martin Wolf, lived in East Anglia, lived in Cambridge and I grew  up in Cambridge.  
**0:03:09-0:03:15:**  They went to live in Switzerland for the last part of my father's working life.  And while they were there, they decided to embark on a retirement project.  And they came back and he would be 60.  
**0:03:21-0:03:24:**  And they decided to set up what became Wakelands.  So in 1992, they bought the land.  In 1994, they planted the first trees.  
**0:03:33-0:03:41:**  And from 1994 onwards, they then ran Wakelands Organic Agroforestry, which was a very pioneering,  active, diverse agroforestry system in the UK and across Europe.  My mum died in 2016 and my father died last year, 2019.  
**0:03:52-0:03:55:**  And my brother and I and our families have now taken over.  So that's how I come to be looking after Wakelands at the moment.  And how did your father and your mother first turn to agroforestry?  
**0:04:04-0:04:06:**  How did they come across it?  So my father's working life, he'd worked mostly for the government as an agricultural scientist.  He was a plant pathologist.  
**0:04:14-0:04:18:**  He had always been interested in different ways of growing crops.  He was particularly interested in growing different sorts of crops together.  So I think when he came across agroforestry while he was still in his sort of first job,  
**0:04:28-0:04:31:**  it stuck in his mind as something he would like to try.  But at that point, it was too innovative.  It was too cutting edge for the sort of government funded research and so on.  
**0:04:37-0:04:43:**  So it had to wait until he had his own retirement project, his own retirement piece of land  to really give it a go.  And maybe you can give us a bit of a sense of the size of the farm and a bit of your  
**0:04:51-0:04:54:**  climate and local context.  So Wakelands is in Suffolk, in East Anglia, within England, within the UK.  East Anglia is possibly the most substantial arable agricultural area in the UK.  
**0:05:08-0:05:09:**  It's very flat.  It's got a relatively good climate.  It's got good soils.  
**0:05:13-0:05:19:**  And so there's a lot of cereal crops, sugar beet and so on, grown in East Anglia.  The Wicklands sits within that.  And when Anne and Martin bought it, it was a farmhouse with some meadows and a farmyard.  
**0:05:27-0:05:30:**  They then bought two further fields.  Those fields at the time were just in a traditional sort of modern chemical supported agriculture  system.  
**0:05:39-0:05:43:**  And so they then ended up with a total area of about 26 hectares.  So it's not an exaggeration, I think, to say that Wakelands is now literally an oasis in  the middle of the East Anglian farming prairie.  
**0:05:53-0:05:57:**  If you see an aerial photograph, we've got an aerial photograph on our website, for example,  you look at an aerial photograph, you really see that very distinctly.  That's something with Dimitri that we really, I mean, we talked a lot about it because when  
**0:06:05-0:06:10:**  we first found your farm and when we were contacting you, like the images are absolutely  spectacular.  So I'd recommend anyone going to see these beautiful, in some cases, 25 year old trees.  
**0:06:16-0:06:22:**  So you mentioned kind of the past and how your father and your mother set up the project  and where they were coming from with that.  But now that you've taken over, what does the farm look like today?  
**0:06:28-0:06:30:**  Are you selling some produce?  And if so, who are your customers?  So my parents were most particularly concentrated on the sort of research approach to things.  
**0:06:42-0:06:46:**  So my dad in particular was very interested in growing things in very small areas to do  comparisons.  So if you'd come here when he was really at his busiest, you'd have seen a patchwork of  
**0:06:53-0:06:57:**  tiny areas of different crops growing alongside each other, different combinations of things,  because he was very much still doing it as a scientific research project.  And indeed, he had collaborators based here from the Organic Research Centre for some  
**0:07:05-0:07:06:**  years working with him.  So there was a lot of sort of serious agricultural science done here over those years.  We, my brother and our families, we're not agricultural scientists, so we're not in a  
**0:07:18-0:07:21:**  position to carry on with that hardcore science.  But what we are doing is carrying on with the organic rotation agroforestry.  So the tree lines are still very much there and we're looking after the tree lines and  
**0:07:29-0:07:32:**  then the crop alleys in between.  Again, we're farming those with a variety of different things.  So the next phase really looks like Wakelands as not so much a research centre, but more  
**0:07:42-0:07:45:**  of a demonstration site.  It's possibly not big enough to be sort of seriously commercial in scale, but we're absolutely  going to make a go of it running as an organic agroforestry site, but with other things going  
**0:07:54-0:07:55:**  on on the site.  And that's really the important thing for us because we are very interested in not just  the sort of technical science and agronomy of the growing of the crops, we're interested  
**0:08:04-0:08:08:**  in what happens to the produce afterwards and the people being involved and so on.  So we are looking at getting people onto the site to enjoy it, to work with the fields,  to appreciate where the food comes from and most importantly, to then process the food.  
**0:08:20-0:08:26:**  So we're looking to set up on site a bakery and cooking facilities, accommodation for  people to come and stay.  And we're doing a lot, for example, with social media to connect people with the way in which  
**0:08:33-0:08:34:**  their food is grown.  I think we think the time is absolutely right.  People are interested in how their food is grown and where it's grown.  
**0:08:40-0:08:44:**  And so we're making collaborations with people and bringing people and organizations to the  site who want to run courses, who want to get involved so that it becomes, as I say,  very much of a demonstration site and not just a sort of behind the scenes growing site.  
**0:08:55-0:09:01:**  We'll definitely come back to that because we're very interested to understand that transition  from a strategic level.  But maybe before we go into more detail, maybe you could give us an overview of the different  
**0:09:07-0:09:14:**  systems you have on the farm and then we'll kind of dig in deeper to maybe the most relevant  ones.  But I think it's useful for everyone to see a bit of the diversity of what you do.  
**0:09:18-0:09:26:**  Okay, so Wakelands is about a total area of about 26 hectares, so 56 acres.  If you ignore the sort of farmhouse area and a couple of meadows, the rest of it is divided  into alleys.  
**0:09:34-0:09:37:**  The alleys all run north-south.  They vary in width between about 12 meters and about 18 meters.  And each alley is separated then by a belt of trees.  
**0:09:46-0:09:51:**  There are, so that's the sort of organic, that's the agroforestry structure.  There are, broadly speaking, four different areas within Wakelands.  One area, the tree lines are all hazel trees, hazel wood.  
**0:10:02-0:10:06:**  They're coppiced on a roughly seven year cycle.  Each alley copies in a different year.  So that produces a lot of wood for fencing and other construction purposes.  
**0:10:13-0:10:16:**  And then the remainder of that is used as chip for biomass.  And then we have a second area, which is willow, again, coppiced this time on a three year  cycle.  
**0:10:21-0:10:24:**  Again, used for fencing and hedging and so on.  And then the remainder chipped for biomass for a boiler.  And then we have the two probably more interesting areas, one of which is the oldest area planted  
**0:10:32-0:10:38:**  in 1994, which are essentially semi-hardwood timber trees.  Although there's also some things like cherries in there, which can be both fruiting and a  timber crop.  
**0:10:44-0:10:49:**  So they are now more than 25 years old and quite substantial trees.  And then we have the last area, they're all roughly the same area in size.  The last area, the tree alleys are a complete mixture of fruit and other trees.  
**0:10:59-0:11:04:**  So we've got in excess of 50 different sorts of apple tree, pears, lots of different sorts  of plums, cherries, apricots, figs, a whole range of different things growing in those  tree lines.  
**0:11:14-0:11:23:**  Also we have the combination of productive alleys where we grow wheat, lentils, squash,  oats, other similar sorts of crops.  And then the very productive tree lines, which are producing a timber crop or a wood crop,  
**0:11:32-0:11:35:**  but also a very variable food crop.  So there's lots of different produce coming from the farm in different ways and throughout  the year.  
**0:11:41-0:11:47:**  So David, we wanted to go into some more depth in some of these systems that you've described  now.  For example, when you talk about the copy-sink system, what are you growing in between the  
**0:11:56-0:11:58:**  copy-sink lines?  So broadly speaking, all of the alleys between the tree lines are equivalent in terms of  different crops we grow in there.  
**0:12:06-0:12:13:**  So those areas are divided for management purposes into 10 areas.  And then we're running an organic rotation around those 10 areas on a roughly four-year  cycle.  
**0:12:19-0:12:24:**  So at only one point, any particular alley will be 50% of the time is going to be in  a grass clover lay or similar.  And then 50% of the time is going to be a crop.  
**0:12:31-0:12:37:**  Those crops, as I say, the last couple of years we've grown wheat, some barley, some  oats, lentils, squash, and so on.  I think we're going to diversify a bit in the coming year.  
**0:12:45-0:12:48:**  And really it's just part of the organic rotation as to what gets grown in which alley.  So any of those things could be grown in the hazel alleys or in the willow alleys or in  the fruit tree alleys.  
**0:12:55-0:13:01:**  There's a little bit of a variation on that because the oldest alleys where the trees  are the oldest, and they're therefore the tallest, also happen to be the narrowest ones.  So they're the only ones where we have a bit of an issue with sunshine in daylight.  
**0:13:10-0:13:16:**  So those alleys are not so good for, for example, the lentils, which need a bit more sunshine.  But broadly speaking, we could be growing any of the things in any of the alleys in  the system.  
**0:13:20-0:13:24:**  So if you look at it long term, you'll just see them cycling around.  You brought up a really interesting point here about the interaction between the crops  and the trees.  
**0:13:31-0:13:35:**  And that's something that we wanted to dig deeper in.  Do you see that in different systems, for example, the copy-sink system compared to  the older timber tree producing system, do you see different performances in the intercrop?  
**0:13:46-0:13:51:**  Is there differences based on, for example, the light or?  Yes, so I'm not the scientist, so I'm not in a position to sort of comment on the mechanics.  But I do, for example, just this year, we grew some lentils in a relatively open field  
**0:14:02-0:14:10:**  situation, and some lentils in the alleys between the willow copy-sink.  And they ripened roughly two weeks apart, even though they were the same lentils planted  at the same time.  
**0:14:16-0:14:21:**  So we see quite distinct differences in that kind of way.  What the mechanisms for that are, I don't know, but there's definitely variations depending  on where we're growing it and in what conditions.  
**0:14:28-0:14:35:**  So with the lentils here, was there a difference in quantity of lentil being produced based  on the different systems, or was it the same?  We haven't yet done the calculations.  
**0:14:42-0:14:47:**  In fact, the last batch of lentils were only harvested yesterday afternoon.  So you'll have to come back to me on that one, I'm afraid.  OK, no, that's fine.  
**0:14:52-0:14:56:**  And how are you managing the trees?  If we zoom into the timber production area, are you managing the trees in a certain way,  for example, to get light through better or to optimise the amount of timber produced?  
**0:15:08-0:15:11:**  So most of those trees are now managed by being pollarded.  So they're pollarded periodically at a height of about three, three and a half metres.  That's partly to stimulate growth, but also the choice of pollarding rather than coppicing  
**0:15:23-0:15:29:**  is at least in part because it means that the lower part of the tree is therefore narrower.  And so it intrudes less into the cropping area so that the growth of the tree doesn't  really start until a height above the way you would have machinery and so on.  
**0:15:39-0:15:43:**  So that's been the broad approach to the managing of those trees.  I think it's also fair to say that some of the trees.  So, for example, the cherry trees haven't been possibly managed as well as they might  
**0:15:52-0:15:58:**  be because I think my parents were never quite clear whether they wanted to maximise the  cherry crop or they wanted to maximise the timber crop.  And slightly we ended up with a bit of a compromise.  
**0:16:04-0:16:08:**  So this year, for example, we had some very big, fantastic cherry trees with huge crops  of cherries on them.  But because the trees are so big, we weren't able to pick anything like, well, even only  
**0:16:13-0:16:17:**  perhaps 25% of the crop because the trees are so big.  So had they been managed for fruit, they'd have been managed differently over the years,  but it's now probably too late.  
**0:16:24-0:16:30:**  But just the question about that then is, how would you manage for fruit production  while keeping them low enough for harvest, but without impeding on the machinery?  Yeah, I think that's probably a challenge.  
**0:16:38-0:16:45:**  So, but I suspect you could keep them big enough to be out of the way of tractors and  so on, and yet still small enough to be picked from ordinary ladders or ordinary equipment,  whereas some of our trees now are 10, 15 metres tall.  
**0:16:54-0:16:59:**  And so you'd need very specialist equipment to be picking the cherries in those trees.  But those systems, so the mature cherry trees are distinct from the orchard.  So I'm assuming that in the orchards you've been managing, taking into account more production  
**0:17:09-0:17:10:**  in that case.  Yes, I think it's that maybe that sounds a bit too thought through, because actually  the orchard, what you're calling the orchard trees, and they're not, it's not an orchard  
**0:17:22-0:17:24:**  in the sense it's not densely packed with trees.  It's fairly, by orchard standards, it's still very low density of fruit trees.  But those trees are much younger.  
**0:17:30-0:17:36:**  So the issues about size and height are questions for the future really.  And talking about density, we mentioned the interline, but on a line, what would be the  typical spacing between trees?  
**0:17:46-0:17:50:**  So they are, they started out being about eight to 10 metres apart.  But there's been a fair amount of natural reseeding.  So for example, quite a lot of self seeded cherry trees around the main cherry trees.  
**0:17:59-0:18:05:**  And then we've done a certain amount of infilling both with new trees, but also with things  like fruit currant bushes and things like that.  So it's quite variable.  
**0:18:12-0:18:15:**  So you felt the need to densify the lines then?  Why was that the case?  It's not so much densify.  
**0:18:19-0:18:24:**  It's more a question of taking advantage of the spaces because where we've got relatively  young apple trees and cherry trees and so on, which are eight to 10 metres apart, there  are obvious gaps between them, which even if it's only for the short term, we can grow  
**0:18:33-0:18:39:**  gooseberries or red currants or black currants or similar things or rhubarb, other interesting  fruit and food to eat.  They may not survive the long term when the trees grow up, but certainly for a few years,  
**0:18:46-0:18:50:**  we can have other things in the system.  And so in this orchard, as you've let it densify, that's also let less light come in, right?  So you've decided to make compromise more in the direction of the fruit instead of the  
**0:18:58-0:18:59:**  winter crop?  I think that if you the area we're talking about, the trees are still that much smaller  and the alleys are slightly further apart anyway.  
**0:19:09-0:19:14:**  So we're not anywhere close yet to the kind of compromise that you're talking about.  The area where that compromise starts to happen is really only in the trees where there are  timber trees that are 25, 26 years old.  
**0:19:24-0:19:27:**  We're at the point where we're getting to the point where we need to make decisions  about the fruit trees as to how we manage them going forward.  But we're not, I don't think, at the point yet where they're causing any issues because  
**0:19:34-0:19:40:**  the alleys in that area are probably 15, 16 meters wide and the trees are still relatively  small.  So what if you compare it to the more mature system, you'd say that it's around 25 years  
**0:19:48-0:19:52:**  that you start to see a real compromise between the intercrop and the tree?  I don't know when you'd say it started.  When you say it's a compromise, it's only a compromise for some things.  
**0:20:00-0:20:03:**  So it's a compromise, for example, if you wanted to grow lentils, but not necessarily  if you wanted to grow other things.  I wouldn't want to say when that started to happen, I'm just not in a position to say,  
**0:20:11-0:20:16:**  but we're now at the point where we definitely have that issue.  I think it's also a good issue to have.  Yes, we're not complaining.  
**0:20:20-0:20:23:**  We're not complaining.  And so I imagine that pollarding in the timber area that you mentioned earlier on must have  a quite a big impact on the ecological dynamic of the system in terms of the light and also  
**0:20:37-0:20:38:**  the wind, right?  Could you maybe explain to us how that changed the management as well of the system?  Yeah, so I guess I wasn't around when they first decided to do the pollarding.  
**0:20:50-0:20:57:**  Certainly the shapes of the trees now are very distinctive and there's a lot of very  solid growth, very high up above the ground.  And then they're being maintained, some of them have been repollarded.  
**0:21:06-0:21:10:**  And then it really varies from one type of tree to another, quite what the effect of  that is.  So I think there's a lot of variability in the way that that's responded, which is partly  
**0:21:14-0:21:18:**  a function of the fact that there's a lot of variability in the tree system in Wakelands,  which is both a sort of successful feature of the system, but also I'm sure leads to  a certain amount of compromise and so on.  
**0:21:29-0:21:33:**  I wanted to ask something before, because we've opened a really interesting door there  on talking about diversity, but before I just wanted to ask, you mentioned that it's a problem  for growing lentils in those more mature systems.  
**0:21:42-0:21:45:**  Does that mean that some other crops are more shade tolerant?  And if so, which?  Yes, so for example, next year we're planning on growing a wheat crop in those alleys because  
**0:21:56-0:22:02:**  we're optimistic that wheat crop will be successful in a way that three or four years ago, my  father grew a lentil crop and it struggled with a lack of sunshine.  So we haven't done a sort of specific scientific assessment of the issues, but we have a sort  
**0:22:14-0:22:18:**  of practical experience that we're basing our decisions on.  And the fact that you have, let's say, a transforming and mature system now, does it make you consider  sometimes for example, moving away from arable crops and let's say, including chickens or  
**0:22:28-0:22:29:**  animals?  Is that a kind of transition in the strategy?  So we are looking at two things, I suppose, in that direction at the moment.  
**0:22:38-0:22:42:**  We are looking at reintroducing some intensive horticulture.  I say reintroducing because my mother and another woman did intensive horticulture in  some of the alleys for several years a few years ago, but then my mother became ill as  
**0:22:53-0:22:54:**  she was older.  So that stopped.  But we are looking to reintroduce that in at least two alleys next year.  
**0:23:00-0:23:06:**  We're talking to two different groups of growers who will probably each take over an alley  within what you're calling the orchard, although it's very low density.  They will each use slightly different systems to grow intensive horticulture, vegetables  
**0:23:16-0:23:18:**  and so on.  One of them is going to operate a no dig system and the other is going to do a more conventional  system and we'll see how that all goes.  
**0:23:26-0:23:30:**  So that's one area in which we're diversifying the nature of what we're growing and indeed  the way we're growing it because that will be their enterprises that are self-contained  their businesses.  
**0:23:36-0:23:40:**  We are absolutely looking at or not looking at interested in having some animals.  There have been chickens here before.  We're less likely to get on that route, but we're very interested, for example, in trying  
**0:23:46-0:23:48:**  some sheep.  We think it could be quite exciting to have some electric fencing that we can move around  the farm, that we can put around two or three alleys at a time and have a small flock of  
**0:23:57-0:24:03:**  sheep who graze on the clover grass in the alleys and also but also on the grass that's  in the tree lines.  And then we can move them around with the rotation.  
**0:24:07-0:24:13:**  The problem we've got with that is partly what a scale but also partly our land is very  wet clay.  So we wouldn't have any suitable winter pasture.  
**0:24:17-0:24:23:**  So we can only make that work really if we can collaborate with somebody else who has  winter quarters for their sheep and is looking for extra summer pasture.  But if we can find that collaboration, then we'd be very interested in introducing some  
**0:24:31-0:24:33:**  sheep into our system.  I was going to say, I think that's a recurring theme because we have the exact but opposite  problem in Greece, where we really wanted sheep to manage the pasture in the winter,  
**0:24:43-0:24:46:**  but then didn't have any appropriate pasture in the summer because of drought.  So I feel like building these kind of partnerships with local farmers is like the key to diversification  and including animals in orchards.  
**0:24:55-0:24:57:**  Go ahead, Dimitri.  I was going to ask about the scale.  You mentioned now that you had a problem of scale for the sheep.  
**0:25:03-0:25:06:**  Could you just elaborate on that a bit more?  So yes, so what I mean by having a scale question on sheep is if we are rotating the sheep around  within our system and also our system is such that at any one time half the land roughly  
**0:25:20-0:25:29:**  is in crops and half the land is in an organic lay, the actual area we have the sheep and  the number of sheep we could have is probably quite a small number.  So whether that makes for a viable flock of the kind which could produce, for example,  
**0:25:36-0:25:41:**  enough milk to make sheep's cheese is something we're looking at.  If it could, then great, we'll definitely have a go at that.  That's what I mean by scale.  
**0:25:46-0:25:52:**  It's whether we've got a big enough area allowing for the rotation to have a sustainable flock.  That makes sense.  And continuing the, I wanted to ask if there's a third option in those areas, especially  
**0:25:59-0:26:05:**  looking at the timber trees, which now are about 25 years, are you considering harvesting  them for wood and restarting the system or maybe have you got a succession there already  going on?  
**0:26:12-0:26:18:**  So well, the willows and the hazels are already harvested for wood.  We have a good wood crop.  So a lot of hazel staves we've sold last year, three and a half thousand.  
**0:26:28-0:26:33:**  We've got a guy who wants 10,000 next year of hazel staves, which he uses as a fencing  product.  In terms of the older trees, the timber trees, we've had trees that have been felled because  
**0:26:40-0:26:47:**  of disease or because of wind damage or whatever, which have generated a timber crop.  I don't think we've yet had any where there's been a planned felling of a tree which has  reached a maturity such that you're actually filling it for a timber crop in an elective  
**0:26:57-0:26:58:**  way.  That may well come.  So we're not yet at the point where we're recycling or infilling for planned reasons,  
**0:27:04-0:27:11:**  but there's been a certain amount of that for, as I say, damage and disease responses.  And I just wanted to ask out of curiosity, just maybe concluding the section on animals.  I felt like a reluctance on your behalf on chickens.  
**0:27:21-0:27:25:**  Is that based on that past experience with chickens that didn't go so well or what is  that based on?  That's it based on, that's a good question.  
**0:27:30-0:27:36:**  I just suspect that a chicken enterprise takes a lot more organisation and oversight than  we're currently able to give.  So I wouldn't rule out the possibility, but it's not in our wish list at the moment.  
**0:27:44-0:27:50:**  It also seems to be the case that you can consider putting in sheep because the trees  already mature and they won't be causing damage, right?  Otherwise chickens would be a more interesting option.  
**0:27:56-0:27:57:**  Sure.  Well, yeah, so certainly, certainly.  I mean, that is one of the advantages of having the old system is that we can include the  
**0:28:03-0:28:08:**  tree lines within the sheep area and be reasonably confident that sheep won't eat the trees.  So that's a bonus of the age of the whole project.  What's your, in your experience with the different intercrops, not especially, what's the difference  
**0:28:18-0:28:22:**  between a pollarding system and a copy-sink system?  How does that interact with what's happening in between the lines?  So where the trees are coppiced, obviously the new growth starts from the ground and  
**0:28:33-0:28:37:**  so they become very bushy at ground level.  And so they tend to be, that makes for a much wider tree alley.  Where they've been pollarded, then obviously the new growth starts at the point at which  
**0:28:44-0:28:45:**  you pollarded.  So you get, the growth is much higher and therefore away from machinery and so on.  So the lines where we have mature trees that have been pollarded, there's a lot of sort  
**0:28:58-0:29:03:**  of undergrowth below them, brambles and grass and small bushes and so on.  Whereas the tree lines, which have been coppiced, so the hazel and the willow, basically they  are solidly hazel or solidly willow down to ground level with less other growth in and  
**0:29:16-0:29:19:**  around the trees.  So one system, the pollarding system reaches higher, it goes up higher and the pollarding  system is more compact and lower.  
**0:29:27-0:29:30:**  Yes, so if you look to the pollarding system, what you're basically looking at is trees.  Whereas if you look at the coppicing system, it looks like hedges.  It's quite a different visual appearance.  
**0:29:35-0:29:40:**  Whereas with the coppicing system, you're getting a lot of growth close to the ground  in a way that is then good in subsequent years for mechanically harvesting to get either  timber for hedging and so on or timber for biomass chipping.  
**0:29:55-0:30:02:**  And you use a machine to harvest the willow and the hazelnut hedges, right?  Yeah, so they've used different technologies over the years.  Just in the last two years, two years ago, we were using what is effectively a very large  
**0:30:13-0:30:18:**  circular saw blade on a hydraulic arm from a tractor.  It's almost like a giant sort of domestic brush cutter.  And that was run along horizontally, let's say 30 centimetres above the ground.  
**0:30:28-0:30:31:**  So cut the crown very close to ground.  The advantage of that was it was very quick because you could just run the machine along.  The disadvantage was that what you then cut fell in every different direction.  
**0:30:42-0:30:47:**  So there was then a processing operation to get them all lined up in order to handle them,  stack them, move them and so on.  This last year, we used a different system, which was a different machine, which had an  
**0:30:56-0:31:03:**  enormous hydraulic sort of hand, I suppose you'd call it, which grabbed the willow or  the hazelnut almost in bunches and held a bunch of, let's say, 30 or so stems at one  time and then had a cutter that cut through the stems.  
**0:31:13-0:31:16:**  And then the hydraulic arm was able to lay them on the ground neatly.  So the result of that was, although it was slower to do the cutting, it meant we had  a very neatly laid line of cut timber that could then be handled and processed much more  
**0:31:26-0:31:27:**  quickly.  So different techniques have been applied with different pros and cons.  And taking into account the use of machinery and how practical it might be, do you have  
**0:31:38-0:31:43:**  a preference between a coppiced or a pollarded system in terms of managing the hole?  I'm thinking in terms of practicality, but I'm also thinking maybe in terms of the shade  it produces.  
**0:31:48-0:31:53:**  Well, certainly when it comes to the managing, the trees that we're managing by pollarding  are all larger, semi-hardwood timber trees.  And the management of that, the pollarding is all done by chainsaws and ladders.  
**0:32:04-0:32:07:**  And so it's essentially a pruning operation.  And the material that comes off that is obviously very difficult to handle because it's very  sort of random bits of branch.  
**0:32:13-0:32:17:**  Whereas what's coming off the coppicing system, because we're coppicing and have been coppicing  the same willow and hazel for many years, what's coming off there are straight growths.  They're three, four, five metres long.  
**0:32:28-0:32:36:**  When we coppice them and they are straight pieces of wood, let's say 30 millimetres in  diameter that are optimised for completely different uses.  So really they're different techniques for completely different things.  
**0:32:45-0:32:50:**  But is it easier, for example, in a pollarded system to control the amount of shade produced?  Yeah, I mean, the pollarded trees, because you're only pollarding them at three metres  above the ground, the growth then goes above three metres.  
**0:32:57-0:32:59:**  So they're much bigger trees.  So they're always going to create a lot more shade because you've only started the coppicing  three metres from the ground.  
**0:33:05-0:33:07:**  So they're going to be that much taller.  Whereas the coppice trees are coppiced, you know, when they're cut, they're cut to 100  mil from the ground, let's say not much more than that.  
**0:33:14-0:33:18:**  So when they're very short, they're really no shade at all.  And even when they're longest, they're only three metres tall.  So they're really quite different approaches for the different uses.  
**0:33:28-0:33:34:**  And so one of the things that comes out with the way that you manage the coppicing is that  you need to get a tractor in.  And so how does that, how does the management and the mechanisation interfere with the intercrop  
**0:33:41-0:33:42:**  as well?  Is it something, can you only enter the space in the interline in certain specific times?  Does it mean that it limits the types of crops that you have to choose as well?  
**0:33:52-0:33:56:**  Yes, I mean, certainly it means you can only go at certain times.  But at any one point in the system, we have an organic lay in half the land anyway.  So I mean, this year, the organic lay was in half of the willow area and all of the  
**0:34:11-0:34:12:**  hazel area.  So access to that was easy because you can just drive on it when it's dry.  Obviously, it's a bit more of a challenge if you've got a crop in the lines between  
**0:34:22-0:34:23:**  the coppicing.  As it happens this year, we were growing lentils in that area.  So that was relatively straightforward because it was an organic lay over the winter.  
**0:34:34-0:34:38:**  And so we could do the coppicing during the winter and then the lentils were planted in  the spring.  So that wasn't an issue.  
**0:34:40-0:34:44:**  If you were growing a winter wheat crop, then it would be a bit more of a challenge because  you wouldn't be able to coppice in that winter in that area.  So I think it's just a question of being a bit adaptable depending on what the crop choices  
**0:34:53-0:34:54:**  are.  But we are kind of coppicing some areas every year on different cycles so that we have a  coppiced willow crop and a coppiced hazel crop every year.  
**0:35:05-0:35:11:**  But at the same time, they're always regrowing over time.  And taking some of the similar question of how do you synchronize cycles, but applying  it more to the orchard, I'm assuming at some point you have to go into the fruit trees  
**0:35:21-0:35:24:**  and harvest their fruits.  Do you find that it's hard then not to have access maybe with not being able to go into  the interline and with a tractor or machinery?  
**0:35:31-0:35:34:**  Is that something that affects the harvest of fruits?  Well, we're not really using machinery for the harvesting.  The harvesting is all done by hand of the fruit.  
**0:35:39-0:35:43:**  So access isn't really a problem because you can always walk along the edge of the fields.  That's not the problem of the edge of the alleys.  That's not a problem.  
**0:35:46-0:35:49:**  And then you just use like wheelbarrows maybe to go to the end of the line.  Yeah, I mean, I suppose just thinking what we did this year, I mean, it's true that we  had, we used a tractor and trailer to move people and cherries around when we're doing  
**0:35:59-0:36:00:**  cherry picking.  That would have been more of a challenge if the alleys in question had been in the crop.  But again, you just have to think about that in terms of what you're planting and how you're  
**0:36:07-0:36:08:**  then going to deal with it.  So that's part of the fun.  Yeah.  
**0:36:12-0:36:18:**  Could you maybe explain to us some of these kind of ecological benefits that you're seeing  being provided by your systems?  I'm thinking, for example, windbreaks.  
**0:36:22-0:36:26:**  Naturally, when I saw the photos of your copy-sink system, I was just thinking, wow, those crops  in between are so tucked in.  They must be so protected from the wind.  
**0:36:29-0:36:33:**  What happens when you cut, for example, the copies in the first months of the spring when  you've got a crop there, but you've got low copy-sink systems?  How do you manage that?  
**0:36:38-0:36:39:**  Yeah.  So again, I think you'd have to talk to the ORC people, the organic research center people,  because I think they've done some work on that kind of thing.  
**0:36:46-0:36:47:**  And they've got the sort of long experience.  I mean, the only thing I would say, just picking up the way you've described it there, is that  because of the way we copy on a cycle, so in the willow, it's every three years, and  
**0:37:00-0:37:03:**  in the hazels, it's every seven.  But in the hazel rows, every row of hazel is actually a double row.  So you don't ever take out both the left and the right row, if you sort of mean, in the  
**0:37:15-0:37:16:**  same year.  So certainly in the hazels, you're never left with a bare line.  The worst you've got is, let's say, a five-year-old line and a cut-to-the-ground line, but they're  
**0:37:26-0:37:27:**  really adjacent to each other.  In the willows, we do take out the whole row of trees, but it would never be more than  that, it would never be adjacent rows because of the cycle.  
**0:37:35-0:37:39:**  So it's not as if you're suddenly opening up a huge area to the wind that wasn't opened  up before.  Of course, you're increasing the exposure slightly, but it's still all within a very  
**0:37:45-0:37:49:**  sheltered system overall.  I guess what's interesting to us is that when you start an agroforestry project or when  you read about agroforestry, there's a lot of principles and theoretical advantages.  
**0:38:00-0:38:07:**  And actually very few people are in a position to observe that from an experiential basis,  which is the case for you because the first trees were planted 25 years ago.  So without affirming anything scientifically, I guess we just wanted to have your perception  
**0:38:18-0:38:24:**  and maybe your experience of working in a system with mature agroforestry systems.  Do you feel that in a sense, it's delivering what everyone is aiming for?  Okay, without taking scientific indicators, maybe, but just in terms of biodiversity or  
**0:38:34-0:38:36:**  mitigating climate extremes.  So sure, it's certainly giving us diversity.  I suppose there's a sort of a simple anecdote based upon my father's experience from a few  
**0:38:47-0:38:54:**  years ago when he was growing potatoes and he grew potatoes in three parallel alleys.  And the farmer next door grew potatoes in a field which is about 100 acres, a bit more  than 100 hectares, but basically a vastly different scale.  
**0:39:07-0:39:11:**  And it was a particularly bad year potato blight.  We lost just one alley of potatoes essentially, but the other two were largely untouched because  of precisely the sheltering you're describing from the data blight spores.  
**0:39:24-0:39:28:**  Whereas the farmer next door essentially lost the whole field because once the blight was  blowing across the field, it blew across the whole field.  So you do see some fairly simple and occasionally quite graphically illustrated effects like  
**0:39:35-0:39:36:**  that.  Of course.  But for example, do you think the fact of, I know that some people would be afraid of  
**0:39:42-0:39:48:**  including trees because they would think it would increase, for example, maybe deers coming  and causing damage to crops.  Having trees and having mature trees around your arable crops, does it set certain challenges  
**0:39:57-0:39:59:**  as well in that respect?  So that's an interesting question.  So I won't talk about it in terms of the crops, if I may, but just in terms of the fruit.  
**0:40:08-0:40:16:**  So this year we had a big cherry crop and various people said, oh, aren't they being,  I'm going to have a terrible problem with birds.  And what was interesting was that although we do have a lot of birds because we have  
**0:40:22-0:40:28:**  a lot of trees, we didn't see any real evidence that the birds were eating the cherries.  It may be because we've got such a rich habitat, there's plenty else for them to eat.  I just don't know.  
**0:40:33-0:40:39:**  But again, with deer, we do have deer here, we have wild deer here, we have wild hares  here.  And we don't see a great deal of evidence.  
**0:40:43-0:40:47:**  We see a little bit of evidence of the deer doing some bark damage to some of the trees,  particularly the younger trees.  But we don't see any great evidence of problems with the deer in that way.  
**0:40:55-0:41:02:**  The other thing that's an issue in terms of pests in this part of the country is pigeons,  pigeons eating the cereal crops and so on.  And it's noticeable.  
**0:41:06-0:41:09:**  I mean, we do have a couple of areas of the farm that are much more open and don't have  trees in at all.  And just visually, you could see that there'd be whole flocks of pigeons sometimes in those  
**0:41:14-0:41:15:**  areas.  I actually thought we had a pigeon problem where we didn't see equivalent numbers of  pigeons in the alleys where you have the intercropping growing or anywhere between the tree lines.  
**0:41:24-0:41:31:**  Now, I haven't done any scientific basis for that, but simply observationally, whether  that's because the large flocks of pigeons don't want to land in the relatively narrow  alleys between the trees or what I just don't know.  
**0:41:38-0:41:42:**  But I'm sure there are those kind of interactions going on.  And I think one of the just to add to that, I talked earlier about the way in which in  the past there'd been collaborations between the organic research center in the UK and  
**0:41:52-0:41:53:**  Wakelands project.  We're back talking to the ORC about further sort of future collaborations.  And I think one of the things they're interested in is precisely looking at Wakelands as a  
**0:42:03-0:42:07:**  relatively mature agroforestry system.  So seeing if you can pinpoint some of those things.  And that's partly with the benefit of data that was collected in previous years around  
**0:42:13-0:42:14:**  things like tree growth and so on.  So there is a fair amount of data which could inform some longitudinal studies in that way.  So I'm optimistic that we can, there's still more to learn.  
**0:42:23-0:42:24:**  That would make sense.  And I'll add protection from spores, which I actually had never thought about as an advantage  for windbreaks.  
**0:42:31-0:42:37:**  We always think in terms of wind damage and storms or temperature, but that's also an  interesting effect that we'd never thought about.  So great.  
**0:42:41-0:42:48:**  I wanted to ask in terms of diversity and you've already mentioned so many crops.  And now that you're kind of transforming the strategy and you're thinking of selling and  diversifying even more by including intensive horticulture and all these elements, do you  
**0:43:02-0:43:08:**  have a farm shop or how do you manage to accommodate that diversity?  So what we're doing at the moment is that we are, I suppose we're doing two things in  terms of the diversity.  
**0:43:14-0:43:19:**  So just expanding the range of activities on the site, as well as bringing in people  to do the horticulture that as you've just described, we are building a sort of bakery  kitchen on the site.  
**0:43:26-0:43:31:**  And we have a woman, a young woman called Henrietta Inman, who is a sort of celebrated  and published baker-cum-chef who's much to our pleasure basing herself here.  So she is going to be working very closely with the people who are doing the growing  
**0:43:39-0:43:40:**  to specify what we grow.  And then she's going to be using the produce on the farm in her cooking.  And I suspect much of that cooking will be directed towards people who are coming to  
**0:43:50-0:43:53:**  the site for activities on site.  And that brings me to the second thing that we're doing in terms of diversification, which  is that we're converting the farmhouse to be accommodation and we're building what we  
**0:44:02-0:44:10:**  call glamping pods, which we will use in the organic, in the the layout is as accommodation.  So people can come here for whether it might be for holidays, but more likely for events,  whether it's for courses or meetings or whatever it may be, people coming to do things involving  
**0:44:21-0:44:23:**  the site and so on.  So we're in that latter regard where we had a couple of organized tree walks just in the  last couple of weeks.  
**0:44:28-0:44:32:**  And we're now talking to various people who are would like to run courses here next year  in 2021.  So we're already talking to people who want to do courses in, let me think, agroforestry  
**0:44:39-0:44:47:**  in permaculture, in sourdough making, in mead making, in willow weaving, in landscape painting,  and so on.  The list goes on.  
**0:44:49-0:44:50:**  So that's very exciting.  So those will be people who come here to do things sort of linked to the farming or the  environment or the food and will base themselves here.  
**0:44:58-0:45:04:**  And we hope will then feel more closely connected and they will be eating the food that's cooked  here by Henrietta based upon what is grown here.  And then just to go back briefly to the glamping pods, our glamping pods are sort of small  
**0:45:14-0:45:19:**  timber structures that are designed very much for all year round people to sleep in.  And they're quite well fitted out.  And they're designed like a little six legged spider.  
**0:45:25-0:45:29:**  And then we've got a purpose built trailer that we use to move them around.  So we then move them around within the organic, the lay alleys, but also as the lay alleys  move around.  
**0:45:35-0:45:39:**  So they are part of the organic, they will be part of the organic rotation, just like  any other crop.  And the point of designing them that way is that they absolutely don't compromise the  
**0:45:45-0:45:46:**  farming at all.  We're not in the position of turning productive land into a campsite or something like that  that some farmers might do.  
**0:45:52-0:45:57:**  This is something which gives us another income stream, but also brings people to visit here  and so on, which is entirely without any compromise to the farm, it's entirely an additional layer  of activity.  
**0:46:05-0:46:11:**  So we see all of those things as working together, partly to increase the sort of financial stability  of the whole thing, but also to make it not just a farm producing food, but also a farm  which has a wider role in society, employing people and educating them and so on.  
**0:46:24-0:46:28:**  It's like we often hear about the eggmobiles and the mobile chicken hens, but actually  you use doing tourism, mobile infrastructure for tourism, it's good, it really fits with  the rotation.  
**0:46:37-0:46:42:**  I just wanted to add something about the produce is, so if I understand correctly, you're thinking  of that almost all your produce can be then directly transformed and sold on site, would  you have any surplus?  
**0:46:50-0:46:54:**  Ask me in a year's time.  At the moment we don't know how much of our produce Henrietta will be able to use and  how much surplus there will be, which depends partly in terms of how her operation is a  
**0:47:07-0:47:12:**  self-contained enterprise, it depends slightly on how big that grows and it depends very  much on the nature of people coming here and how many people come here.  If we end up with people staying here at the moment we're building six pods, each of those  
**0:47:20-0:47:24:**  could accommodate two or four people, we hope to have 12 pods in due course.  If those pods were occupied by people staying here for even half the year, that would be  an awful lot of food and I suspect she would indeed use all the produce that we produce,  
**0:47:35-0:47:37:**  but we're a long way from that yet.  So at the moment we still, at the moment in the short term, at least when it comes to  the fruit produce, we still sell that through small retail outlets in the area and with  
**0:47:46-0:47:52:**  the cereals and the lentils and so on, we sell those through a specialist online retailer  called Hodmerdods who are based in this area but actually cover the whole of the UK.  And the cereals, at the moment you have them milled somewhere else and then you still...  
**0:48:04-0:48:11:**  The cereals, the wheat in particular, we mill on site and then we supply, we do supply Hodmerdods  with some grain because some of their customers want grain, but most of what we supply them  with is flour that's milled on site in relatively small batches so that anybody who buys their  
**0:48:23-0:48:30:**  Hodmerdods, their Wakelings flour from Hodmerdods, it would have been milled no more than a matter  of days or weeks beforehand.  It won't have sat around getting stale and certainly the real bread specialists are very  
**0:48:37-0:48:42:**  keen to have fresh milled flour because of its additional flavour compared to what you  might call stale flour.  Rightly so.  
**0:48:46-0:48:52:**  And so all of this is sold, could be sold locally as well to the local community?  Yeah, so we had with our cherries for example, we sold some cherries, we supplied some cherries  to a local organic box scheme that operates in Norwich, which is a small city nearby.  
**0:49:04-0:49:10:**  But we also sold small quantities into the village shop, which is 10 minutes down the  road.  So different dimensions.  
**0:49:14-0:49:18:**  And how many people does the farm hire at the moment?  That's a good question.  So we have two guys who are part-time contractors who do the arable work, so the wheat and the  
**0:49:31-0:49:33:**  lentils and so on.  And their hours are very variable.  I suspect it's probably an average of about one day a week through the year, but it's  
**0:49:40-0:49:42:**  very variable.  We have another couple of guys who again are employed as and when who do the tree management.  Another woman has been dealing with our squash crop this year.  
**0:49:54-0:49:58:**  The horticulture operations will involve several people and indeed one of them is going to  be a community supported agriculture scheme.  So that will involve members of the community working on the site.  
**0:50:03-0:50:07:**  But not all of those people are, well, none of those people are our employees, some of  them are contractors.  But in some of them, I mean like Henrietta, that's her own enterprise and the horticulture  
**0:50:15-0:50:20:**  is going to be the enterprise of the two different groups of women who are doing it.  We will just be hosting them.  So the intended arrangement with them is that they will have an area of land on which to  
**0:50:25-0:50:28:**  grow their food crops.  And what we're discussing with them is that they won't pay us, or they only pay us a nominal  amount, but they will in exchange for using the land give us, let's say, 25% of what they  
**0:50:37-0:50:41:**  produce for Henrietta to cook in her kitchen.  So it will be more of a sort of collaborative arrangement rather than a commercial arrangement  with them supplying her with food in exchange for, sorry, ingredients in exchange for using  
**0:50:52-0:50:55:**  the land.  So the number of people working here, in a year or two's time, I think there could be  quite a lot of people working here involved in farming and food production, but they won't  
**0:51:03-0:51:08:**  necessarily be, or they certainly won't be full time and they probably won't be our employees.  But we're very keen to have a lot of people doing stuff on the land involving food and  farming and the environment.  
**0:51:16-0:51:22:**  Again, in contrast to the sorts of methods that are used elsewhere, which involve one  guy and a huge machine or whatever it might be.  For sure.  
**0:51:26-0:51:31:**  And it's going to become quite a hub when all of these different partnerships develop.  Well, we hope so.  We hope so.  
**0:51:33-0:51:37:**  That's going to be really, really nice.  And the people that manage the trees at the moment and in the future, that's yourself.  And are you working with somebody else as well?  
**0:51:44-0:51:50:**  Well, I say we've got a couple of guys who are expert arboriculturalists who've been  doing stuff here for 15 or so years.  So they really, they get there carrying on and they're making the management decisions  
**0:51:58-0:52:00:**  day to day.  So one of the questions that we usually ask our guests is about mistakes.  Now in your case, because you've come into the farm a bit later than your parents, it'll  
**0:52:14-0:52:15:**  be interesting to see your perspective.  I don't know if you'll be able to go so far back in time, but what are some of the key  mistakes that were done on the farm in terms of the tree lines, in terms of the design  
**0:52:26-0:52:30:**  and et cetera, that how would you do things differently in the farm?  So the very earliest tree lines, which are now the oldest trees, were planted 12 meters  apart.  
**0:52:37-0:52:42:**  And I think that was too close together because as the trees and the undergrowth has got mature,  you lose about three meters of width.  So you end up with an active area of about nine meters.  
**0:52:48-0:52:49:**  So I think that was a mistake.  Whereas the later lines are planted sort of 15 meters or 18 meters apart, and that's much  more of a, much more sustainable balance.  
**0:52:57-0:52:58:**  That's the first thing.  The second thing is, as I mentioned earlier, the way in which some of the timber trees  have been managed.  
**0:53:05-0:53:13:**  So for example, the cherry trees, I think they were, it would have been better if there  had been an early decision to say that we either want these as fruit or we want them  as timber, and then they'd be managed accordingly.  
**0:53:20-0:53:22:**  Whereas I think it's been a bit of a compromise.  So I think we haven't got the best of both worlds.  And then a third example, so this is slightly away from the farming, but it's in terms of  
**0:53:31-0:53:34:**  what we do with the produce.  As we've discussed, the residue of the willow and hazel coppice is all chipped.  And then the chipped biomass is used in a biomass boiler to produce heating and hot  
**0:53:47-0:53:49:**  water for the farmhouse.  Now that boiler was installed in the corner of the farmyard, and the way in which that's  been installed has proved not all the sort of location of it within the complex is not  
**0:54:03-0:54:08:**  optimised really for the handling and the processing and the moving around of the chips.  So I would say if you were starting again, you'd put the boiler in a different place  and in a place where you very specifically identified land or buildings in which you  
**0:54:19-0:54:23:**  could store large quantities of wood chip and handle it very easily.  Whereas we haven't got that because of our layout.  So we do what might be unnecessary handling of the wood chip, moving it around from place  
**0:54:33-0:54:37:**  to place because of our layout compromises.  Well, and that means more time, more machinery and so on.  So at the moment, when the chips were all chipped, when was that now about the end of  
**0:54:55-0:55:02:**  March into April, we now have a huge pile of wood chip sitting in the field.  We are going to have to move that pile of wood chip before the rain start in a few weeks  time because by October or November, we won't be able to drive a tractor onto that field  
**0:55:12-0:55:14:**  because it'll be so wet.  So we have to move enough of that wood chip into an area of the farmyard and then cover  it up for the winter to keep the boiler going.  
**0:55:22-0:55:26:**  Now if we had a different layout, if it had been sort of planned in a different way, then  we wouldn't be doing, we would have chipped it into its final destination and it wouldn't  have been moved around.  
**0:55:33-0:55:38:**  So there's things like that, which because when my parents first laid the whole place  out, they didn't have a wood chip boiler that came with an afterthought, not an afterthought,  but with a late tradition, they perhaps didn't have the flexibility they might have had.  
**0:55:46-0:55:53:**  But I would just say in answer to your lessons learned questions, because it all evolved,  it didn't necessarily evolve in the most efficient way.  We suffered the same problems at Massey Farm as well, where as things have evolved without  
**0:56:06-0:56:11:**  necessarily the exact planning from the beginning, which is very difficult to do, then we definitely  felt the consequences of inefficient work and inefficient spacing or placing of things.  But continuing with the wood chips and heating the home, are you happy with the efficiency  
**0:56:22-0:56:26:**  of that system of being able to use the wood chips to heat your home?  Is that a system you're happy with?  Well, it's very nice to think that the hot water in my shower comes from chips that come  
**0:56:37-0:56:43:**  from timber that's grown in our fields, just as it's very nice to have a big solar photovoltaic  array and think that our electricity will come from the sun.  And obviously that's a big contributor, a big sort of potential climate change benefit,  
**0:56:52-0:56:57:**  because our fuel is a very short cycle carbon capture.  So it's constantly being replenished in carbon terms.  So that's all great in those sorts of ways.  
**0:57:08-0:57:12:**  It's compromised, it's not as good as it could be, because we're doing unnecessary handling.  And we haven't yet got it right in terms of the technology and the techniques for harvesting  and shipping and so on.  
**0:57:18-0:57:21:**  Those are all things we need to think about to refine.  But the basic principle, I think, is great.  And do you have any surplus left from the border?  
**0:57:28-0:57:33:**  Let's say, I mean, we can imagine a thousand uses for wood chips from the no dig markets  garden to, for example, mulching trees.  So in terms of volumes, do you have that resource as well?  
**0:57:42-0:57:43:**  Ask me in a year or two.  I say why I say that because until a year ago, well, until three years ago, my parents  lived in this house.  
**0:57:54-0:57:57:**  My mum died in 2016 and then it was just my dad living in the house.  So his needs for heating and hot water were relatively modest.  If so, in that era, there was a lot of surplus wood chip.  
**0:58:07-0:58:12:**  As I mentioned, we're planning on having a lot more people using the house and therefore  a lot more showers and a lot more whatever.  So it may be that we get through a lot more wood chip.  
**0:58:18-0:58:23:**  I'm optimistic that we still have plenty, but we won't necessarily have a huge surplus.  But as I say, if you ask me that question in a year or two, I'll be able to give you  a better answer.  
**0:58:27-0:58:29:**  Well, definitely do that.  You're not going to get rid of us so easily.  Well, one question I had in mind, you know, listening earlier when you were talking about  
**0:58:39-0:58:44:**  the strategy and opening up the farm to visitors and doing a hub, you mentioned that it was  also part of economic viability.  And that kind of made me think, let's say I understand that it's probably like something  
**0:58:51-0:58:52:**  that you want to do.  And it seems very coherent to open up the farm and the project.  But if you were to put apart the fact that you want to do it, do you think that you could  
**0:59:00-0:59:07:**  run agroforestry system based only on production that would be economically viable?  And the reason why I ask this is because it's such a crucial information for anyone kind  of setting out as we are and, you know, planting the trees and planting out.  
**0:59:15-0:59:20:**  And I think it's great if you have some insight into that, bearing in mind that I know that  the farm hasn't been run as a business, as a conventional business for the last 25 years,  but just, you know, based on where you are now and your your estimations and feeling  
**0:59:30-0:59:32:**  about that.  So I think it could be.  I think we have a number of challenges, including that the things I described to you as mistakes,  
**0:59:43-0:59:47:**  which mean that we have higher costs than we might otherwise have.  I think also, as I described to you, we are reliant on sort of contractors and so on.  And that's a relatively expensive way of doing things for some of those activities.  
**0:59:56-1:00:01:**  So if we were doing the farming directly ourselves, that we didn't have labour costs, that would  be different economics.  I think you choose your crops carefully.  
**1:00:07-1:00:09:**  And I think, again, we have issues about the layout.  So there are areas where we have very big headlands of grass and so on, which are great  for biodiversity and so on, but not so good in terms of the cropping area.  
**1:00:19-1:00:24:**  So I think you could if you were designing the system from scratch, you could design  it differently and operate it differently to make it much more sustainable, even in  its own terms.  
**1:00:28-1:00:31:**  And particularly if you included things like intensive horticulture, which are much more  financially productive, then I think that would be the case.  But from where we are, I think we can certainly make it much more financially sustainable  
**1:00:41-1:00:47:**  than it has been, whether it's on this relatively small farm area, it would be completely viable  without any subsidies as a self standing commercial proposition, just as farming is harder to  say.  
**1:00:57-1:01:01:**  And I think equally, if you look across the hedge and look at the farm next door, where  they're growing 100 hectares at the moment of beans in a completely ordinary, conventional,  chemically assisted way, I don't think they're making much money in growing beans either.  
**1:01:11-1:01:14:**  I think they are reliant on the subsidies as well.  So I think sometimes the comparisons need to be carefully framed.  I couldn't agree more because we often have conversations with people and then you kind  
**1:01:24-1:01:30:**  of have to remind that we're not comparing a system that works economically, which would  be the conventional one to alternatives.  We're comparing a system that doesn't work economically and relies on subsidies and still  
**1:01:37-1:01:39:**  where farmers struggle to make an income.  So thanks for reminding us the right comparison.  I had another question, which is, if you look at the farmers around you and that agricultural  
**1:01:54-1:02:00:**  deserts and you compare it to what's happening in your land, what do you think is the biggest  barrier or the biggest limitation for other farmers to adopt agroforestry systems?  Well I think there's a, I suppose there's a big lack of understanding and a big sort  
**1:02:12-1:02:16:**  of information deficit.  I also think that, I mean, so occasionally, not occasionally, quite often we get contacted  by farmers who are interested in converting to some agroforestry.  
**1:02:25-1:02:28:**  I mean, it's an interesting phenomenon.  I've had contact several times in the last few months from sort of young, I mean, I say  young people, so people let's say in their 30s who are the sons and daughters of the  
**1:02:39-1:02:41:**  existing older farmers.  And as the children are looking to inherit their farms or whatever, they are interested  in changing the methods.  
**1:02:48-1:02:53:**  So I've had a number of contacts from those kinds of people.  And one of the things that, that's great to sort of hear that, one of the things I think  one of the challenges I think they face is that when they, if they were to introduce  
**1:03:03-1:03:09:**  an agroforestry system into a field, then obviously for the first few years, the tree  lines are purely a detriment because they're compromising your arable crop, but they're  not yet giving you any return in terms of fruit or nuts or timber or anything like that.  
**1:03:21-1:03:25:**  So you have to have a much longer term perspective, whether it's longer term climate change perspective,  sort of as a big picture perspective, or whether it's simply your own economics and farming,  you have to have a, you have to be in it for the long game because you've got a few years  
**1:03:36-1:03:42:**  at least of where you're, you have a field of wheat or whatever it might be with saplings  in and that must look quite frustrating for a while.  So obviously we have the advantage that the Wakeland site has long since grown through  
**1:03:49-1:03:55:**  those early years, but I suspect that's a significant barrier for people.  I can imagine.  And now you can, when you respond to them, you can link our podcast.  
**1:04:00-1:04:01:**  Absolutely.  Absolutely.  Absolutely.  
**1:04:03-1:04:04:**  Hopefully.  I know, no, I'm only joking, but I mean, hopefully that's what we can continue to explore in  the next episodes and really go into those practical challenges and obstacles because  
**1:04:14-1:04:19:**  they're actually more interesting to us than, you know, repeating again and again how amazing  agroforestry is.  But maybe that's when, when maybe some smart subsidies or I don't know if it's some alternative  
**1:04:28-1:04:31:**  financing methods, but there's, it's true that there's, there's a lot of innovation  required beyond what's going on in the field to enable a large scale transition of agroforestry.  I'm sure that's all entirely correct.  
**1:04:41-1:04:42:**  Yeah.  And we'll, we'll of course link everything to do with the the farm and your websites  and social media and would encourage anyone to just go and see these beautiful pictures  
**1:04:53-1:04:59:**  at the very least of a beautiful 25 year old trees in the middle of the English countryside.  It's quite a sight.  Thank you very much.  
**1:05:03-1:05:05:**  Thank you so much for listening to the episode with David.  We really hope that you enjoyed it.  All the links are below to his website and his social media and also to ours where you  
**1:05:11-1:05:13:**  can get lots more information.  And as always, we are looking forward to hearing your feedback and to have your questions as  well.  
**1:05:19-1:05:22:**  We want to get in touch with you and we want you to get in touch with us.  So please don't hesitate to go on our websites and get in and contact us through our different  contact forms or just send us an email.  
**1:05:28-1:05:42:**  So thank you so much and we will see you next time.  