---
title: #7 Creating regenerative supply chains based on multi strata agroforestry with Ryan Zinn from Dr. Bronner's
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.

---

### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2020-10-12)  

**0:00:00-0:00:16:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:23-0:00:27:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  these challenges.  
**0:00:33-0:00:38:**  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Hi everyone and welcome back to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:00:49-0:00:52:**  We're your hosts Etienne and Dimitri.  Today we're super happy to share with you an interview with Ryan Zinn from Dr Bronner.  Dr Bronner is actually one of the first companies to implement the regenerative organic certification  
**0:01:04-0:01:09:**  and they're really pioneers in transitioning agricultural systems towards more regenerative  practices through their supply chains.  And it's great because we're able to talk about this aspect with Ryan on a more like  
**0:01:16-0:01:23:**  global supply chain business level but we're also able to really get an insight on his  work on the field with smallholders and it's a really great way of understanding how agroforestry  works out in a totally different context across the world.  
**0:01:32-0:01:36:**  I think that Ryan shares with us some really important tips that we can also use in our  context in terms of how to manage diversity on the farms and this is you know a big topic  that we've already touched upon with many of the farmers and practitioners that we've  
**0:01:45-0:01:51:**  interviewed and so he shows to us how he's using infrastructure and the importance of  infrastructure that enables the farmers that they're working with to provide their supply  chains to diversify their farms.  
**0:02:00-0:02:04:**  And so again this links you know diversity with infrastructure and he's giving us some  practical info as to how they're making that work in their fields with the smallholder  farmers so it was really exciting to talk to Ryan and we hope that you enjoy the interview.  
**0:02:14-0:02:16:**  Hi Ryan, welcome to the podcast.  Thank you so much for having me, this is great.  Could we start maybe with an introduction of who you are and how you got into agroforestry?  
**0:02:25-0:02:31:**  Absolutely my name is Ryan Zinn and I work for an organic and fair trade soap company  based in the United States, Dr. Bronner's and Dr. Bronner's is really I would say a  pioneer in the space in that we've developed vertically integrated supply chains all over  
**0:02:44-0:02:49:**  the world to supply our raw materials and really our goal was to establish organic and  fair trade raw raw material supply chains and as luck would have it the vast majority  of our raw materials come from perennial or agroforestry systems.  
**0:02:58-0:03:05:**  I actually got started in agroforestry in the late 1990s when I worked in southern Mexico  at the time of one of the heights of the the Chiapas conflict where I would work with coffee  farmers and I was exposed to agroforestry in all of its different forms and there I  
**0:03:14-0:03:20:**  really became quite a big fan I would say of agroforestry as a technique and really  as an organizing concept for rural communities and it was there in working with coffee farmers  that I really began to learn and understand more of agroforestry systems as an organizing  
**0:03:31-0:03:32:**  concept.  And to set the scene could you tell us a bit why Dr. Bronner would you know why such a  company would get involved with regenerative agriculture in general and with agroforestry  
**0:03:43-0:03:45:**  as well?  Well that's a great question you know one of the things that happened with Dr. Bronner's  as a you know really kind of a small in what we call in the US like a counterculture company  
**0:03:55-0:04:02:**  in that it was vegan it was primarily you know the Castile soap and it had a very small  niche consumer base but about 15 to 20 years ago the family decided to make the decision  to transition all raw materials and we're talking about you know coconut oil primarily  
**0:04:14-0:04:19:**  but also palm oil, olive oil and some essential oils like mint oil and lavender oil all too  organic and this is at the time when the national organic standard here in the United States  was really beginning to take off and so as do many companies you know particularly in  
**0:04:29-0:04:35:**  the US and some in Europe you end up by you know most of your raw materials from brokers  or intermediaries and this is a good way to start your business because it allows you  to not invest so much capital in developing supply chains but what the the Bronner family  
**0:04:45-0:04:50:**  quickly realized was that despite the fact that you will have like this organic certificate  to accompany these raw materials you really have no idea about the integrity of the product  there's always risk of fraud and adulteration and then similarly you have really no idea  
**0:05:02-0:05:08:**  about the you know the livelihood of the farmers and the farm workers on the ground and so  our goal was to then find organic and fair trade supply chains but what we quickly found  was that there was in fact no certified fair trade palm oil for example or no certified  
**0:05:19-0:05:25:**  fair trade coconut oil and so as a result the Bronner family made this wild decision  to actually set up and invest in vertically integrated supply chains and so our first  organic and fair trade coconut oil project was in Sri Lanka and that was set up about  
**0:05:35-0:05:42:**  15 years ago and since coconut oil really is the backbone of the vast majority of our  products from there we really began to expand out you know our product line as well as our  supply chains and so since then we've expanded out on a number of agroforestry projects that  
**0:05:53-0:05:58:**  we've either set up ourselves in partnership with smallholder farmers or we work really  closely with third-party suppliers that have the same values and ethics that we do so right  now we've got a number of vertically integrated supply chains that we basically own and operate  
**0:06:09-0:06:16:**  in partnership with small farmers all around the world in Sri Lanka, Ghana, Samoa and in  India and then we work really closely with other third-party suppliers in places like  Palestine, Brazil, Paraguay and Ecuador.  
**0:06:26-0:06:31:**  And what's your role exactly in this whole organization then and all these events?  Yeah that's a good question you know one of the things you realize very quickly when you  work on the ground all over the world is that what you have in your job title doesn't always  
**0:06:41-0:06:47:**  necessarily you know go along with what the reality is on the ground so you know primarily  my focus is on designing systems, regenerative systems whether that's perennial and agroforestry  systems or that's more annual systems for essential oils like in the places like India  
**0:06:57-0:07:03:**  and the idea is that we want to support and accompany small farmers and you know really  one of the biggest challenges for small farmers all around the world is in many cases not  so much the practices themselves a lot of small farmers are pretty regenerative in their  
**0:07:11-0:07:16:**  practices out of necessity but they face a lot of challenges in getting their products  to market and actually being compensated fairly for what they produce.  So from our perspective that is to support or actually set up the infrastructure and  
**0:07:25-0:07:30:**  facilities to get their raw materials to market so that might be setting up like oil mills  for example in Ghana and Sri Lanka and in Samoa or it might be figuring out other ways  for farmers to diversify their production so that they can have a stable livelihood.  
**0:07:41-0:07:44:**  You know one of the things that we've noticed you know over the course of our journey the  last 15 years is you know our progression generally is to get farmers as we say in the  door in English you know we want to be able to give them an organic premium that reflects  
**0:07:55-0:07:58:**  all of the sort of investment that the farmers are doing.  We want to make sure that the payments are you know categorized and certified as fair  trade so that gets the farmers kind of on that first step but really you know despite  
**0:08:06-0:08:11:**  the fact that they're receiving a fair payment for let's say palm you know their palm fruit  in Ghana the reality is that farmers need to really diversify not only to create climate  resilient systems on the farm but also to be really economically resilient.  
**0:08:22-0:08:27:**  So what we want to do is make sure that we have pathways for farmers to market other  crops that quite frankly you know Dr. Bronner's will actually never use things like cassava  or taro or turmeric or cocoa for example and so our goal is to utilize sort of the framework  
**0:08:40-0:08:45:**  and the infrastructure that we have set up in these communities to be able to develop  markets and opportunities for farmers to be able to sell their products either at a premium  to importing countries in Europe and the United States or to actually distribute locally so  
**0:08:56-0:09:01:**  that way local communities can actually have access to really organic regenerative and  healthy food.  We'll definitely come back to a lot of these things you just introduced to us but first  
**0:09:07-0:09:12:**  we wanted to really have a clear idea of what your projects look on the ground and this  is where Dimitri is going to take over from me.  Yeah we were very curious as to what the designs look like on the ground when you're working  
**0:09:21-0:09:23:**  with these farmers.  Really so I should say you know the designs really vary by kind of country by country  community by community whereas in the South Pacific and the Polynesian indigenous culture  
**0:09:35-0:09:41:**  really has this deep history in agroforestry that you know is very vibrant to this day.  Other countries have different experiences so I'll talk a little bit about Ghana because  that's a good example of you know what we see as maybe a composite experience and so  
**0:09:49-0:09:56:**  you know a lot of countries and smallholders particularly have gotten a lot of bad information  and education from let's say government extension agents or in many cases even agrochemical  companies that really focus on building these you know monoculture systems.  
**0:10:06-0:10:09:**  They say you know even though you've got three to four hectares you should just plant oil  palm and that's it.  And so there's a lot of like you know bad history and bad experiences really over the  
**0:10:16-0:10:21:**  last you know couple of decades and so part of our goal is to be able to provide a pathway  for farmers to convert.  So you know when you look at your sort of average farmer in the eastern region of Ghana  
**0:10:29-0:10:34:**  you know in general what they have are sort of like a mosaic approach to production.  So they may dedicate you know one or two you know one to five hectares to oil palm for  example one to five hectares to really densely planted cocoa and then maybe a hectare or  
**0:10:45-0:10:49:**  two for home production you know some type of maize and pumpkin system.  And you know as farmers begin to replant over the course of you know the lifetime of their  cocoa or palm plantations our goal is to then jump in with opportunities both with training  
**0:11:01-0:11:06:**  but also capital and resources to be able to create a diversified system.  So in this particular case our goal really is to in cooperation with farmers is to figure  out hey look what is it that you want to produce for a cash crop.  
**0:11:15-0:11:20:**  You know as Dr. Bronner's and our project in Ghana will buy you know all of the oil  palm that they can produce.  But similarly it's important for them to have a diversified income for other opportunities  
**0:11:26-0:11:31:**  things like cocoa for example which is another important cash crop for West Africa.  So our goal is to look at a given farm will place it basically on a grid and a consultation  with the farmers will come up with a plan and generally this includes a combination  
**0:11:41-0:11:44:**  of multi strata species right.  So first of all we want to make sure that there is enough both biomass species whether  those are perennial ground covers like praeria which provides enough ground cover biomass  
**0:11:55-0:11:57:**  and nitrogen fixing elements.  We also want to make sure that there are you know tall timber trees that can be used either  as fuel wood or also just basically you know as shade.  
**0:12:05-0:12:09:**  You know one of the challenges in West Africa particularly with cocoa is that you know much  of it is really densely planted and there's actually no shade in many cases.  And farmers have been sort of taught by you know agrochemical and extension agents that  
**0:12:20-0:12:24:**  you know if you plant shade in a cocoa plantation you're going to lose production which is quite  the opposite.  And they actually deal with quite a bit more pest pressure if they don't have any shade.  
**0:12:29-0:12:33:**  So what we want to do is make sure that there's a combination of cash crops.  So in this particular case it's cocoa and oil palm that there is enough fruit trees  that are able to sort of round out their local food basket in the economy.  
**0:12:44-0:12:47:**  And then we also look at a number of other sort of opportunistic crops and whether that  might be in succession things like beans and maize and pumpkins for example or some what  we call maybe more midterm crops which would include things like cassava taro or what they  
**0:12:59-0:13:02:**  call cocoa yam in Ghana and other species.  And so our goal really is to create a system that reflects nature but is organized and  I would say optimized in a certain way that after establishment really takes farmer you  
**0:13:15-0:13:19:**  know labor down to the most minimal other than for pruning and harvesting.  But then actually it sort of creates the sort of it sort of maximizes their production in  a way that I think is really important because right now you know truthfully you know there's  
**0:13:28-0:13:31:**  just not enough production for farmers to actually make a living.  So it's really quite shocking that farmers continue to farm despite the fact that it's  quite difficult to say nothing of sort of the climatic challenges that they're facing  
**0:13:39-0:13:40:**  as well.  So really our goal is to come up with a system that both reflects their own abilities you  know what they have in terms of labor for example what they want to do in terms of their  
**0:13:48-0:13:55:**  production of cash crops whether that's you know a cocoa dominated system or a oil palm  dominated system but make sure that there's the right balance of shade trees for example  enough biomass species to actually keep the fertility in the system is going and enough  
**0:14:06-0:14:09:**  income and food during the succession period.  So in most cases you know cocoa and oil palm really won't begin to mature and produce efficiently  for a decent income till about you know depending on the species or the varieties I should say  
**0:14:20-0:14:23:**  you know about five years since we want to make sure that there's enough income in the  system for farmers and as a result that means that we would maybe lean focus and focus primarily  on things like cassava sort of in that lower strata you know early cycle crops to be able  
**0:14:36-0:14:40:**  to actually make sure that there's income and you know I think one thing that's important  to realize is that you know I've seen all of these amazing you know designs for centropic  agriculture and you know diversified agroforestry systems and I think they're all fantastic  
**0:14:49-0:14:54:**  because you know conceptually you know they're an amazing approach to try to replicate nature  they can sequester carbon they can do all these things but without really the infrastructure  in place to be able to accommodate the system it becomes really difficult for farmers so  
**0:15:03-0:15:07:**  there's no sense in you know growing you know cassava and turmeric and ginger and all these  other crops in the early cycles if you have no place to sell them.  So really our goal is to find opportunities either to process them locally and distribute  
**0:15:16-0:15:21:**  nationally in Ghana or to process and then export so that farmers can actually receive  a premium and I should just say you know one of our experiences in Samoa has been really  interesting you know we planted a fair amount of papaya in some of their early trials and  
**0:15:33-0:15:38:**  what we ended up with was just too much papaya I mean it was just like you know pretty wildly  everybody was sick of eating papaya by the end of the by the end of the year so we want  to do is to be dynamic and flexible enough to meet the needs of farmers and then to be  
**0:15:48-0:15:54:**  able to accommodate any surplus or other crops that can actually generate income for farmers  so I apologize if that was a little bit long-winded but that's that's kind of a rougher approach  to do how we think about the systems.  
**0:16:02-0:16:08:**  That's um no it's been a very elaborate and interesting description but in all of this  description you haven't really mentioned or you haven't talked about what the farmers  produce for Dr. Bronner right it really seems that you're helping the farmers before you're  
**0:16:18-0:16:21:**  trying to make sure they produce for Dr. Bronner where does where does Dr. Bronner come into  here are you making sure that their cash crop is is as part of your supply chain?  Absolutely so in in Ghana particular case you know our we have a mill in the eastern  
**0:16:34-0:16:40:**  region that processes palm fruit oil palm and so all of that palm oil is really critical  for like bar soap right because of the the fatty acid composition and so our focus there  as farmers begin to replant is to make sure that there is sufficient palm oil in the system  
**0:16:52-0:16:58:**  that they can continue to supply us but also that there's enough other crops that are will  kind of reduce the overhead of farmers as well so we basically take on all of their  palm oil that we can and right now what we're trying to figure out is where do we prioritize  
**0:17:06-0:17:13:**  next in terms of facilitating you know post-harvest you know manufacturing or processing and so  right now I think where we're landing on is primarily things like cocoa because that's  a big challenge for farmers to fetch a fair price there and especially to convert to organic  
**0:17:22-0:17:27:**  is a big challenge in West Africa and then also finding other opportunities but you know  to be honest at the end end Dimitri this is important you know in a way because we could  probably continue on and you know buy you know monocultured organic and fair trade oil  
**0:17:38-0:17:43:**  palm really long term there's two things that really worry me from just a strictly business  perspective one you know the economics of smallholder agriculture is just not so favorable  that that young generations are actually looking to go farm in most cases they look at their  
**0:17:55-0:17:58:**  experience of their parents and they're saying hey look this doesn't make sense for me to  continue on if it's going to be hard work and very little return so we want to create  a system where it is rewarding for young farmers and is attractive enough for them to continue  
**0:18:09-0:18:14:**  to farm because if they don't farm then we don't have a business and then similarly you  know as we're seeing you know at virtually all of our projects there is some type of  climate impact whether it is you know various fluctuations in degrees it could be extended  
**0:18:26-0:18:31:**  droughts or rains or it could be things like you know typhoons and tornadoes and hurricanes  that you know really impact the farm's production and so what we want to do is to make sure  that we have a climate resilient system built in that actually safeguards not only the farmer's  
**0:18:42-0:18:48:**  livelihood but you know quite frankly ours as well. And at the moment these plots or  these tests and these different designs to what scale are you able to deploy them are  you just testing them out on test sites or are you already deploying that through the  
**0:18:57-0:19:04:**  supply chain? So it really depends by country so in the particular case of Samoa we just  wrapped up a project that was actually funded through the World Bank interestingly enough  that was focused primarily on you know climate change adaptation which is a big challenge  
**0:19:15-0:19:23:**  in the South Pacific and there we planted upwards of about 350 hectares of diversified  multi strata agroforestry systems with 500 farmer families. So that was our first step  in terms of replanting portions of their farm so the farms in Samoa for example tend to  
**0:19:35-0:19:40:**  be quite a bit bigger anywhere between 10 to 50 hectares and so what we wanted to do  was start I would say small and have farmers dedicated about three hectares of production  to really intense you know diversified agroforestry systems as a jumping off point. But overall  
**0:19:53-0:19:57:**  when you work with that many farmer families then you end up with you know decent number  of hectares. In the particular case of Ghana it's a little bit slower because you know  farmers as they look at new technologies generally they're not going to commit their entire production  
**0:20:08-0:20:12:**  to a new technology they may not have much experience with. So our approach there has  been a little bit different. We started several years back with a few pilot farms that we  owned and managed to be used as trading sites and then with a handful of our own staff and  
**0:20:22-0:20:27:**  some real key farmers to be able to begin to plant these different models on their own  land and now moving forward we're looking to expand that out quite significantly with  you know dozens of farmers and you know many hectares of land to be able to expand that  
**0:20:37-0:20:42:**  model out. And I should say you know we've got basic principles that we would like to  see implemented you know that means that there's diversification certainly that there is a  biomass and fertility cycling through the system and then shade certainly needs to be  
**0:20:53-0:20:58:**  a priority particularly in West Africa. But from there you know farmers may choose this  you know sort of whatever crop mix that most suits them well. You know we don't want to  take that away necessarily from them but really make sure that you know in case of Ghana oil  
**0:21:06-0:21:12:**  palm is really kind of at the core. And then you know right now we're in the process of  designing a few pilots in India primarily with fodder species. You know there's a big  challenge there in terms of both biomass and fertility. And while the farmers that we work  
**0:21:24-0:21:30:**  with grow annual crops primarily usually a rotation of mint some type of staple grain  or rice and then any combination of leguminous crops or other types of crops. One of the  things we notice is that for the dairy and the cattle population is that they have very  
**0:21:43-0:21:48:**  poor quality pasture and really have very little nutrition. And so the idea would be  then to create a number of fodder banks where farmers could actually grow perennial fodder  species that can supplement or be the primary feed source for their livestock. And then  
**0:22:00-0:22:06:**  lastly in Sri Lanka because the vast majority of production there usually goes hand in hand  with dairy cows and pasture. We're looking at different ways to actually improve both  the pasture quality which is a big challenge in some tropical countries. But then like  
**0:22:15-0:22:21:**  I said create systems that really capitalize on perennial fodder systems that will take  some of the pressure off of the ground cover and perhaps actually allow for farmers to  intensify their dairy herds by having better quality perennial fodder available for their  
**0:22:33-0:22:36:**  farmers.  This is a huge diversity clearly a huge diversity of expertise that's needed to consult and  help the farmers with all these systems. So where do you get your knowledge from?  
**0:22:47-0:22:53:**  Well that's a great question. So we are likely to have a great combination of local expertise  on the ground. Each project has its share of local technicians and field officers that  is required out of both our approach but also the organic standards required that we provide  
**0:23:09-0:23:13:**  training. So we hire local staffers to be able to do that and be able to implement these  programs in collaboration with farmers. And then we've also worked with a couple of great  consultants and technicians that have a lot of deep history and knowledge in the agroforestry  
**0:23:24-0:23:31:**  world. And so one of our primary partners is an organization based out of Bolivia which  is called Ecotop. And so they've emerged really I think probably out of the same school of  Ernst Gottsch and those folks in the centropic agricultural system. And so we try to balance  
**0:23:42-0:23:48:**  out a combination of sort of international consultants and our own expertise with that  of local technicians to make sure that what we're proposing actually makes sense and it  has a greater likelihood of survival. Once you have this knowledge how do you make  
**0:23:59-0:24:02:**  sure that it really responds to the needs of the local farmers? I understand you have  a lot of local partners but what is the process for getting those ideas out there and those  techniques? That is a great question. So you know I'll  
**0:24:10-0:24:17:**  use probably our example in Samoa is one of our sort of like best test cases. So you know  early on we've done a number of surveys with a small sample of farmers to understand really  kind of like what their priorities are and what their plans are. So that gives us a base  
**0:24:28-0:24:33:**  of knowledge that's really really important because if we come up with a crazy idea you  know from internationals or from the Europe or the United States then they just look at  us like we're totally crazy. And then the other aspect is that you know farmers all  
**0:24:42-0:24:46:**  over the world they get all these proposals all the time that you know somebody comes  in and says hey look we want to buy you know whatever you know 50 tons of cassava or something  and then they never show up. So farmers are generally pretty I would say cautious in many  
**0:24:56-0:25:01:**  cases in terms of you know developing commercial relationships. So I would say first off it's  really important for you know commercial partners to have deep roots and be really committed  with the communities that they're working with. If you don't have that sort of relationship  
**0:25:10-0:25:15:**  and trust built in the chances of actually developing these systems is really really  limited. And then from there you know it's a consultation process where we determine  with each individual farmer you know aside from those things that are really core to  
**0:25:24-0:25:30:**  the project like biomass and shade species you know what do they like to produce and  where do they see the biggest business opportunity in addition to what they supply for Dr. Bronner's.  And they basically choose those crop species themselves and that in a way really empowers  
**0:25:40-0:25:46:**  farmers to make those choices. And then we generally start relatively small primarily  through training. So what we've done is create a number of pilot test farms that act as outdoor  classrooms for farmers. And you know one of the things that we talk a lot about in you  
**0:25:58-0:26:03:**  know farmer extension is to say you know show don't tell. You know farmers A would like  to see with their own eyes how the system works. They don't want to see a video. They  don't want to hear you talk about it in a classroom. They actually want to go into the  
**0:26:11-0:26:18:**  field and see what it looks like. So we established a number of pilots there to be able to really  demonstrate the technique but also really the potential. You know there's a lot of myths  you know that you come across sometimes in working in rural communities all over the  
**0:26:28-0:26:33:**  world. And so a lot of times there's sort of fear that species might be competing with  each other or there's not enough water or you know those types of things that are quite  common. So what we want to do is actually demonstrate that you know these diversified  
**0:26:42-0:26:49:**  systems really you know many cases planted very closely in terms of the spacing not only  you know work together you know in many cases but actually can actually produce quite a  bit more. And so that I think is something that's really important for farmers. And then  
**0:26:58-0:27:04:**  secondly you know our goal as you know trainers in many cases is to draw out some of that  traditional knowledge that farmers already have. You know I'll be honest I've been to  some farms you know all over the world that you know go far and above of what I've ever  
**0:27:12-0:27:17:**  expected as far as you know really diversified agroforestry systems. And so it's really working  with those farmers to really highlight their experience because you know as an outsider  farmers you know are less likely to trust me than they might you know their neighbor  
**0:27:26-0:27:30:**  for example. And so our goal is to really you know find those those farmers that are  taking the lead and have some experience because when when farmers learn from their peers there's  a greater chance that you have you know better adoption. And then from there our goal is  
**0:27:41-0:27:45:**  to be able to monitor and accompany the farmers experience within the first couple of years  of establishment. So that means regular visits to a troubleshoot any problems that they might  have. You know we want to be able to monitor seedling mortality and see if there's any  
**0:27:59-0:28:03:**  reason why a given you know cropper species is in fact you know maybe dying you know at  a higher rate than others. And that requires us to have engagement on going with farmers.  And then the next step really is to monitor yields right. You want to see what is actually  
**0:28:15-0:28:20:**  being produced on the farm. And that requires a fair amount of note taking by farmers and  buyer field staff. But we want to be able to prove to say hey look not only is the system  more productive but potentially over time it will actually be less labor. Because our  
**0:28:32-0:28:36:**  sort of experience at least my experience is that once you have an established and relatively  mature system in place it actually reduces your labor costs quite a bit. Whether that  is contractors you have to buy you know you know purchase through the neighborhood or  
**0:28:45-0:28:49:**  that's your own time. We want to make sure that we actually reduce those labor costs.  But to get there you have to kind of go through this establishment phase which can be a little  bit tough because it's generally more work at the early stages. But overall you know  
**0:28:58-0:29:03:**  one of our goals is for farmers to keep this basically what we call like a farm diary.  And that allows for them to you know make sure that they are recording everything that  they're doing whether it is labor, species you know that are performing well or maybe  
**0:29:12-0:29:17:**  not performing well. Or in some cases you know we want to see what the production looks  like. Ideally we don't want to sacrifice a farmer's income for having a beautiful you  know food forest but doesn't necessarily do much for their income. There's no chance of  
**0:29:28-0:29:32:**  them continuing that on. We want to be able to monitor that going on. This actually allows  us to make decisions on the ground and make changes as needed. You know one of the things  that we did in Samoa was plant a huge variety of annual biomass species that would allow  
**0:29:46-0:29:51:**  for farmers to really build up that biomass and soil fertility in the first year during  establishment. And then what we found was that all of these invasive snails really like  these biomass species and so they went in and you know ate them all up and we had to  
**0:29:59-0:30:04:**  kind of come up with a different plan. But you know had we not been working with farmers  really closely we would never have known. You know I think too many you know planting  projects go in, they'll plant species and then they won't see farmers again you know  
**0:30:12-0:30:16:**  for another five years. And when they come back you know the system has not you know  worked well because they haven't really provided that monitoring and accompaniment.  You gave enough so much information it's fascinating. You know with the Massey farm and you know  
**0:30:27-0:30:32:**  me currently in Brazil etc. we have quite a lot of we have an understanding or let's  say we're quite familiar with the syntropic systems. And one of the critics of the system  of the syntropic systems is the labor cost that's involved with managing the system right.  
**0:30:42-0:30:47:**  I mean all this there's you know there's the chop and drop technique and it requires huge  labor interventions to manage you know even if it is five hectares it's a lot of labor.  And so I'm very interested to find out how did because you mentioned it now how did you  
**0:30:59-0:31:03:**  manage to and your farmers and all the teams that you're working with how did you manage  to reduce that need, reduce that labor requirement in this type of stratified biomass producing  tropical systems. Yeah that's a great point Dimitri. I think you know in general farmers  
**0:31:20-0:31:28:**  are a little hesitant in some cases to you know adopt this the service and tropic approach  for that same reason right. They see you know that their workload is multiplying exponentially.  And so really there's a couple of approaches that we've kind of looked at. One of the things  
**0:31:40-0:31:47:**  that we do when we evaluate a farmer for their suitability for a project like this is to  see how much family labor or contractors they have to be able to actually implement this  in their early stages. Certainly if there is a you know a farmer and all of his or her  
**0:31:59-0:32:04:**  children have now left the farm and they live in the city and it's just him by himself or  her by herself they're probably not a great candidate. So we want to start first and just  do an inventory to see what is available and you know what has been the recent experience.  
**0:32:14-0:32:19:**  And second we're looking at two things. One is to figure out how to best take advantage  of different technologies in particular implements and tools to be able to streamline that process.  So for example in Ghana you know they're you know sort of maintaining even just in the  
**0:32:32-0:32:38:**  palm monocultures with you know prairie cover cropping their you know hand labor is quite  expensive and you know quite time consuming. So we've been able to sort of work with local  contractors to substitute you know like electric or gasoline powered you know streamers or  
**0:32:51-0:32:57:**  brush cutters for the traditional machetes. And so as a result then that basically reduces  their workload and cost quite a bit. Though we're still looking at you know different  options as well. You know one of my favorite things to do is talk with other agroforestry  
**0:33:05-0:33:09:**  folks and figure out what tools are they using to do these types of things. And especially  kind of on the larger plantations you can actually use you know mechanized you know  weeders and brush cutters and things like that at a greater success rate. And then lastly  
**0:33:20-0:33:25:**  you know one of the things that we really tried to do is look at sort of this element  as a potential opportunity. You know one of the things that is a big challenge all over  the world is just you know unemployment especially for young people. And so potentially this  
**0:33:35-0:33:41:**  could be an opportunity for young people to actually be trained in the maintenance and  I would say probably a bigger challenge is the you know the tree pruning especially as  trees get quite tall it becomes a lot more challenging. And so we're hoping you know  
**0:33:50-0:33:56:**  as time goes on to be able to support teams of young contractors to be able to provide  these services but with tools and at a reasonable rate in the event that farmers take on a relatively  large you know plot of land that the plant in an agroforestry system but quite can't  
**0:34:06-0:34:11:**  manage it themselves. So you know I would say you know looking at those opportunities  might be one possible way to tackle this problem.  Have you found that it is worth investing in biomass tree producing species even if  
**0:34:23-0:34:27:**  you have to invest in all this pruning work?  I would say you know if you ask me I would say it's absolutely worth it. You know one  of the analogies I like to tell farmers it's as if you you know if you were to plant a  
**0:34:38-0:34:45:**  you know your grid or your plot and it was all just cash crop species it might look good  and you might have some decent production early on. But the reality is it's like having  a beautiful you know sports car like a Lamborghini but then putting in like very bad gas you  
**0:34:54-0:35:00:**  know. And so in the end you know you're not going to be performing optimally. And so that  you know sometimes makes sense for farmers. And I would say you know part of it is that  they have to kind of get over the hump of those first couple of years. And so we certainly  
**0:35:09-0:35:16:**  understand that. And we in fact try to come up with different alternatives for farmers  to sort of manage that you know in the event that they don't have sort of the labor available  or quite frankly sometimes they're quite old and so they're unable to do some of these  
**0:35:25-0:35:30:**  kind of more laborious things. So because the systems are relatively young I would say  less than five years it's really a little bit you know maybe early to say whether or  not farmers have totally adopted this process wholeheartedly. But certainly something that  
**0:35:41-0:35:45:**  we'll continue to monitor.  Because as the as the trees grow it's expected to have more work with the pruning right?  You might have less work with other types of you know initiation phase labor but you'll  
**0:35:56-0:36:02:**  have more work managing these biomass producing trees. Is that is that what you guys are expecting  to happen?  That's what we're anticipating. So I think there's two sort of you know concerns along  
**0:36:08-0:36:13:**  those lines. One certainly is the labor you know and that that is something that we can't  underestimate. And the second one is really you know a centropic or diversified agroforestry  system really requires much more engagement by the farmer than they might have done previously.  
**0:36:27-0:36:31:**  You know it's really easy if you're just growing a monoculture of coconuts you know with some  cattle and you know some you know sort of ground species you know cover crops you don't  have to worry about the timing of your pruning or harvesting as much. But as we look to incorporate  
**0:36:41-0:36:47:**  more biomass and shade species you know the timing of that pruning is really critical.  And if you don't actually prune according to the season you might have challenges with  you know sort of like ripening or maturing of your coco pods or your citrus or what have  
**0:36:59-0:37:05:**  you. So those are all things that need to be sort of continually trained. And I think  you know by providing enough incentives for farmers to continue to sort of maintain their  system hopefully we can have enough momentum that they'll continue on you know really with  
**0:37:15-0:37:17:**  this approach.  As you include more diversity in these systems are then the farmers able to sell this diversity?  Do they have the markets then to bring that produce to and actually sell it?  
**0:37:29-0:37:33:**  Yeah so that's an absolutely important point at the end. You know this is one of the things  as I mentioned before in Samoa we ended up with a whole bunch of papaya because that  was something that was gross relatively quickly in the establishment phase. But then farmers  
**0:37:43-0:37:47:**  end up with a whole bunch of papaya and no market. So really what we want to do is make  sure we have a good balance and then figure out how to best allocate that production.  So in most cases our goal is basically divided kind of what I call like three buckets or  
**0:37:59-0:38:05:**  three you know sort of categories. One Dr. Bronner's will take on all of their coconut  production or palm production or coco production to be able to process and then export with  an organic and fair trade premium. Second you have sort of these new emerging opportunity  
**0:38:17-0:38:24:**  crops which I would call like cassava, turmeric and ginger and others. And there we're in  the process of developing the infrastructure and the processing facilities to actually  accommodate that production and then to sell. So for example in Samoa we are going to build  
**0:38:36-0:38:43:**  a facility to manage the sort of harvesting cleaning and processing of ginger and turmeric  because that was one of the crops that we noticed that produces quite well in the first  couple of years and that could actually fetch a decent price internationally. And the same  
**0:38:52-0:38:58:**  thing for cassava in Ghana for example. We're in the process of building out that system  to be able to accommodate that production. And then lastly we want to make sure that  there's an opportunity for farmers to sell into their local markets or just have enough  
**0:39:06-0:39:11:**  food for their families. And so we're looking at a couple of different ways of accommodating  that. So for example in Ghana at the mill we have several hundred workers that work  at the mill and so we provide meals for them there and so our kitchen will then be able  
**0:39:22-0:39:27:**  to accommodate the farmers production and buy their produce to be able to prepare in  the kitchen itself. That's not a long term strategy as the system begins to develop and  expand but certainly we're looking at local marketplaces in urban areas to have access  
**0:39:38-0:39:43:**  to sort of fresh and regenerative products as well. So luckily we have a fantastic team  in Ghana who are already thinking about these things and have already discussed ways to  actually convey that produce to Accra to be able to sell in the local markets and to ensure  
**0:39:53-0:39:58:**  that there's enough income for farmers. But this is kind of an ongoing quest that we've  been dealing with because the reality is is without that incentive to have this diversified  system it's really difficult for farmers to commit this sort of time you know this investment  
**0:40:10-0:40:15:**  into a diversified system only for it to just sort of compost in the field. Yeah sure but  just to understand the extent to which Dr. Braun is involved if I understand you do provide  all this support in terms of infrastructure and transformation and getting the produce  
**0:40:24-0:40:29:**  to markets even on the ones that you weren't originally buying but where does that stop?  I mean is it just a kind of transition phase and then you would you'd hopefully have the  farmers manage that on their own? Is it then that once you've provided the infrastructure  
**0:40:38-0:40:44:**  you also actually buy that produce as Dr. Brauner? So you know one of the things that  we've found ourselves doing in the last couple of years is to get in the business of trading  so that means finding marketplaces at least internationally that farmers wouldn't be able  
**0:40:56-0:41:03:**  to do by themselves and so that means that engaging you know buyers whether that is you  know organic and fair trade and you know manufacturers in Europe or in the United States. And so  as a result what we'd like to do is sort of kickstart that process in so far as we can  
**0:41:17-0:41:22:**  be useful and provide a service. So you know our partners and project in India while we  buy all of the mint oil that we need for our soaps there they also produce a number of  other crops that are really really useful so they're now sending you know organic and  
**0:41:32-0:41:38:**  fair trade peanuts to Germany. They're also sending holy basil or Tulsi to a healthcare  company here in the United States and so where we can sort of facilitate and make those connections  that's really valuable right even though we don't necessarily benefit financially from  
**0:41:48-0:41:53:**  that it means that the projects themselves are much more stable and it reduces their  overhead and costs. So in a way it's kind of an indirect way for us to support the project  in farmers that we would not necessarily sort of you know capitalize it on ourselves. It's  
**0:42:05-0:42:11:**  kind of like the diversity in having to have diversity in the farms is obliging you also  to diversify your business in a way right? Yeah I mean that's a great point I think you  know it's you know our sort of journey I would say is like you know we thought it was really  
**0:42:21-0:42:26:**  just enough to be able to buy organic raw materials. We realized that wasn't enough  we needed more engagement with farmers and then as you see you know to actually run a  business and to stimulate and incentivize diversification you know you have to accompany  
**0:42:36-0:42:40:**  farmers along that way and you know ultimately our goal would be for the projects to be able  to manage that process themselves but you know quite frankly you know there's enough  challenges on the ground working with you know several hundred or several thousand small  
**0:42:49-0:42:55:**  holder farmers and managing that just on our primary work alone. So insofar as that we  can support that process and that really that transition to diversity and resilience then  we're doing our job I think. And do you think this diversity and this resilience would be  
**0:43:05-0:43:10:**  a model that farmers could adopt even if they weren't selling the produce abroad or do you  think it's really attached to being able to sell with a premium? Well you know really  you know my sort of approach is what we call here in the US you know the campsite rule  
**0:43:19-0:43:23:**  you want to leave where you're you know working or living better off than where you found  it so even eventually you know Dr. Bronner's you know disappears for whatever reason that  farmers will continue on with sort of organic production and really this diversified approach  
**0:43:34-0:43:42:**  and you know I see this actually as a kind of like a test pilot that might be useful  and inspiration you know for other places in the world or even in Ghana and Samoa even  if it has no direct commercial connection to a buyer in the United States or Europe  
**0:43:50-0:43:56:**  for example. You know I see it you know really from a couple of different angles one certainly  there's a need to produce more you know food and fuel and medicinal plants ecologically  and I think agroforestry is the best way to do that and I also see a couple of co-benefits  
**0:44:10-0:44:15:**  that need to be incorporated into any you know sustainable development goals or programs  developed by you know national or local governments. Certainly we have a problem with employment  for young people and so I feel like agroforestry provides much more opportunities than just  
**0:44:27-0:44:32:**  growing conventionally or with monocultures. Certainly there needs to be a way to take  land potentially out of production if we can produce more on less land through agroforestry  then that allows us to leave land to nationally regenerate and go back to its wild state as  
**0:44:42-0:44:46:**  opposed to you know this massive expansion that we're seeing in places like Indonesia  and Brazil and other places. And then lastly I see as farmers begin to look at this as  a response to sort of climate change this just really builds in what I would call insurance  
**0:44:57-0:45:02:**  for them going forward. You know one of the things that we've seen really in the coffee  sector particularly in Central America and Southern Mexico is this you know widespread  infestation of this coffee rust La Roya which has been just decimating the coffee marketplace  
**0:45:15-0:45:20:**  in these communities and as farmers begin to respond you know my you know sort of view  and experience experience has been it hasn't been sort of these improved varieties of coffee  necessarily that are gonna save the day for coffee communities but it's really this diversification  
**0:45:29-0:45:34:**  and returning to much more sort of traditional agroforestry approaches. So I you know I my  friends always get tired of me always talking about agroforestry but I do really feel like  it's you know one of the few techniques that you know can actually has multiple benefits  
**0:45:45-0:45:51:**  and you know above and beyond just producing you know raw materials for for committed you  know fair trade companies. So hopefully our approach will actually provide like a I don't  know I would hate to use this metaphor but kind of like a lifeboat or sometimes they  
**0:46:02-0:46:07:**  call it like a lighthouse to provide inspiration information to be able to expand the model  even if it isn't for you know cash crops to send sell to an external market for example.  So Ryan earlier on you mentioned the importance of infrastructure to be able to to be able  
**0:46:21-0:46:26:**  to provide solutions for the farmers to to maintain these diversified systems and that's  something that with Etienne we've often very often talked about and something that in the  podcast we want to dig deeper into and so I'd love to know what are in in your experience  
**0:46:37-0:46:41:**  with Dr Bronner and with these thousands of smallholders what are the key you know pieces  of infrastructure that are missing for these types of farmers in order to adopt and to  scale these types of agroforestry systems? Yeah that's a that's a great question Dimitri  
**0:46:53-0:46:57:**  you know infrastructure really is so key and this is one of the things I've noticed working  with smallholders all over the world is that in many cases they are you know doing great  things or in many cases feeding their families but really there's a lot of missing elements  
**0:47:06-0:47:12:**  that are either just unavailable to them or there's just structural challenges to actually  be able to advance these things and so I see it you know kind of you know pre-implementation  and post-implementation so really to start things off you know farmers need you know  
**0:47:23-0:47:28:**  capital you know there's a lot of good studies out there about the establishment costs for  you know like an average hectare of a diversified agroforestry system and in general you're  looking at anywhere between you know like 1000 to 1200 euros to start off you know a  
**0:47:39-0:47:45:**  system and I've seen that to be pretty common at least in the places that we work so you  know for smallholders in West Africa or you know throughout the Americas that's you know  it's a pretty big investment so certainly financing is something that needs to be addressed  
**0:47:55-0:47:59:**  and then we've done that through a combination of different ways at our projects and I would  say I don't know if we're necessarily unique but you know we try to leverage as much as  we do through financing you know seedlings through our own program whether that is like  
**0:48:09-0:48:16:**  no interest loans or we're able to access grants through development agencies like GIZ  to be able to actually implement these projects so I would say you know sort of that startup  capital I think is really really critical and not always available you know there's  
**0:48:24-0:48:29:**  a lot of you know I would say bad you know financial institutions all across the world  in rural communities where the terms are just really not very favorable to farmers so I  think that needs to be addressed and we've tried to do that in a variety of different  
**0:48:38-0:48:44:**  ways but every place is really different. Second you know of course there is the issue  of you know where are you going to find the planting material you know a lot of farmers  may have enough like oil palm or coconuts or you know whatever you know olive trees  
**0:48:53-0:48:57:**  for example that they can actually produce on their own but as you look to really diversify  the system and incorporate you know things like biomass species for example or different  fruit species you know finding those seedlings aren't necessarily that easy so you know establishing  
**0:49:07-0:49:10:**  nurseries that can actually accommodate and produce that I think is really absolutely  critical and secondly you know what I call sort of like you know after the farm gate  or post-production really it's this sort of you know I would say these hubs that are able  
**0:49:19-0:49:25:**  to accommodate and do some value added you know for farmers and so in many cases I've  seen this mostly in the Americas where cooperatives let's say for a coffee cooperative you know  certainly they'll buy and sell you know coffee on behalf of their members but then they look  
**0:49:34-0:49:38:**  to actually do some value added elements which is important as well whether that's conserving  and preserving other you know crops I think is really important or just doing some minimal  processing before it heads off to the marketplace I think is absolutely critical so this is  
**0:49:47-0:49:52:**  a place where I feel like there needs to be much more development funding because right  now we have this really kind of extractive model where you know farmers continue to produce  most of the value is added outside of their community and as a result they're always going  
**0:50:03-0:50:08:**  to be in this very precarious or vulnerable state right because most of that value is  being you know sort of generated someplace else so insofar as that we can have different  systems that allow for value added preservation and processing relatively close to the farm  
**0:50:19-0:50:23:**  gate I think that's really really critical you know some crops are great you know that  you can you can you can you know store cocoa for example for you know quite a while before  it actually goes bad but a lot of them even oil palm for example actually has a relatively  
**0:50:36-0:50:41:**  short shelf life and you need to process it relatively quickly or it could go rancid so  I think that piece is very very important and then lastly my sort of dream would be  to have a global or regional network of practitioners that could share both knowledge and experience  
**0:50:53-0:50:58:**  but also tools and resources because I think that's really really critical as we look to  really optimize these systems you know to do what you guys are talking about which is  how do we sort of manage for labor costs for example hopefully there's some technology  
**0:51:07-0:51:12:**  that we can implement that actually reduces those challenges a little bit but I think  that's going to have to emerge from this you know global network that you both are actually  fostering to be able to share those experiences as we go forward.  
**0:51:20-0:51:25:**  Continuing on the infrastructure because it's a very very important topic does it somehow  also require your farmers to be located geographically in the similar regions I mean if you need  the teams to train them if you need to build infrastructure to process etc etc.  
**0:51:37-0:51:42:**  Yeah absolutely I think that is one thing that is absolutely critical as you look to  set these systems up and and create whatever you know commercial or cooperative relationships  amongst farmers because I think no one farmer can do this on their own and so you know by  
**0:51:54-0:51:58:**  setting up systems to collaborate I think that's really important and as a result the  scale you need to be able to do that it needs to have enough farmers to make it worthwhile  to aggregate and have enough throughput to make it you know kind of commercially viable  
**0:52:08-0:52:12:**  but you don't want to have such a wide you know sort of geographic distance where it  becomes really really challenging you know both to provide sort of that those services  that as accompaniments you know the certification services as well but also if you're if you're  
**0:52:21-0:52:26:**  conveying you know your produce over you know you know many you know hundreds of kilometers  you know not only are you having a horrible climate climate impact with your greenhouse  gases but it just doesn't make for an efficient system so I think there's different ways that  
**0:52:35-0:52:39:**  you know putting on sort of the crop and the country and those types of things that you  can accommodate for that I do know you know in places in West Africa with cocoa you may  have like satellite offices or purchasing centers that accommodate for that but I think  
**0:52:50-0:52:54:**  there needs to be kind of this I would say like sweet spot right you don't want to have  it so big that it's very difficult to manage and you lose that intimacy with farmers but  it can't be so small as well that you just never reach economies of scale so you know  
**0:53:04-0:53:09:**  that's really been our goal is to make sure that everything is within you know relatively  close distances so you have those connections but you want to make sure that you're able  to provide those same opportunities for farmers in the region as well.  
**0:53:17-0:53:22:**  In this past five years have you seen this diversification and also the work infrastructure  work and all the different support that you've provided to the farmers etc has it made the  farmers better off than they were five years ago are the farmers following you and wanting  
**0:53:32-0:53:40:**  you know and really taking on this work and are they economically satisfied with this  type of new agroforestry that you're presenting to them?  Well first off Dimitri I should clarify you know we started this journey five years ago  
**0:53:49-0:53:53:**  we haven't actually planted you know for the last five years and so really it's been in  the last couple of years that we've actually begun this process like on the ground so we're  you know I would say between three to four years we have you know in terms of some like  
**0:54:01-0:54:07:**  from start to finish at a given you know plot or pilot so I would say you know I don't want  to say it's too early to tell but you know one of the sort of you know sort of the beautiful  things but also challenges of working with trees and perennial systems is that you know  
**0:54:17-0:54:22:**  until you start to get some decent production I think what we say is like all bets are off  you know you can't really tell so well if you know a farmers are really you know enthusiastic  about adopting and experimenting with the system and you know you really can't tell  
**0:54:34-0:54:37:**  you know what the production what looks like for like your cash crop to be able to compare  it to yields of a monoculture for example certainly there's enough experience and you  know scientific studies and literature to suggest that you'll have more production and  
**0:54:48-0:54:53:**  you'll be more resilient but we also have to just sort of prove that out on the ground  where we're working as well so I would say it's a little too early to tell but that being  said you know I would say you know at least you know where we have the probably the most  
**0:55:03-0:55:08:**  advanced you know and really diversity of experiences it's really kind of a mixed bag  I would say about half the farmers are very very enthusiastic and have really gone you  know the full agroforestry route in terms of planting all the biomass species and shade  
**0:55:18-0:55:23:**  and you know the great diversity and there's probably another half or so that does kind  of this agroforestry light what I like to call it where they basically you know they  may plant some you know biomass species but not you know the recommendations or they may  
**0:55:33-0:55:39:**  have a limited number of you know species beyond some of the more basic cash crops but  you know really it's you know our job to be able to demonstrate that we can in fact you  know absorb and buy some of these other crops for example or demonstrate that you know while  
**0:55:50-0:55:55:**  there is some additional labor costs certainly that investment then you know pays dividends  down the road so we're well maybe we should we should we should circle around and talk  about it next year that we will have more information to talk about.  
**0:56:03-0:56:09:**  Let's have you on the podcast again to cover this issue in a few years time or something  see how the model has has proved itself.  That sounds great.  
**0:56:13-0:56:17:**  And wrapping up a bit this first part where we really were able to go into some detail  on the projects on the ground with Dimitri we greatly value mistakes you know as a source  of learning and that's I guess what I want to ask you you know if you could talk to the  
**0:56:26-0:56:30:**  Ryan of a few years ago before he started the project and share a few of your mistakes  and learnings what would your key mistakes and learnings be?  Oh wow there's so many in a way you know this is one of the things that I think is really  
**0:56:40-0:56:46:**  critical to be you know open to evaluation and things like that and so in general I would  say you know while I've been personally exposed to you know many different you know agroforestry  models and experiences in general that's not always the case for a lot of farmers or even  
**0:56:58-0:57:04:**  some of our local staff and so you know in you know in my particular case you know I  get a little bit too enthusiastic about agroforestry and so I want to you know push ahead and start  off at a very large scale but in truth you know I think it's a much more of a stepwise  
**0:57:15-0:57:20:**  approach in terms of engaging not only farmers but really you know local staff to be able  to implement these projects hand in hand with farmers as well so I would say you know part  of it is probably moving a little bit too fast and also trying to strike this balance  
**0:57:30-0:57:39:**  of you know finding a way to accommodate all of these other you know crops with you know  sometimes it's kind of we put the cart before the horse so you plant all of these crops  but you don't necessarily have a clear pathway on how you want to commercialize or process  
**0:57:47-0:57:53:**  them and so to be honest with you you know we are very familiar with you know oil palm  and coconuts for example but we're not so familiar with things like you know cassava  and turmeric and so it's taken us a fair amount of work to be able to understand both you  
**0:58:04-0:58:10:**  know the agronomics the reality on the ground but also the marketplace you know as you may  know I'm not sure what the experience is in Europe so much but certainly in the US context  you know there's always like what we call like food fads right and so you know some  
**0:58:22-0:58:26:**  days you may have like everybody wants to buy gluten-free products or you know this  type of superfood and so that's a good opportunity in the short term for producers to sort of  fill those needs but long term we want to make sure that if a fad or superfood you know  
**0:58:39-0:58:44:**  goes away that farmers aren't left you know sort of planting all of these things and not  left with it so we want to be really cautious there and so I noticed that has been you know  not so much for us but you know in the industry a big challenge some of you might remember  
**0:58:52-0:58:57:**  like you know years back you know quinoa was really really popular and then you know farmers  and the Andes started to plant quinoa and build all this infrastructure and then now  quinoa you know doesn't make much money and people aren't buying it as much and then farmers  
**0:59:05-0:59:10:**  are left with all this debt and overproduction so we have to be really careful there because  you know we don't want to undermine the farmers ability to continue to produce and have a  good livelihood so anyways that was a little bit of a tangent but I would say you know  
**0:59:20-0:59:25:**  when you try to convert some of these you know systems thinking that have been really  embedded for many many years or even in the university system in different countries it  takes a long time and so sometimes I move a little too fast as far as the things I would  
**0:59:34-0:59:35:**  like to do.  Listening to you speak it's true that the big difference that you're trying to do similar  things to us in terms of you know regenerative agriculture, agroforestry but instead of focusing  
**0:59:45-0:59:49:**  on local markets which would be the strategy in our case for example or in the case of  a lot of farms we talk to you're having to also cope with these dynamics of like the  global markets and you know food as a commodity somehow so that's like a whole other level  
**0:59:58-1:00:00:**  of challenge as well.  Yeah that's an absolutely important point I mean really you know our goal is not to  sort of design systems that go primarily to external you know sort of global commodity  
**1:00:12-1:00:17:**  markets or even you know these premium ethical fair trade and organic markets either really  we want to strike a balance so that way if for whatever reason you know the you know  let's say there's an economic downturn and as we're seeing right now through the COVID  
**1:00:27-1:00:32:**  crisis you know and maybe there isn't as many imports into Europe and the United States  we don't want that to then really jeopardize farmers ability to produce you know profitably  right so we need to strike this balance really between really addressing sort of local food  
**1:00:42-1:00:47:**  needs either within the family structure within the local community and then you know expanding  out into the region in the nation and then also look where we can be opportunistic to  have stable and long committed marketplaces for some of these other cash crops so it's  
**1:00:58-1:01:00:**  a little bit of a balance in act.  I wanted to ask you Ryan if we could talk a bit just briefly about some of the agricultural  mistakes in terms of the designs that you did and that you wish you'd done other in  
**1:01:16-1:01:21:**  another way or you know more specific towards the agricultural side.  Yeah well absolutely I think probably the most relevant you know examples would be our  larger scale projects in Samoa and they're you know one of the things that is always  
**1:01:32-1:01:38:**  kind of a little bit more flexible in you know maybe potentially open to mistakes but  you know we know for example that we can always have a market for coconuts and cocoa and certainly  the marketplace for fruit in Samoa locally is quite advanced but I think you know the  
**1:01:51-1:01:56:**  really sort of like unknown part is you know trying to figure out what is most important  you know planting during the succession phase of any new plantation so as we look to come  up with different crop combinations whether that's you know taro or cassava or turmeric  
**1:02:11-1:02:17:**  and ginger and other things you know we were kind of playing a little bit in the dark there  and so as a result you know one of the things we realized is that though there's kind of  this global you know marketplace for cassava that's really emerging in large part because  
**1:02:27-1:02:34:**  of the need for gluten-free ingredients if we don't actually have the facilities to either  process that or if there's not enough local demand then it's just a waste of time so we  ended up planting a fair amount of cassava early on in a number of the plots in large  
**1:02:44-1:02:49:**  part because it grows fast it provides good shade for for young seedlings for cocoa for  example but then farmers if they end up with cassava and nothing to do with it then they  become you know I would say demoralized a little bit and then you end up with a lot  
**1:02:59-1:03:04:**  of cassava without a marketplace and so you know it's one of those things that you want  to make sure you do your best to sort of develop those relationships and trust but then if  you encourage farmers to grow something that nobody wants then it's always like you know  
**1:03:13-1:03:19:**  kind of a problem and so you learn you know I would say you know sometimes not as quickly  as you should so for example there's a great species in the Pacific called noni which is  is really fantastic very resilient it grows in pretty much any soil type and it was clear  
**1:03:32-1:03:37:**  there even with some good pruning that you know noni could be so you know substituted  for cassava in some cases and so we learned as a result of our kind of like ongoing engagement  with farmers that we should you know maybe shift to focus a little bit there even though  
**1:03:47-1:03:50:**  noni is a you know it's a perennial tree crop but you can actually you know sort of prune  and maintain at a relatively low level to continue to provide that shade during that  succession period so I would say that would be just a perfect example of something that  
**1:03:59-1:04:03:**  we think make a whole lot of sense and it works in other countries but we needed to  make adjustments you know relatively quickly in the case of Samoa.  Thank you so much for being so honest with your experience and sharing all of this with  
**1:04:11-1:04:16:**  us somehow I find it so motivating when we're talking about mistakes and learnings because  it's like well you know everyone's human even the people doing the most amazing stuff get  some stuff wrong and you know that comforts me somehow.  
**1:04:26-1:04:31:**  Yeah well to be honest with you we're pretty transparent I mean we've made a lot of mistakes  you know but I think you know our sort of like motto or approach is like you know it's  fine to make mistakes as long as you're moving forward and then you just like honest with  
**1:04:41-1:04:46:**  it because you know this is tough work in general you know you need to kind of you know  find your space between you know you're primarily a commercial entity right but you also have  this these ethics that really focus on you know rural development and you know human  
**1:04:57-1:05:02:**  empowerment and all these other values and so you need to be able to balance that all  not only to have you know be able to sleep at night with a clear conscience but really  I would say in the long term by making sure you have sort of this transparency and commitment  
**1:05:12-1:05:18:**  that that can only help your business down the road so I think it's important to be honest.  That's a great ethic and that's how we all learn so for the last part of the interview  we also wanted to have a bit of a perspective of you know understanding what it takes for  
**1:05:28-1:05:33:**  a company like Dr. Brunner to integrate agroforestry and regenerative agriculture in their supply  chain and to scale it so maybe to give an idea to give us an idea could you explain  a bit you know where you're at now in terms of integrating these regenerative practices  
**1:05:44-1:05:49:**  and you know what are the next steps and what kind of scale are we talking about?  Now that's a great question and I may not exactly know since it's kind of a you know  kind of a changing landscape but I can give you a just sort of a general idea you know  
**1:05:59-1:06:04:**  so first off I should point out that Dr. Bronner's is relatively unique so it's a family owned  business and so as a result we have a lot more sort of longer term perspectives than  let's say a publicly traded company would you know a lot of times either through you  
**1:06:17-1:06:21:**  know venture capital and other investors or if you have stockholders you know they want  to see a very quick return on their investment so we have the luxury and privilege really  to be you know much more you know of a long term thinking as far as our planning there  
**1:06:34-1:06:40:**  so we're really lucky to have you know a fantastic family that is able to give us a lot of leeway  to be able to do these projects knowing that we may not see a huge return you know in 12  months or 18 months I think that's really really important so I'd say you know in general  
**1:06:51-1:06:55:**  you know there needs to be some financing or approach to be able to realize that you  know actually implementing agroforestry in some cases may take a while to be profitable  though that's certainly not our kind of goal hopefully we'd have enough sort of production  
**1:07:04-1:07:08:**  in the early years to make it profitable in general but anyway I just wanted to underscore  that point because I think that's one of the biggest challenges for businesses and other  companies to be able to really implement these projects is that the startup capital is not  
**1:07:17-1:07:23:**  insignificant and the return on investment sometimes takes a little bit longer so I would  say you know broadly speaking you know the vast majority of our raw materials come from  perennial crops but just because it's perennial doesn't necessarily mean it has that agroforestry  
**1:07:34-1:07:38:**  values that we're looking to implement so what we've done is a couple of things one  in most many of our projects we've begun to do you know if not larger scale you know plantings  with farmers we've at least started the process of training and establishing pilot plots to  
**1:07:52-1:07:56:**  be able to demonstrate and train farmers there so that's really I would say the first step  and then as we look to sort of leverage financing we can then expand that out with more farmers  and really our goal isn't that farmers you know even if they have a small plot convert  
**1:08:07-1:08:12:**  everything to a really diversified agroforestry system you know overnight or you know all  at once but we want to make sure that there's a transition to that process so that way that  as an opportunity that they can learn in the process and it reduces their risk right you  
**1:08:22-1:08:26:**  know if they farm they grow everything you know in a diversified agroforestry system  and then for example they have like challenges with their family and they're not able to  maintain it then that's not a good model that we would like to promote and then lastly you  
**1:08:35-1:08:39:**  know one of the things that we've been looking at here in the United States is you know how  do we leverage third-party certifications so for example you know many consumers are  familiar with you know B.O. or organic that's been very important for the development of  
**1:08:50-1:08:55:**  the marketplace certainly fair trade is another element that's very very important we want  to make sure that you know farmers are paid fairly for their production and that workers  are protected and treated fairly throughout the supply chain but the reality is is that  
**1:09:06-1:09:12:**  in a way they're a little bit incomplete so Dr. Bronner's and a couple of other NGOs and  businesses like Patagonia as well as research outfits decided to create a third-party certification  called the regenerative organic certified certified and really our goal was to bring  
**1:09:23-1:09:30:**  together not only organic and fair trade but really to layer on additional elements that  focus primarily on soil health and so one of the things we realized you know early on  is just because it's organic doesn't mean it's actually ecological so we wanted to come  
**1:09:41-1:09:46:**  up with a system that could actually bring all of these values under one roof and make  sure that farmers and producers are actually rewarded for their regenerative practices  so that that process has kicked off and over the course of the last year there was a number  
**1:09:56-1:10:02:**  of pilots including three at our projects in India, Sri Lanka and in Ghana and our hope  is that there would be sort of a commercial pathway for those producers looking to market  their crops as regenerative you know in the marketplace and I think that's really critical  
**1:10:13-1:10:19:**  and there needs to be this combination of you know upfront financing a long-term perspective  but also a pathway for for farmers to be rewarded for all of the investment that they're doing  in regenerative practices and we think this this certification the ROC might be one way  
**1:10:29-1:10:30:**  to do that.  And could Dr. Bronner's be certified like all of its suppliers could have that certification  is that something then that would apply to Dr. Bronner's products?  
**1:10:38-1:10:45:**  Yep so that is ultimately our goal you know we as a result of the pilot our virgin coconut  oil out of Sri Lanka was one of the first products to be to be certified as regenerative  organic and really our goal is that the rest of our supply chains will go along that pathway  
**1:10:58-1:11:02:**  but you know one of the challenges that we're facing going forward and this is something  that's you know a big challenge for people all over the world with with third-party certifiers  is that with COVID we're seeing sort of limits on how much transportation or you know travel  
**1:11:12-1:11:17:**  can be done you know even within countries or you know from you know outside countries  as well so as a result all of those audits to actually do the certification have been  put on hold in some cases so we're exploring you know whether or not we can do this with  
**1:11:27-1:11:32:**  you know virtual audits or you know self-reporting or what have you but ultimately our goal would  be able to to make sure that all of our supply chains or major raw materials are certified  regenerative organic and to be honest you know we're quite confident that we can get  
**1:11:43-1:11:48:**  there in large part we've got you know a good you know sort of foundation of organic and  in fair practices already all of our you know major raw materials organic and fair trade  so basically we just sort of need to continue to our sort of pathway towards regenerative  
**1:11:58-1:12:03:**  production and I think we'll get there. Do you have a date for that objective? Is it  a matter of a decade, a few years, more? Yeah I would say you know for the tropical perennial  crops I would say we would get there you know probably in you know two to three years you  
**1:12:16-1:12:22:**  know for some of the more dry land or arid crops you know things like olive oil or jojoba  oil that might take a little bit longer because you know the sort of the infrastructure in  approach is really different and so we have to rely on our partners there to be able to  
**1:12:32-1:12:37:**  you know design those systems and we certainly know that they've been doing you know some  of those things already you know certainly our partners in Palestine, Kanan Fair Trade,  I mean they're working with you know olive trees that are over a thousand years old in  
**1:12:46-1:12:52:**  some cases so that's pretty regenerative to me but that being said you know we want to  figure out the best approach you know for most of our raw materials and so I think for  the tropical you know oil crops that is probably sooner than later but there are a number of  
**1:13:03-1:13:07:**  other crops you know like especially in essential oils like lavender for example or eucalyptus  or tea tree where that may take a little bit longer in large part because those are third  party suppliers and we don't have as much you know kind of influence or control there  
**1:13:16-1:13:21:**  as we would otherwise. I was wondering you know you mentioned that one of the main obstacles  is that you know extra cost that comes with maybe having this truly regenerative supply  chain and I'm wondering you know how is Dr. Bronner able to do that is it you know through  
**1:13:34-1:13:39:**  a strategy of having really high you know quality products and is it realistic for them  to have that level of quality throughout their whole supply chain? You know I think it is  you know one of the great things about Dr. Bronner's is that we've made this commitment  
**1:13:50-1:13:55:**  to transition to organic and then fair trade and now to regenerative and I think that the  Bronner family is pretty realistic about all of the challenges and the timeline there and  so I think from our perspective that we're on that pathway pretty clearly but what we've  
**1:14:07-1:14:11:**  also realized is you know basically two things. One I've talked about the diversification  on the ground that is a pretty clear element to facilitate that transition for farmers.  They need to make sure that there's additional income to justify this investment in this  
**1:14:22-1:14:28:**  conversion and then similarly what we're realizing is that it's really important to be able to  collaborate with other like-minded companies whether it's you know body care or food for  example everybody that sources from agricultural raw material supply chains. We realize that  
**1:14:41-1:14:46:**  to be able to scale out this regenerative approach really requires collaboration so  what we've done here in the United States is start to work with a small group of companies  committed to regenerative practices and insofar as that we can leverage either our buying  
**1:14:57-1:15:04:**  power or investments or just education then the chances of us scaling out regenerative  practices is a lot better. So it's been really exciting because you know through this this  collaboration we're seeing even competitors work together on sourcing and you know farmer  
**1:15:16-1:15:23:**  support for example as a way to be able to invest in regeneration. So this is really  kind of I would say one of the more hopeful things I've seen during this you know COVID  pandemic is that there's been greater collaboration and just kind of openness and transparency  
**1:15:33-1:15:38:**  with other people in the industry because people are starting to realize that not only  are consumers demanding a regenerative product for sure but really you know their long-term  viability depends on regenerative practices on the ground and so insofar as that we can  
**1:15:50-1:15:57:**  do that collaboratively and really kind of leverage our power all the better. Yeah it's  great to hear that and I really hope you do manage to do that for everyone's benefit and  it's great to have that perspective of you know how companies are tackling that challenge  
**1:16:07-1:16:12:**  because as I said before we're more used to direct selling in a sense and you know dealing  with the final consumer as well so it's great that companies are positioning themselves.  I did have maybe among my last questions you know knowing all it takes to change your supply  
**1:16:23-1:16:29:**  chains towards regenerative practices does it make you optimistic that that's something  that we're going to see like expand through a lot of companies or do you think the constraints  you were talking about in terms of investments and returns of investments are massive how  
**1:16:38-1:16:44:**  do you feel about that transition? I would say I'm both optimistic but like realistic  you know it like as we've talked about you know there's a big sort of education gap and  training gap that's a reality certainly the financing is going to be a big issue and I  
**1:16:55-1:17:01:**  you know I think that you know there is a I would say I'm optimistic that there's kind  of a sea change with a lot of the development agencies out there whether it's you know DFID  in the UK or GIZ in Germany and others where they see the value in regenerative practices  
**1:17:15-1:17:21:**  and really looking for ways to facilitate the you know the adoption of these practices  not only you know at the farm gate you know with farmers but also kind of in these intermediary  steps whether it's processing or distribution you know one of the sort of most you know  
**1:17:31-1:17:37:**  it's a little bit off topic but one of the most you know disappointing statistics out  there is from the FAO that you know there's a fair amount of food waste that happens you  know globally and it's you know almost like equal equivalent to like the emissions of  
**1:17:46-1:17:52:**  China in terms of you know greenhouse gases but most of that either happens you know at  consuming level with consumers in their homes or at restaurants but a fair amount of it  is just like food loss right there's so much food that goes to waste because of poor transportation  
**1:18:02-1:18:09:**  lack of refrigeration or processing particularly in the global south and so as a result like  like there needs to be greater investment there and so you know we could talk all we  want about the sort of agronomic practices that lead to regeneration but we also have  
**1:18:19-1:18:24:**  to be just really honest to say hey look we need to have a full scale transformation of  the food system if we're able to accommodate that so I would say insofar as that there  is additional sort of like funding and realization at that level I think that's absolutely critical  
**1:18:35-1:18:40:**  and I think the one sort of silver lining that I've seen as a result of COVID has been  that one you know people are starting to realize that obviously you know having you know healthy  and safe food is pretty critical and that there's been sort of a renewed effort both  
**1:18:51-1:18:55:**  here in the United States and really in a lot of the countries where we work where people  are starting to go back to the country and farm again so that to me is really exciting  we need to make sure that those young people actually have a pathway to farm you know profitably  
**1:19:05-1:19:11:**  and stably and I think regenerative agriculture is the way to do it.  Oh great concluding remarks there.  Thank you so much for all this information and as a last tiny question we'd love to know  
**1:19:21-1:19:26:**  what would you like to hear about in the next episodes on the podcast and what kind of topics  and questions are you excited about?  Well I mean so first of all I want to say congratulations on the first couple of episodes  
**1:19:34-1:19:39:**  I recommended it to all of my friends and colleagues I think you know your approach  of looking at both you know all of the different elements that go into regenerative agroforestry  are so critical whether that is getting very specific into you know the experience on the  
**1:19:50-1:19:55:**  ground and how to design and carry out these programs to the marketing and value-added  step and then lastly I think you know what's important are these big structural questions  like how do we actually you know scale out regenerative agroforestry at a larger scale  
**1:20:05-1:20:09:**  and what are really kind of that is implications you know I continue to look at the situation  in the Amazon with dread and I keep thinking like wow you know agroforestry could really  release a lot of that pressure to expand the agricultural landscape and actually protect  
**1:20:22-1:20:26:**  some of these this native land so I think you know touching on all of these points is  just so critical we can't just focus on one or the other and I think the podcast is really  the best platform to do that.  
**1:20:33-1:20:38:**  On these kind words from Ryan that's all for today we'd really love to have your input  your questions and your feedback on how the podcast is going so please reach out to us  you can do that on our website or on social media and as usual you'll find all the attached  
**1:20:49-1:21:07:**  and useful links below the episodes.  