### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2020-10-23)  

**0:00:00-0:00:16:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:23-0:00:27:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  these challenges.  
**0:00:33-0:00:38:**  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Hello and welcome to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:00:46-0:00:49:**  We're your host Dimitri Ennityan and today we interviewed Christian and Sarah from the  Regen Network.  This interview was very interesting for us because as agroforestry farmers, we know that  
**0:00:57-0:01:04:**  the systems that we put into place have huge benefits in terms of carbon storage, biodiversity  and even de-polluting a farmlands.  And these are things that aren't valued economically or are difficult to value economically currently.  
**0:01:13-0:01:18:**  And this is what Regen Network has been working on, providing potential for farmers to benefit  from all these ecosystem services that they're investing time and money into.  Yeah, absolutely Dimitri.  
**0:01:25-0:01:31:**  What's amazing is that we hear a lot about carbon credits or biodiversity credits, payment  for ecosystem services and the reality is that it's quite confusing and hard to get  your head around.  
**0:01:37-0:01:42:**  And we're really lucky because Christian and Sarah are actually able to work really well  together in this interview to give us both like a big picture understanding as well as  zooming in into the really technical details.  
**0:01:49-0:01:53:**  So I really came out with a much better understanding of what we're talking about and that is important  because I'm sure these payment mechanisms are going to become more and more important  in the farm economy.  
**0:01:59-0:02:00:**  Super.  So without further ado, let's get into it.  So Sarah and Christian, welcome on the podcast.  
**0:02:07-0:02:08:**  Thanks so much.  So glad to be here.  Thanks for having us.  
**0:02:10-0:02:13:**  So very excited to have this chat with you.  We'd love to know a bit more about yourselves to start off with.  It would be amazing if you could just quickly introduce yourself and tell us how you got  
**0:02:21-0:02:23:**  into this adventure.  Sure.  I guess I can start out.  
**0:02:27-0:02:29:**  My name's Christian Shearer.  I'm a permaculture practitioner for a long time.  I guess this part of my life started about 17 years ago when I started a permaculture  
**0:02:40-0:02:45:**  education center in Northern Thailand.  I assume that many of your listeners are familiar with permaculture, but for those who are not,  permaculture is a design science that's based around working in harmony with nature, seeing  
**0:02:55-0:03:01:**  how that we can work with natural systems rather than against natural systems.  And certainly when we're talking about agroforestry and other agricultural systems, it really,  really comes into play.  
**0:03:09-0:03:13:**  Harvesting water, catching water, recycling nutrients, all this stuff is at the center  of really productive permaculture systems.  I lived in Southeast Asia for a long time and worked with smallholder farmers and then  
**0:03:24-0:03:31:**  got wrapped up in really in all sorts of different ecological agriculture applications and just  started to see how hard farmers work and how little reward they get for that, whether that's  financial reward or emotional reward for that, which is just crazy because all of us literally  
**0:03:46-0:03:52:**  survive off of the work of our farmers.  In all those years, I have come to really respect and appreciate the hard work of farmers  all around the world and wanted to do what I could to contribute to not only farmers  
**0:04:04-0:04:09:**  doing better in their lives, but helping them to shift towards more ecologically friendly  systems because my passion for agriculture comes in two fronts.  It's both in a passion for working with farmers and seeing rural and agricultural communities  
**0:04:20-0:04:25:**  thrive and that means financially better off and ecologically better off.  And then my passion also lies in the realm of ecological health.  And I see agriculture as one of the most important levers in the world for reversing global climate  
**0:04:35-0:04:42:**  change, improving our ecological situation and upgrading ecology all around the world.  So my work with TerraGenesis International, my previous company was all about that.  My work with Regen Network at this time is all about that.  
**0:04:52-0:04:58:**  And it's exciting to see how much action is happening in that space.  Nice.  It's very interesting.  
**0:05:00-0:05:03:**  Sarah, maybe you can introduce yourself as well.  Yeah, absolutely.  My name is Sarah Baxendale and I'm the Director of Finance for Regen Network currently.  
**0:05:12-0:05:16:**  And I am a banking assistant turned farmer.  I was working in New York City in a fancy corporate job and I became involved with the  Occupy Wall Street movement in Zuccotti Park in the financial district and was one of the  
**0:05:30-0:05:34:**  coordinators of the sustainability working group there.  And in conjunction with the New York based environmental activism community I became  a part of, I became very exposed to permaculture.  
**0:05:44-0:05:49:**  So I too am a permaculture designer and teacher.  So it was a really interesting way to be introduced to conversations around environmental impact  in New York City.  
**0:05:59-0:06:06:**  So a lot of my work, which is sort of different than Christian's work, is that my work has  been primarily urban in my career over the last decade or so.  And I've worked with, at this point, about at least 100 small projects in Boston, in  
**0:06:18-0:06:26:**  Philadelphia, in New York, and Pittsburgh primarily around designing and implementing  urban ecological design solutions.  So I'm a lover of the city and my permaculture background is very city permaculture as the  
**0:06:37-0:06:43:**  way that we were taught to look at design systems using the patterns of nature.  And so my work took me most recently to the state of Pennsylvania, which is in the US  mid-Atlantic region.  
**0:06:52-0:06:59:**  And for the past six years prior to joining Regen Network, I worked as a park planner  for the city of Pittsburgh and I helped to redesign over a thousand acres of parkland  using green infrastructure projects as a way to manage stormwater combined sewer overflow  
**0:07:13-0:07:18:**  that the EPA was demanding that the city of Pittsburgh manage.  And I had the privilege, because my family is from Pittsburgh, to actually work on the  street where my grandfather grew up helping to redevelop a property that was formerly  
**0:07:33-0:07:38:**  a federal housing authority complex that was 107 acres.  And we, over six years in conjunction with the community and the city, turned it into  the largest urban agriculture farm in the United States.  
**0:07:47-0:07:54:**  And it contains the first adult urban farmer training program where adults can come and  rent a quarter acre, a half acre, and start a business.  It also contains the largest orchard in the city of Pittsburgh with 252 fruit trees, the  
**0:08:06-0:08:14:**  largest children's farm in the mid-Atlantic region at an acre and a half, and it is also  a restoration forest project where the land has been put in permanent preservation.  So I managed a very, very large urban agriculture redevelopment project.  
**0:08:25-0:08:31:**  It's actually one of Obama's top six sustainability projects in the country.  And when I left there, I had the privilege of joining Regen Network and bringing the  whole idea that you should know the name of your farmer and that we all eat three times  
**0:08:42-0:08:49:**  a day and that farmers need technical and financial support to be successful.  And so I bring all the lens of having been a farmer myself and having a great desire  to empower farmers across the globe, as well as directly affect climate change to the work  
**0:09:01-0:09:05:**  that I have the privilege of doing with Regen.  Nice.  I would say maybe the perfect time to ask you guys, what is Regen exactly and what does  
**0:09:15-0:09:16:**  it do?  My co-founder Gregory Landwey and I started Regen Network back in 2017 after working with  our company, TerraGenesis International, on trying to help natural products companies  
**0:09:30-0:09:37:**  shift their supply from organic and fair trade supply to regenerative supply.  And most of those companies had no idea what that meant, and we were trying to help them  understand what it meant and help them figure out how they could intervene with their supply  
**0:09:45-0:09:52:**  chains and upgrade them towards agroforestry and cover cropping and rotational grazed animals,  etc.  But one of the things that we realized is that the technology was not there to serve  
**0:09:58-0:10:00:**  that purpose.  And so we ended up starting a branch of TerraGenesis called Regen Network, which then ended up  becoming its own company.  
**0:10:08-0:10:13:**  So let me dive into that a little bit, and I'm going to stay rather high level here because  I want us to get to the point where we're actually talking about how it affects agroforestry  and ecological agriculture.  
**0:10:20-0:10:24:**  But to begin with, there's two layers to our company.  And on this call, we're mostly going to be focusing on the second layer of our work because  that's where it crosses with agriculture.  
**0:10:33-0:10:36:**  But let me give a high level overview of both of those layers.  So first of all is the layer one portion of our work.  This is the underlying technological infrastructure for ecological data and ecological agreements.  
**0:10:46-0:10:54:**  We recognized that there needed to be a new set of infrastructure, a new set of tools  that underlies the way in which people share data, create agreements, have transparency  around what's real and what's not real.  
**0:11:07-0:11:13:**  It literally lays down the road upon which all the eco projects can travel.  It's like a shared resource.  That makes sense.  
**0:11:18-0:11:19:**  Yeah.  And the way that we're building Regen Network, once it's built, it's put out into the commons.  It's 100% open source.  
**0:11:27-0:11:29:**  It's governed by the community.  It's transparent and open.  And it's built this way so that all the different stakeholders can have a shared understanding  
**0:11:37-0:11:42:**  and shared trust about what's true and what isn't true about ecological data and ecological  agreements.  Because part of our belief right now is that the problem, the ecological challenge that  
**0:11:49-0:11:56:**  the world is facing has a lot to do with an imbalance in people's access to information.  So one party will say, yeah, these things happened.  We have regenerated the soil in this place.  
**0:12:06-0:12:09:**  And the other people are like, how do we know that that's true?  And they're like, well, you just need to trust us because we have the data.  We have the scientists.  
**0:12:14-0:12:15:**  Just trust us.  It's true.  And the worst example of this are the oil companies and the mining and extraction companies  
**0:12:24-0:12:27:**  that make claims about what happened at their sites.  And then later on, we find out that those claims are completely false.  But it's because they had the money to hire the scientists.  
**0:12:37-0:12:42:**  And then the scientists made the conclusions that they asked them to make.  With Regen Networks layer one infrastructure, that's not going to be possible anymore.  If you want to make scientific claims, you're going to have to publish the methodologies  
**0:12:52-0:12:57:**  that you're using and make public the ways in which you're making those claims.  So that layer one technology is built with blockchain infrastructure.  It's built with a whole software development toolkit that enables third party application  
**0:13:08-0:13:13:**  developers to be able to build all sorts of different applications on top of it.  There's a whole world of interesting things we could go into there, but I'm going to stop  there for the layer one.  
**0:13:21-0:13:24:**  Unless you guys have questions, we certainly can go there.  I think we're going to delve into that also after some aspects that we want to understand  better for sure, but keep going.  
**0:13:31-0:13:32:**  Great.  Great.  And then layer two is the applications that are built using that infrastructure.  
**0:13:38-0:13:43:**  And at Regen Network, our first application is called Regen Registry.  It's a registry for carbon and other ecosystem services credits that aims at democratizing  the carbon credit markets and acknowledging whole systems regeneration rather than just  
**0:13:53-0:14:01:**  fragmenting carbon into a stand alone solution to the world's problems.  So the aim of the registry, the aim of Regen Registry is to be a marketplace for a world  of different ecosystem services credits because we understand that all of the farmers out  
**0:14:15-0:14:18:**  there are all working in their own context.  Each watershed is its own unique place with its own unique context.  And the management practices and the varieties of fruit and nuts and animals that you're  
**0:14:32-0:14:35:**  implementing are different than somewhere else in the world.  And so the verification of ecological outcomes that are happening in your place is going  to be unique from other places.  
**0:14:45-0:14:52:**  We want to enable that uniqueness to shine through.  With Regen Registry, every project gets its own project page.  Every credit issued from that project is tracked and recorded transparently through the layer  
**0:15:01-0:15:03:**  one technology.  And to make it really clear how this works, there's really three parts to this project  and to this process.  
**0:15:10-0:15:14:**  And Sarah is going to be much better at diving into the details of this.  But just on a high level, talk about those three parts.  First of all, when a farmer or rancher approaches us about issuing credits on our site, the  
**0:15:24-0:15:28:**  first thing we need to do is think about methodology design.  What methodology are we going to use to verify that real world impact has actually happened  on your site?  
**0:15:36-0:15:39:**  And then the second thing is monitoring and reporting.  How do we collect the data to understand what has really happened and what's the right data  to collect?  
**0:15:45-0:15:51:**  And then third thing is the credit issuance and then the sales of those credits to corporations  or individuals that are looking to meet their climate commitments.  I wanted to just ask a question that's still in that kind of bigger picture, but how can  
**0:16:05-0:16:10:**  Regen Network then support agroforestry systems?  Just to make it really clear for our listeners.  Yeah, absolutely.  
**0:16:17-0:16:25:**  One of the fundamental theories of change that Regen Network is holding is that if the  economics of agriculture shifts in a direction such that farmers and ranchers are financially  incentivized to use ecologically friendly practices rather than using chemical and conventional  
**0:16:44-0:16:51:**  practices that management practices around the world could rapidly change.  Because we're talking about individual people, individual families that are making these  choices year by year about how it is that they're going to manage their properties.  
**0:16:59-0:17:06:**  As soon as they understand that the farmer or rancher down the road is getting paid more  because they're employing ecological farming practices rather than employing the other  way, then that becomes very interesting for them to shift their practices.  
**0:17:16-0:17:24:**  So Regen Network is building the infrastructure to be able to monitor and verify ecological  impact, issue digitally secure digital assets that allow them to sell that impact as a second  yield on their property and thus benefit financially from those actions.  
**0:17:43-0:17:46:**  Okay, that's super interesting.  And possibly could you share with us, we talked about it previously when we were talking before  the interview about this example about this farm that you've started working with.  
**0:17:58-0:18:03:**  Could you describe a bit more how this works in practice?  Yeah, so the example you are referring to is called Wilmot Farm and it is a many thousand  hectare ranch in Australia and New South Wales.  
**0:18:16-0:18:24:**  This is our first carbon credit issuance for what we call the carbon plus grasslands methods.  And what's happening on this ranch is that you have this really innovative rancher who  has been doing high intensity rotational grazing for a number of years and what we were able  
**0:18:35-0:18:43:**  to measure using a combination of soil samples and remote sensing methods as we were able  to measure the increases in soil organic carbon over time from these clusters of cattle sort  of like rapidly moving around the property to different paddocks at different times of  
**0:18:54-0:18:56:**  the year.  And what's really great about working with a project like Wilmot Farm is that they are  a very talented series of practitioners and what they're doing is essentially the example  
**0:19:09-0:19:14:**  that we think can be adopted in that particular region of the world.  And by being able to work with this sort of like gold star use case example that allows  us to prove in conjunction with this farm that rotational grazing is a way to sequester  
**0:19:27-0:19:32:**  additional carbon in the soil to prove that it can be measured using our remote sensing  methods and for us to essentially put forth a new type of carbon credit into the marketplace.  And we think about carbon credits a little bit differently than the way they've been  
**0:19:45-0:19:47:**  thought about historically.  Our approach we've dubbed carbon plus and what we recognize is that carbon credit buyers  are looking for those carbon outcomes that can be monitored and verified and packaged  
**0:20:00-0:20:06:**  into a carbon credit because everybody's trying to sink as much carbon back into the earth  or sink carbon through other means in order to immediately address climate challenges  and climate impacts.  
**0:20:13-0:20:18:**  But the way that we look at projects is through this lens that Krishna has been describing  this ecological agriculture.  And so we have this pile of ecological co-benefits that are the plus part of the plus in the  
**0:20:28-0:20:34:**  carbon credits and there we look at other indicators on a property of what's happening  to the ecosystem because of this change in practice.  So in the example of Wilmot Farm we were able to use remote sensing to come up with a metric  
**0:20:44-0:20:50:**  to look at the quality of ecosystem vigor across the entire property to come up with  metrics that looked more holistically at the quality of the soil health.  And then more generally depending on the type of project we can look at other types of indicators  
**0:21:03-0:21:11:**  like biodiversity indicators or density of forest or water quality improvements or decreases  in flooding on a property.  The co-benefits indicators are all kind of uniquely packaged with the best management  
**0:21:19-0:21:24:**  practice that we are monitoring for the carbon outcomes.  In the example you explained you're measuring carbon that has already been stored in the  soil and I'm wondering is that how you're going to measure in the future?  
**0:21:34-0:21:39:**  If I'm going to give an example in agroforestry would you always issue credits on carbon that  has already been stored in the soil that is on a mature agroforestry system or would you  also have a way of incentivizing a change in practice that would deliver that carbon  
**0:21:52-0:21:54:**  storage in the future?  Yeah, so we can actually do both.  What we're limited by are we use the Sentinel-2 satellites in the European Space Agency that  
**0:22:10-0:22:11:**  went up in 2016.  So starting in 2017 they started to have really good global imagery data that's all free and  publicly available.  
**0:22:19-0:22:29:**  So any property that has been doing practices as early as 2017 we could establish 2017 as  a baseline for a project if they have the appropriate input data for the method that  we're using.  
**0:22:37-0:22:40:**  So our approach allows us to do two things.  It allows us to say, okay you've already got 100 almond trees, you historically planted  them, but we can monitor the increase in the scale of those trees and the increase in the  
**0:22:52-0:22:56:**  soil organic carbon from 2017 forward.  We also have the opportunity and have historically partnered with projects where people are starting  from a blank slate.  
**0:23:04-0:23:07:**  It's just an empty piece of property.  They want to plant 100 fruit trees.  They want to then do it in order to issue carbon credits as well as glean all the fruit  
**0:23:16-0:23:18:**  products off of it.  And in those cases we have the ability to partner with someone and model out how much  carbon that they would get over the 10-year carbon credit issuance time period to give  
**0:23:28-0:23:34:**  them a sense of how much funding they might receive for their best management practice  decisions and then partner with them to monitor that property over that time period, issue  those credits, help to sell those credits to individuals and companies that are interested  
**0:23:47-0:23:53:**  in a high quality holistic agriculture and ecology based carbon credit and ultimately  help those farmers and ranchers receive money for the ecological outcome benefits of having  planted those agroforestry systems on their property.  
**0:24:04-0:24:09:**  So we have the ability to do both and the ability to meet a project where it's at just  depending on who it is and what part of the world that they're in and where they are at.  It makes it very easy for us to meet people where they're at and then help them move forward  
**0:24:18-0:24:24:**  from wherever it is that they are at and want to get to.  So basically someone could buy carbon plus credits but based on future carbon sequestration  and actually buy them and fund the planting of the trees that would then sequester that  
**0:24:36-0:24:41:**  carbon maybe five or ten years down the line.  Yeah, technically a company has the ability to do so.  In order for that, in order for us to issue carbon credits for future years, we would  
**0:24:54-0:25:01:**  have to have a company that wants to buy essentially the full decade of monitoring time period  of credits in order to provide a farmer the funding upfront in order to have the money  to plant those trees.  
**0:25:10-0:25:17:**  We in a ten year time period do five monitoring rounds with remote sensing and from that we  issue four batches, four vintages of carbon credits in a ten year time period.  Great, thanks for clarifying that.  
**0:25:29-0:25:36:**  Just going back to when you were explaining that issuing carbon credits plus also incorporate  this idea of ecosystem vigor and then go beyond the normal carbon credit.  Could you tell us a bit more what you're able to measure in terms of ecosystem services  
**0:25:46-0:25:47:**  beyond carbon?  Sure, so it depends on the system that someone is utilizing.  We've worked with ranchers doing rotational grazing.  
**0:25:57-0:26:02:**  We've worked with organizations that are using sheep and vineyards.  We've worked with agroforestry projects and we're starting to work with your sort of standard  crop farmers or your regenerative crop farmers.  
**0:26:13-0:26:16:**  So it depends on where you are in the world and it depends on the best management practice  as to what's happening in that ecosystem.  But it primarily comes down to three or four basic things and you can kind of segment this  
**0:26:28-0:26:31:**  depending on what the practice is.  We look at ecosystem vigor because we want to look at the ecosystem whole.  Where there are water bodies on a property we have the ability to look at water patterns  
**0:26:42-0:26:45:**  and water quality.  We also look at biodiversity, diversity of plant species, diversity of animal species,  the sort of ecosystem biodiversity interaction of a property.  
**0:26:59-0:27:02:**  And then one of the main indicators that we focus on is soil health.  So it's really looking at the composition and the quality and the change in soil, the  change in its water holding capacity, the change in its macro and micronutrients over  
**0:27:12-0:27:13:**  time.  Because what we've found is that a lot of the sort of untapped, unverified, unmonitored  carbon that everyone around the world is trying to figure out how to measure is really soil  
**0:27:26-0:27:27:**  carbon.  A lot of people have figured out like, you know, how much carbon is sequestered by a  tree over its lifetime, but not a lot of people have figured out how to look at the soil and  
**0:27:37-0:27:43:**  to approach the soil as the big carbon sink that we inherently know that it is.  So a lot of our ecological indicators are tailored around those three or four pillars.  And each project, it really is unique because it's in a different part of the country, it's  
**0:27:55-0:28:00:**  in a different part of the world, it's wetter, it's drier, it has a different growing season,  has different rates of growth of the plant, each farmer is choosing a different best management  practice.  
**0:28:06-0:28:11:**  So we try to tailor that palette of looking at ecosystem benefits to the unique ecosystem  that we're in, and tailoring and accompanying that to the choices that each individual farmer  is making on their property.  
**0:28:20-0:28:23:**  All right, that's fascinating.  But for me, it really brings up this question of how do you measure all that data in terms  of you know, what tools are you using to measure for example, biodiversity?  
**0:28:31-0:28:37:**  Yeah, so there's really an amazing amount of information that one can glean from satellite  data, everything from land use classification to the change in, you know, plant density  over time, you can also classify different trees and different plant species, once you  
**0:28:53-0:28:59:**  find the spectral signature of one, you can essentially train an algorithm to find that  plant across a specific area.  It's really incredible.  
**0:29:04-0:29:09:**  It's really cool, actually, what you can do with the satellite information these days  and the European Space Agency Sentinel one and two satellites have been becoming increasingly  more complex.  
**0:29:17-0:29:24:**  So we use that as a way to be able to look at more information faster, and to be able  to bring down the volume of ground truthing data that is necessary on a property.  So when we partner with a new project, we have like a whole survey of questions, we  
**0:29:37-0:29:41:**  ask them about what that farmer is seeing on their property, you know, they might be  seeing that, you know, their fields are becoming more diverse, they're, you know, they didn't  flood as much as the neighbor did during a certain storm, but their streams are running  
**0:29:51-0:29:52:**  clear.  And so we gather sort of their qualitative reflections about their own property.  And then from that, we take a look at what we can do with the available satellite data  
**0:30:01-0:30:06:**  in that area, because it's not always the exact same amount of, you know, satellite  information, depending on where you're on the world and what time of year it is.  And then we sit down with the farmer and specifically asked for a limited series of ground truthing  
**0:30:17-0:30:23:**  information that either helps us to have sort of a double check on what we're seeing from  the satellite, or provides us a limited series of input that we then calibrate the satellite  to.  
**0:30:30-0:30:37:**  So in the example of soil organic carbon, if you were to, if you're a farmer, and you  were to engage with one of the existing carbon credit registries, what they asked you to  do is to essentially take 1000s and 1000s of soil samples across, you know, it might  
**0:30:47-0:30:50:**  be 100 hectare property.  And people, farmers find that to be too expensive and too cumbersome.  And so our method conversely, only requires 20 samples randomly around a property for  
**0:31:03-0:31:07:**  a 2000 hectare property size.  And from those 20 soil samples, we're able to calibrate the satellite, compare and contrast  the information that we're finding, train the satellite to then map across the rest  
**0:31:20-0:31:21:**  of the area.  And essentially map the outcomes of those soil sample reports via remote sensing across  the entire property at scale.  
**0:31:29-0:31:33:**  And what we found from it is, I find very fascinating.  The remote sensing outcomes are about 93% accurate in comparison to soil samples.  And given how much, yeah, it's really remarkable.  
**0:31:43-0:31:48:**  And if you think about it, like it's very cumbersome to take a soil sample in the field.  It takes a long time to wait for the lab.  It's a whole time intensive, labor intensive process.  
**0:31:57-0:32:00:**  And a lot of times when you're taking soil samples, you're just kind of like taking some  dirt here, taking some dirt there and hoping that it's representative of the whole property.  So the method we're using acknowledges the fact that you can, unless you're measuring  
**0:32:13-0:32:19:**  literally every square inch of your property, you're never going to have like a full picture  of your property's soil anyways.  It's just not really practically possible.  
**0:32:24-0:32:30:**  So we're finding that remote sensing allows us to circumvent that burdensome process by  limiting the amount of ground truth data.  Right now you're talking about carbon in the soil, right?  
**0:32:36-0:32:41:**  You're not measuring the, for example, the nutrient levels and et cetera.  We are measuring the macro micronutrients.  We measure all the cation exchanges.  
**0:32:46-0:32:50:**  We may get your bolt density and we measure soil organic carbon.  And from those, in conjunction with the satellite tools, we are able to measure soil organic  carbon, carbon stock outcome changes, as well as soil health and soil health metric indicators.  
**0:33:04-0:33:10:**  So they are accompanied together to provide us enough information to use the individual  tools in an ArcGIS or KGIS scenario that allows us to model outcomes.  So you'll take the samples, you'll measure samples from the soil to look at the micronutrients  
**0:33:20-0:33:23:**  et cetera, to calibrate the satellite.  The satellite is not the one that's measuring micronutrients in the soil.  That is correct.  
**0:33:27-0:33:28:**  Yeah.  There's a number of like statistical processes and very detailed buttons that are pressed  along that pathway.  
**0:33:34-0:33:39:**  But the big picture is we take a very limited series of soil samples and use it to calibrate  the satellite so that it then takes what are in those soil sample outcome data and models  it across the entire property.  
**0:33:47-0:33:53:**  So you can get a carbon stock outcome or a property wild soil health indicator.  And if we had a picture in front of us, we have these like beautiful interactive maps  where it shows the soil organic carbon changes on different parts of the property each time  
**0:34:05-0:34:07:**  it's measured.  And so we're able to see like the pathway of where cattle have gone because that's the  pathway of where the carbon is most dense in the property.  
**0:34:17-0:34:23:**  And in the case of Wilmot, we were able to see from the modeled satellite soil organic  carbon outcomes, the fences of the paddocks.  You could literally see they were just in this specific area.  
**0:34:32-0:34:34:**  There's clearly a fence there.  The carbon in this part of the property is higher than it is on the other side of the  fence where they haven't been for six months.  
**0:34:43-0:34:48:**  Do you get this kind of accuracy with your other indicators as well?  Because now you mentioned this 93, if I remember percent for the carbon.  Do you get that with also like biodiversity, water quality?  
**0:34:56-0:34:57:**  Yeah.  So it's unique to each property and that's where those two are a little bit harder to  have a, you know, just sort of a black and white response to.  
**0:35:08-0:35:14:**  But part of what we look at with water is we look at water through the lens of soil  cleaning water.  So we look at the interactions of the soil health indicators and the water patterns on  
**0:35:20-0:35:21:**  a property.  So we can actually map with the satellites, the moisture levels and the water patterns  across the property, which tells us water dynamic information.  
**0:35:33-0:35:38:**  And then if we're say measuring water quality in a stream, we'll have a farmer take just  like a couple of little water samples, send them to a water lab and then look at the quality  of the water over time as we look at the quality of the soil health over time.  
**0:35:50-0:35:56:**  As we look at the soil as this cleansing sponge to the water that is on the property itself.  So that one's a little bit more around dynamic modeling and with remote sensing, you can  actually model the patterns of waves in the ocean and model the melting of glaciers because  
**0:36:09-0:36:14:**  you can see the dynamic physical changes in those areas.  And so there's actually an amazing amount of water tools that exist in ArcGIS and QGIS  to look at watershed wide issues or what's happening in a delta system.  
**0:36:25-0:36:29:**  You know what's happening with erosion from water pattern weather changes already.  Yeah.  So just to zoom out a little bit and put a little bit of this into context about our  
**0:36:35-0:36:40:**  business model and the way that we're working as a company, as a company.  We have an incredible science team that is led by a PhD remote sensing scientist that's  creating really innovative remote sensing satellite powered methodologies for measuring  
**0:36:53-0:36:55:**  specific indicators on the ground.  A lot of that is just what Sarah was just describing.  But I also want to recognize that as a company, we aim to work in a decentralized way where  
**0:37:08-0:37:14:**  region network doesn't need to be the creator of every methodology and the provider of monitoring  for every single aspect of these properties.  So it may be that we have a client who says, you know, I am growing a chestnut operation  
**0:37:24-0:37:31:**  in Germany and I've been working with the World Wildlife Fund on bird friendly chestnut  operations.  We have a methodology to measure the biodiversity of bird species and we'd like to use that  
**0:37:38-0:37:39:**  methodology.  And we have all the data collection provided by this third party and at region network,  we can just say, great.  
**0:37:47-0:37:53:**  We don't know, you know, how robust your methodology is, but it sounds like it's a great tool that's  been developed by great partners.  Let's create a credit built around this bird friendly agroforestry operation and, you know,  
**0:38:05-0:38:12:**  call it the, you know, bird friendly biodiversity credit.  And then as long as we publish the information associated with the methodology itself and  then publish the outcomes of that, of the application of that methodology, we can then  
**0:38:23-0:38:26:**  put that credit into the public.  So my main point of sharing this is that if region network was doing this alone, we could  only get so far in the world.  
**0:38:38-0:38:45:**  But what we're inviting is that we want scientists and universities and nonprofits and other  organizations to get involved, to create methodologies that work for their specific context and that  cover specific needs that farmers and ranchers have in their areas.  
**0:38:54-0:39:00:**  And with that information, we can then create a credit class, issue digitally secured credits,  and then get that financial ball rolling.  Thanks for, you know, bringing those elements because you preempted one of my questions  
**0:39:10-0:39:13:**  about, you know, scaling up such methodologies.  But I think it's much clearer now that you've shared these details.  What I wanted to understand a bit better is, okay, so now it's pretty clear, understand  
**0:39:22-0:39:30:**  how you measure different ecological parameters and assess soil health and ecological health.  How do you then transform that into a credit that you can sell to a company?  Yeah, so our, you know, as Christian was saying, you know, the goal of our company, you know,  
**0:39:41-0:39:46:**  is not to be the only ones pressing the buttons for farmers, you know, and doing the monitoring  or the credit design.  But the process to issue a credit is that a credit class must first be designed and  
**0:39:54-0:39:57:**  then a methodology to monitor that.  And it could be, you know, a traditional methodology, it could be remote sensing methodology.  There's not really any limitations on that.  
**0:40:05-0:40:10:**  Once a methodology is peer reviewed, it's eligible to have credits issued for it.  So the credit classes specifically talk about how the items or the ecological outcomes that  have been monitored are packaged together into a carbon plus credit.  
**0:40:24-0:40:29:**  And then ultimately, what physically happens is, you know, we take the outcomes of the  monitoring reports, we issue on a project page, the number of credits that represent  the carbon stock and ecological outcome changes between two monitoring periods.  
**0:40:42-0:40:48:**  And then that number of credits becomes available for sale on the regen registry.  Our company provides an optional service at this phase where if a farmer or, you know,  an entity already has their own community of buyers, maybe it's the people that sign  
**0:41:01-0:41:08:**  up for the CSA, you know, that this is being issued from, or maybe it's a ranching operation  that already has local corporate partners.  If folks can sell their credits themselves, they are welcome to go ahead and sell them  
**0:41:15-0:41:19:**  without the assistance of our company.  But if people don't have those types of connections, and they have the option of signing up for  a credit brokerage service, where we work to link them with individuals and corporations  
**0:41:29-0:41:35:**  that have goals of, you know, addressing climate change, and then they're able to purchase  those credits on the regen registry.  So mainly the clients at the moment, what motives do these clients have in purchasing  
**0:41:45-0:41:46:**  credits?  So you mentioned, you could be an organization that wants to act positively on the climate,  so you buy those credits, or you could be a business that has some regulatory constraints  
**0:41:56-0:41:58:**  as well.  So our credits all exist in what's called the voluntary market space.  There's a compliance market space, and that's where a lot of your big energy companies,  
**0:42:09-0:42:12:**  for example, are required to operate.  So we operate in a voluntary space.  So companies that are saying, you know, we want to become climate neutral, or carbon  
**0:42:20-0:42:26:**  neutral, or climate positive, and in order to do so, they're unable to address all the  carbon in their supply chain through, you know, light bulb changes, or, you know, changing  the way a factory operates, they end up with extra carbon that they theoretically have  
**0:42:38-0:42:41:**  to figure out, you know, how to offset.  And so we structure our carbon credits as carbon removals, because they are pulling  carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere into the earth.  
**0:42:50-0:42:57:**  And then we partner with companies that have these goals so that they can pick from a portfolio  of options that meet their goals.  And our projects and our credits focus on looking at ecological and social outcome indicators  
**0:43:08-0:43:14:**  that are aligned with the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals, which is a series of goals  that many companies are using to drive their business operations.  So if I'm a company, and I come to Regen Network, I can look through all the project pages,  
**0:43:25-0:43:31:**  I could say, okay, my employees are really into forests this year, we're going to pick  forestry projects, and they can pick from a portfolio of projects that are on the registry  and choose how many carbon credits they want to buy from each project and go ahead and  
**0:43:42-0:43:46:**  place a purchase right there on the platform.  We have a list of over 1000 companies that have made public commitments to, to reduce  in their carbon footprint or even going carbon positive over time.  
**0:43:57-0:44:04:**  And this is a huge, there's a huge movement amongst corporations, international corporations  around the world that are recognizing that governments are not able to solve this problem.  This is especially true in our country, the United States, where our government is not  
**0:44:12-0:44:15:**  stepping up to solve the climate issue.  So corporations are stepping in and saying, we're going to take a lead on this.  And I'm talking about corporations like Microsoft, who recently said, we're going to offset all  
**0:44:25-0:44:29:**  of the carbon that we've ever produced back to 1975.  I'm talking about corporations like Delta Airlines that earlier in the year came out  and said, we're going to become the first carbon neutral airline, offsetting all of  
**0:44:38-0:44:45:**  the carbon that our company produces through every aspect of our company.  You know, that the ride share company lift offsets every single mile that every driver  in their company drives.  
**0:44:53-0:44:59:**  And through that process, like Sarah was just describing, those companies are incentivized  to reduce their impact first, you know, how can we, you know, reduce the amount of oil  that is used or gasoline that's used in our cars in our lift program.  
**0:45:10-0:45:14:**  Let's get people to ride share, let's get people to use bikes rather than cars and use  little scooters in city rather than taking rides.  But when they don't do that, because inevitably these companies can never get to net zero  
**0:45:21-0:45:26:**  on their own, they then purchase ecological offsets through a company like ours and through  the voluntary markets to then get to net zero or get to net positive.  And that's where the voluntary markets come into play.  
**0:45:36-0:45:41:**  And that's where our company like Regeo Network can really help.  And how do you decide on the pricing of these carbon credits?  Because so far I understand pretty well the whole chain of process.  
**0:45:50-0:45:54:**  But then at some point you're left with, okay, well, we have all this ecological data and  then we have to transform it into a credit with a set price.  How does that process occur?  
**0:45:58-0:46:04:**  Yeah, I mean, that's a really, really is a market mechanism and it's all over the place.  For anyone out there that's following the carbon markets, you know that carbon sells  from anywhere from 40 cents a ton for certain types of carbon all the way up to, you know,  
**0:46:16-0:46:17:**  50 or 100.  I saw Stripe just bought some carbon for $75 a ton trying to assist in a startup company  that's working on sequestering carbon in an innovative way.  
**0:46:30-0:46:38:**  So when we go to price the carbon, it's really a matter of what is it that a corporate partner  is looking for and how can we match what they need in a way that really meets their corporate  needs and their budgetary needs around this.  
**0:46:51-0:46:54:**  And for us, there's a lot of storytelling involved in this work.  So not only are we collecting really robust data on what's actually happening on the ground  and being able to help a corporate buyer know for sure that the money that they're spending  
**0:47:07-0:47:13:**  is actually translated into real world impact, but also we're able to tell that story in  a way that's really compelling and interesting for the company themselves and their board  and their shareholders and their customers to really understand that the company is doing  
**0:47:26-0:47:29:**  something real.  And I'd say the combination of really clear good data that proves real world outcomes  and a story about a farmer and their family and a place being regenerated, that together  
**0:47:42-0:47:47:**  combines to help us set a price that works for all parties.  I think it would be really interesting, Christian and Sarah, to start talking a bit about what  it means for farmers in practice, really from the farmer's perspective.  
**0:47:58-0:48:00:**  And we have a few questions based on that.  So you already touched upon it earlier on, but maybe we can go into a bit more depth  here.  
**0:48:07-0:48:13:**  One of the first ones is, how much work does it actually represent for the farmer on the  ground in order to satisfy the data needs to get a credit?  So as your listeners know, to farm regeneratively is something that takes a lot of skill.  
**0:48:31-0:48:37:**  And it's something that you're going to be constantly learning and growing your capacity  in over time.  As you start to grow your first chestnut trees, you start to grow your first almonds or start  
**0:48:45-0:48:50:**  rotationally grazing your animals, you're going to learn a lot through the process.  And you're never going to stop getting better at it as long as you continue to take a deep  interest in what's happening to your property, to your animals, to your trees and to your  
**0:48:59-0:49:02:**  ecology in general.  So without a doubt, this is something that really does take skill and takes effort.  Now to answer your questions specifically is very challenging because all of these systems  
**0:49:15-0:49:17:**  are very different.  And each farmer or rancher has a different background, a different experience, a different  understanding of how to engage with their soil, with their animals, with their tree  
**0:49:27-0:49:28:**  systems.  And so each farmer, each rancher has a unique experience around what it takes to make this  happen.  
**0:49:41-0:49:47:**  Now what we do know is that if you're farming in the conventional way, in the way that most  agronomical school systems teach you to farm, you are generally farming in a way that degrades  the environment.  
**0:49:57-0:50:00:**  You're losing topsoil every year.  You're adding chemicals, you're reducing biodiversity, you're reducing the health of the water systems  around your farming operation.  
**0:50:09-0:50:17:**  And to shift from a system that follows those kinds of practices to a system that really  acknowledges and uplifts the dynamic nature of life in your system, honestly is a paradigmatic  shift in the way that you're understanding your agricultural systems.  
**0:50:32-0:50:38:**  Now is that going to be so hard that it's not worth even trying?  Absolutely not.  Is it going to be something that takes a lot of effort to understand in a constant process  
**0:50:45-0:50:47:**  of learning or growing?  Yes.  Are you going to succeed in sequestering carbon into your soil right away?  
**0:50:55-0:50:56:**  Maybe not.  Some people do, some people don't.  It may take some experimentation and trying this or trying that, seeing how it works to  
**0:51:04-0:51:09:**  intercrop various things that you can chop and drop into the landscape.  It may take experimentation with the size of the paddocks that you rotate your animals  into and the frequency with which you rotate to try to understand which rotational pattern  
**0:51:24-0:51:29:**  is the one that's going to be most optimal for soil health.  It's not nearly as cut and dry and programmatic, I would say, as the conventional agricultural  systems that are what our parents and grandparents have been practicing.  
**0:51:49-0:51:50:**  Yeah.  So let's create an imaginary use farmer here.  So we're going to call the farmer Sally.  
**0:51:58-0:52:10:**  Farmer Sally has 75 hectares of peach trees somewhere in the Northeast United States.  And farmer Sally wants to have carbon credits issues that take into account the carbon stock  changes in soil organic carbon in her orchards, as well as the above ground biomass carbon  
**0:52:25-0:52:29:**  holding capacity of her peach trees.  So in this case, we would chat with farmer Sally and learn about what she's doing with  her trees, how she takes care of them, how old they are.  
**0:52:42-0:52:46:**  Is there anything, are she using any animals to graze in between?  Is she just mowing?  What's the patterns that she's seeing around her property?  
**0:52:51-0:52:56:**  And that's very much like a simple intake form and a couple of kind of casual conversations  to get a sense of that.  And then we would partner with farmer Sally to ask her to collect or provide information  
**0:53:06-0:53:10:**  that has been historically collected around some of these items.  So we would ask for soil samples.  And at 75 hectare size, we would only need 20 soil samples from the entire orchard.  
**0:53:22-0:53:29:**  We would want them to go to a lab and have soil organic carbon percentage, macro micronutrients,  the cation exchange percentages, as well as bulk density measurements for each location.  And that collecting 20 samples is something that can be done in a couple hours out in  
**0:53:42-0:53:44:**  the orchard.  Then we would be asking her questions like, what species are these?  When did you plant them?  
**0:53:52-0:54:00:**  Can you go out and measure a couple of diameter at base heights so we can see how big the  tree stalks are in a couple of areas?  How tall do you think some of your trees currently are?  
**0:54:08-0:54:14:**  And with just sort of like that limited series of a couple of ground truth points, we can  then start using the satellite data and map out her property.  So I would map out from the boundaries and be able to identify exactly which peach varieties  
**0:54:25-0:54:31:**  are in which areas, how big they are, what we can calculate what the above ground carbon  stock is for those trees, whether they're newly planted one-year trees or they're maturing  out 20-year-old peach trees.  
**0:54:41-0:54:47:**  And we can come up with a carbon stock number for all of the above ground biomass associated  with her orchard.  We then take the soil samples, do the remote sensing calibration and come up with a amount  
**0:54:54-0:55:00:**  of soil organic carbon sequestration and carbon stocks in her orchard.  And from that, we would say, hey, Sally, we did all the math.  We came up with this amount of carbon that is this many carbon plus agroforestry credits.  
**0:55:12-0:55:16:**  We were able to monitor these other ecological indicators that help tell the story of your  property as well.  And then we would issue credits to her and be able to keep it really simple and be able  
**0:55:24-0:55:27:**  to sell the credits in the market system.  So we approach this as a one ton of carbon sequestered is one carbon plus credit, keeping  the math really easy for everybody.  
**0:55:37-0:55:45:**  And if we assumed that the above ground carbon was an average of 14.88 tons per hectare per  year and the soil organic carbon is 4.89 tons per hectare per year and the credit price  is $15 per credit, then the total revenues that could be expected to be about a quarter  
**0:56:01-0:56:07:**  million dollars, the total costs of monitoring and verification and soil sample and credit  issuance would be about $175,000.  So Sally could make off of a 75 hectare orchard about 75K split up into four separate credit  
**0:56:21-0:56:24:**  issuances over a 10 year time period.  So it's like having an additional annual farm income level over a period of a decade or  more.  
**0:56:32-0:56:35:**  And in some of our use cases, some of the carbon is a little higher.  Some of these cases, their carbon stocks are a little bit lower.  It just depends on each individual farmer and each individual property.  
**0:56:42-0:56:47:**  But that's kind of a ballpark of what would happen if we were to actually partner with  an orchard and go through the steps with an individual farmer.  Wow, that's quite a lot of money.  
**0:56:54-0:56:56:**  It's a decent amount.  Yeah, we love more money to farmers.  That's what we're trying to get.  
**0:57:01-0:57:08:**  We're trying to help keep their process super simple, super digestible, really, really easy  to fill out the form and partner with us and do all the monitoring cost effectively and  efficiently because we understand that farmers are busy.  
**0:57:18-0:57:21:**  We think their time is extremely valuable.  We think the work they do is extremely valuable.  And we think that the world should be rewarding them for their amazing ecological practices  
**0:57:29-0:57:35:**  and acknowledging the roles that farmers have in preserving and restoring ecosystems that  we all inherently survive upon.  This is really core to our mission that we've designed this process with farmers to make  
**0:57:43-0:57:46:**  it literally as easy as we can possibly manage.  And a lot of our core team have been or are farmers ourselves.  So we have asked ourselves all along this way, how much information would I be able  
**0:57:58-0:58:00:**  to collect in my orchard?  How much time would I have to spend to this?  And how can I how could I make this process as easy as possible for farmers to engage  
**0:58:07-0:58:08:**  with?  And at the end of this 10 year period, could the farmer potentially start again then and  on the condition that they're still continuing to sequester carbon and then maybe reissue  
**0:58:20-0:58:23:**  another 10 year period with that on the long term?  Is that possible?  Yeah, so our credit terms are 10 years and at the end of them, a farmer has the option  
**0:58:30-0:58:33:**  to renew for another 10 year cycle.  So if during that time period they've, you know, at year eight, they've just planted,  you know, a whole new orchard section or something like that, you know, we can add that to the  
**0:58:43-0:58:49:**  bundled location of their property and continue to monitor the outcomes for existing trees  and new trees or new management practices that have been added throughout that 10 year  lifetime.  
**0:58:56-0:59:01:**  Because then I guess the the from the perspective of the of the buyers that they would want  to make sure that if they invest in these carbon credits that after the 10 years and  that the farmer received all this money that he that carbon is still going to maintain  
**0:59:10-0:59:14:**  the soil and nothing is going to jeopardize that.  Yep.  So the term associated with that is called permanence.  
**0:59:19-0:59:23:**  And the way that we approach this is relatively flexible.  We have a 25 year permanence time period for the carbon associated with the 10 year monitoring  issuance.  
**0:59:32-0:59:34:**  And there are two options a farmer can take.  Farmers have the option of putting a covenant on their land.  So if it was ever sold, they would have to maintain that section of the property, you  
**0:59:44-0:59:49:**  know, with the conditions that are associated with the carbon credits or because a lot of  farmers don't like to put covenants on their land.  It's a little too permanent for a lot of people.  
**0:59:54-0:59:59:**  The other option that's the more flexible version is that we have something called a  permanence buffer where we will hold back 20 percent of all the credits for each issuance  into essentially like a holding account.  
**1:00:08-1:00:17:**  And when we do that final monitoring in year 10 and reconcile the carbon, we basically  have held back some of the credits in case there's any carbon loss or in case there's,  you know, and some of the math doesn't add up.  
**1:00:25-1:00:32:**  We can basically release that permanence buffer either to cover any carbon loss that has happened  during the total 10 year time period, or we would just issue those credits out, you know,  as a bigger lump at the end because we held them back just to make sure that the carbon  
**1:00:44-1:00:48:**  was indeed accounted for appropriately.  It seems that what you're describing is supporting farmers that are already doing, you know,  good practices and taking care of their soil.  
**1:00:59-1:01:04:**  Could we imagine a scenario where these carbon credits fund the transition of conventional  farmers to regenerative practices and help them kind of counterbalance the additional  costs and risks that goes with transitioning?  
**1:01:12-1:01:16:**  I know I already alluded to this a bit earlier, but I was thinking maybe we could summarize  that through an example as well.  Yeah, so the way that would work on our part is if we had a credit buyer that wanted to  
**1:01:27-1:01:36:**  partner with a project, you know, that was transitioning and wanted to essentially prepay  carbon credit purchases in order to help fund that farmer implementing those new management  practices or planting those new trees.  
**1:01:46-1:01:54:**  Our organization doesn't do technical support for farmers beyond the sort of carbon plus  initiatives that we have, but we actually have a number of amazing partners that what  they do is they partner with agroforestry projects specifically to help them get the  
**1:02:07-1:02:15:**  upfront startup funding that is a barrier for transitioning and there are groups that  do that through finding investors that invest in the trees themselves as if they're like  an asset.  
**1:02:22-1:02:27:**  And there are a lot of technical support and grant programs that support transitioning  farmers, at least in the United States, that are adopting orchard management or regenerative  practices.  
**1:02:34-1:02:42:**  So we typically like to partner with organizations that can help people with the startup costs.  Every once in a while there is a buyer that wants to buy the whole credit issuance and  wants to see a project happen so badly they'll just prepay and then that money can go to  
**1:02:53-1:02:58:**  the farmer in order to get the trees purchased and the trees planted.  We interviewed a few weeks back Propagate Ventures who had an interesting way as well  of funding farms.  
**1:03:04-1:03:08:**  I've seen online that you guys seem to know each other.  They were really interesting.  So we're going to link here our listeners to Propagate Ventures and check out that interview  
**1:03:15-1:03:22:**  because it will marry itself very well with what's being said right now about Regen Network.  So what I wanted to say about this is that you can create quite direct relationships  between a buyer and farmers that want to sell the carbon credit.  
**1:03:31-1:03:39:**  Yeah, so we have talked to companies that are so excited about having an intimate connection  with their environmental and social initiatives and they want to be able to visit the farmer  and meet the farmer or they want to be able to talk to them.  
**1:03:49-1:03:54:**  Sometimes there's projects where it's honestly just easier to put the farmer and the buyer  and us in a room and say, okay farmer, what are you doing on your property?  Okay company, what are your focuses?  
**1:04:02-1:04:03:**  Is it water?  Is it biodiversity?  Let's figure out how we can sort of marry this land and this data with the story that  
**1:04:10-1:04:13:**  that company is really after.  Some companies love that intimate connection and we definitely have the ability to provide  that.  
**1:04:18-1:04:22:**  For companies that, you know, that's just a little too much work for them.  They can very easily just go on Regen Registry.  Each project page tells an intimate story of each project, shows where the property  
**1:04:30-1:04:33:**  is and tells you what they're doing.  You can see all of the monitoring report information, what the outcomes that we've been monitored  are.  
**1:04:40-1:04:44:**  There's videos, there's photos, there's maps, all kinds of cool stuff.  So for a company that's like, that's too much work for them, they can go on there and filter  for agroforestry or filter for forest and then look through the forestry projects and fall  
**1:04:54-1:05:00:**  in love with one of the stories of the farmers on the platform and just invest their credit  purchases right there without having to go through all of the high touch, you know, getting  to know the farmer intimately because not everybody has the time for that.  
**1:05:08-1:05:12:**  So we have the flexibility to sort of meet companies and meet farmers where they're at  because some farmers don't want to talk to people and some companies don't want to talk  to farmers.  
**1:05:16-1:05:22:**  But sometimes they do want to have a conversation and we can put them in the Zoom room together.  I want to add to this that I think that there's also a lot of really interesting international  climate change finance that's also coming out, the things like green bonds and impact  
**1:05:37-1:05:40:**  investing that could also play a part here.  So in a similar way that Propagate Ventures creates pre-purchase agreements for the produce  coming off of their agroforestry systems, as it becomes more accepted that as a farmer  
**1:05:53-1:05:59:**  shifts to ecologically friendly practices that they can be ensured that they are going  to receive ecological assets like carbon credits and biodiversity credits from their actions,  then there is a role for an impact investor to get involved and say, hey, I can provide  
**1:06:11-1:06:16:**  the capital upfront as long as I can share in the rewards of the ecological outcomes  that you produce.  And so I'm sure that we'll be seeing more and more of that rolling out as well.  
**1:06:24-1:06:29:**  Once we're on the economics, looking at the value of all of this, I also wanted to ask  about, we've talked a lot about carbon and the value of carbon right now, but what about  the value of biodiversity, for example?  
**1:06:35-1:06:38:**  Do you have a metric of like a ton of bugs per hectare?  I don't know how you could, I'm joking now, but I don't know how you can measure it exactly.  But I'm curious to see what's the value of biodiversity compared to the value of like  
**1:06:48-1:06:53:**  of a biodiversity credit or compared to carbon, what's it worth?  Well, you asked what the value is, which is a very different question than what's the  price of these things.  
**1:07:01-1:07:06:**  Maybe I should talk more about the price then to make it more specific, but yes, I understand.  Yeah, sure.  So just really quickly, the reason I make that difference there is that there are some  
**1:07:13-1:07:18:**  really interesting reports out about the value of ecosystem services and they are incredibly  high.  So even as we're talking about $25 or $50 a ton for these things, there are reports  
**1:07:26-1:07:32:**  out there that show that the value of ecosystem services coming off of one hectare of agroforestry  land could be in the thousands or tens of thousands of dollars of value to society.  Right.  
**1:07:38-1:07:40:**  And biodiversity being one of those things.  Unfortunately, in terms of the price of biodiversity credits, the market is still really small  for them.  
**1:07:48-1:07:54:**  It's a pretty nascent market and most of the prices are kept confidential between different  parties when they engage in the voluntary biodiversity purchases.  Unfortunately, I can't give you a very specific answer there.  
**1:08:09-1:08:13:**  Biodiversity is a challenging one because it's so different in every single place.  I mean, are you talking about the biodiversity in an arid desert situation?  Are you talking about biodiversity in the Amazon?  
**1:08:19-1:08:22:**  Are you talking about the biodiversity in Belgium?  It touches upon the complexity you have to deal with when you're finding prices and  metrics, etc.  
**1:08:29-1:08:32:**  It's one of the most fascinating things about your work there.  You're dealing with so much complexity.  And turning it into the language of economics and of modern society, it's not easy, it  
**1:08:41-1:08:42:**  seems.  I think this is part of why we're approaching carbon plus with all the ecological and social  indicators as a pathway for individuals and companies to start thinking beyond carbon  
**1:08:56-1:09:02:**  so that we can increase our collective understanding of how ecology works and what economic and  social values it has.  So that having a conversation around, hey, this is a biodiversity credit becomes more  
**1:09:11-1:09:13:**  normalized.  Part of our challenge as a company is we're trying to innovate and have a whole ecosystem  conversation.  
**1:09:20-1:09:28:**  That includes carbon, but is really highlighting the entire ecological interaction of the earth.  And that is just not everybody can identify many plants.  That's why we find a lot of companies ask about forestry credit.  
**1:09:36-1:09:40:**  And it's because their staff members can identify a tree.  They can't necessarily identify an herb.  They don't know their cactuses.  
**1:09:44-1:09:48:**  They don't understand necessarily like watershed ecosystems.  I mean, these are things that us as ecology, biology, agricultural people that we probably  could talk about all day.  
**1:09:56-1:10:00:**  And so we spend a lot of time educating buyers.  Why beyond carbon?  Why look at a whole ecosystem?  
**1:10:03-1:10:06:**  What do we mean by ecosystem?  What does happen on a property when somebody makes a management practice change?  Why is that an important thing to incentivize?  
**1:10:14-1:10:17:**  And then ultimately, how do we collectively value that?  And that is sort of a social conversation right now.  You know, what's a company willing to pay?  
**1:10:22-1:10:23:**  What do we think it's worth?  What are the reports say?  How dire is climate change?  
**1:10:27-1:10:29:**  You know, how what's it's like what you're saying.  What's the value of a handful of pollinators?  You know, you could track that through the whole where do the pollinators go and what  
**1:10:37-1:10:43:**  are they, you know, spreading pollen to and how many crops does a single bee, you know,  flutter into and out of and how much of our agricultural production in a year just one  bee touch.  
**1:10:49-1:10:53:**  I mean, these are complex conversations to have.  So we spend a lot of time educating farmers about our process and a lot of time educating  companies and individuals about an entire ecosystem of challenges that we have to step  
**1:11:04-1:11:08:**  up to the plate and try to solve one by one.  So if we even move the dial a little bit from carbon to ecosystem conversations, we're getting  closer to things like biodiversity or watershed ecosystem frameworks or different things that  
**1:11:19-1:11:23:**  are much more complex like that.  It's really fortunate that carbon can be used like this as a metric, a useful metric, not  only for sequestration and climate change, but also for soil health and all the importance  
**1:11:35-1:11:37:**  it has in the soil ecosystem.  So I guess that's very helpful.  I wanted to maybe take things down one level and go back to some practical questions.  
**1:11:47-1:11:52:**  But what's the minimal scale that you would be working with with a farm?  Because you mentioned some monitoring costs, which I'm assuming most of them are fixed  in terms of doing the soil analysis, etc.  
**1:12:01-1:12:07:**  So small farms, can you work with them as well?  So in the founding of Regen Network, both Gregory Landwey and I, a couple of co-founders  to spend a lot of time working with smallholder farmers.  
**1:12:18-1:12:22:**  One of our aims as a company is to get to the point where we can be working with farmers  who are farming, you know, half a hectare, one hectare, two hectares of land area, and  be able to do that in such a way that they also can be benefiting from the way that they're  
**1:12:32-1:12:38:**  serving the ecology and building ecological benefit.  Now there definitely is an economy of scale going on.  And until we can reduce the cost of monitoring, and we have enough of a robust data set that  
**1:12:49-1:12:54:**  we can extend and correlate into those small farms, for the time being, we haven't been  able to proforma out small farms like that and make it profitable for them to engage  in this at this time.  
**1:13:04-1:13:10:**  But we're seeing that as we automate these remote sensing methodologies, the price of  that monitoring is coming down and down.  And we see a point in the not too distant future where we will be able to engage with  
**1:13:17-1:13:20:**  smallholder farmers on that scale.  Now, Sarah, maybe you can speak to what is the kind of minimal size that we're seeing  for farms at this time to fall in the net positive financial outcomes with an engagement  
**1:13:33-1:13:34:**  like this?  Yeah, so from the technical detail, the answer to this question is a function of three things  that are all variable.  
**1:13:44-1:13:50:**  So there is not a straight answer to this exactly.  The appropriate scale is determined in part by credit price.  The higher the credit price, the smaller a parcel can be.  
**1:14:00-1:14:04:**  And also the carbon stock valuation.  So the percentage or the tons per hectare per year of above ground biomass than agroforestry  and tons per hectare per year for soil organic carbon.  
**1:14:14-1:14:19:**  As there is more carbon in the soil, you can work with smaller properties.  So the example I gave earlier was 70 hectares.  And at sort of the average Northeast US modeled rates for those carbon sequestration metrics  
**1:14:34-1:14:43:**  I just mentioned and a $15 credit price, a 70 hectare size is about the minimum of what  can be profitable for a farmer.  And right now we're in the process of trying to figure out how we can make the process  
**1:14:54-1:14:58:**  even more affordable for smaller farmers.  And part of that comes with our goal to automate as much of the remote sensing methodology  work as we can, which drives the cost down significantly for each monitoring round.  
**1:15:12-1:15:18:**  But there ultimately is a question to be asked for each farmer.  Our remote sensing methods may not be the appropriate monitoring tool for all property  sizes.  
**1:15:24-1:15:32:**  There are other ecological monitoring systems that can be used for very small use cases  that can model out how much carbon is probably in your trees very approximately, but can  model it.  
**1:15:40-1:15:47:**  And so for a very small farmer, in some cases, those models may be the more cost effective  monitoring approach than the remote sensing methods that we use.  Our remote sensing methods are very accurate.  
**1:15:55-1:15:59:**  They're very much based on a measurement framework, but that measurement framework is not always  needed by every credit buyer and is not always appropriate for every property scale at this  point.  
**1:16:05-1:16:06:**  Okay.  That's very interesting.  You know, the problem is that we always reach the end of our interviews and we have so many  
**1:16:13-1:16:19:**  things to ask, and then we have to scramble together the most interesting questions that  we can.  And one of the things that I thought throughout the whole interview now is, you know, this  
**1:16:25-1:16:26:**  is great.  All this data is amazing for obviously for creating carbon credits and creating income  for the farmers in this way.  
**1:16:31-1:16:36:**  But also it seems to be a huge amount of information and data that the farmer can use to improve  his techniques.  And so all this data, are you also, for example, capable of selling it to a farmer or providing  
**1:16:44-1:16:48:**  it to farmers so that they can then use to understand, okay, you know, I did this there  and the carbon improved in this way.  And you seem to be able to be very specific and especially geographically speaking, you  
**1:16:55-1:16:56:**  know, you can be very precise.  Is this something that's part of the services you could offer?  Absolutely.  
**1:17:01-1:17:06:**  And first of all, before we get into selling the data to the farmers, we want to make sure  that people understand that we're not running the Facebook business model here where we  take your data and don't value it in that direction.  
**1:17:17-1:17:22:**  So first of all, when we collect data from farmers, farmers have an option.  Farmers are the owners of that data, and they have an option of either releasing into a  pool of data that they can then sell it from or releasing it in a kind of a Creative Commons  
**1:17:33-1:17:41:**  license where others able to use and benefit from that data for free.  We're not in the business of trying to monetize that data as a primary aim here.  Our primary business is to serve farmers and help them to get to move on their path towards  
**1:17:53-1:17:55:**  ecological soundness.  I wish we could pull up a screenshot here for your viewers, because there's some really  beautiful imagery that Sarah was describing earlier that's coming off of the Wilmot Ranch  
**1:18:04-1:18:09:**  that we worked with in New South Wales, Australia.  That literally shows the difference between two different paddocks.  And we don't know what the farmers did on the ground that made the difference between  
**1:18:18-1:18:21:**  the amount of carbon they sequestered on one side of the fence compared to the other side  of the fence.  But when we feed that information back to the farmer that paddock five did much better  
**1:18:29-1:18:34:**  than paddock three, the farmer can then clearly use that information in informing how they  then move their animals around in the following years and continue to sequester even more  carbon and build even better soil.  
**1:18:42-1:18:46:**  So yeah, incredibly valuable stuff being able to be fed back.  Yeah, so I wanted to add also just that the data we're collecting from a farm is qualitative  in order to fill up the project page where they write their own story and they share  
**1:19:01-1:19:06:**  where their farm is and they choose to share their own photos and videos.  But the amount of information that we're collecting to do the monitoring is actually incredibly  limited.  
**1:19:11-1:19:19:**  It's really a handful of ground truth information and soil samples and a property boundary.  So we're not collecting tens and tons of management data from farmers unless they're specifically  called for in the monitoring methodology.  
**1:19:27-1:19:34:**  And one of our strategies that we're starting to move towards is partnering with farm management  applications that farmers are already using so they can like literally press a button  and say, I want to, you know, I want to issue carbon credits on Regen Network.  
**1:19:44-1:19:49:**  And then it basically sends us their data from their farm management app to our intake  form and automatically get some started with the process.  So they don't even have to like export stuff and upload stuff.  
**1:19:58-1:20:03:**  I mean, our information gathering is not, you know, the outcomes can be used to inform  someone making better best management practice decisions.  And those types of maps that Christian is discussing are really amazing visuals to support  
**1:20:12-1:20:13:**  that aim.  But, you know, we're not collecting piles and piles of farmer data.  Just because we don't need that much farmer data to do a lot of the, you know, a lot of  
**1:20:26-1:20:33:**  the monitoring that we do in-house, it just really doesn't require like, it does not require  every single detail about a farm.  It only requires a specific set of information.  
**1:20:37-1:20:42:**  And we try to not collect information that isn't directly related to what we need, because  we think that's cumbersome to a farmer.  Just to understand, at the moment all this is happening in the US, what kind of plan  
**1:20:53-1:20:57:**  do you have for scaling Regen Network?  Are you planning it will be available internationally?  And if so, in how many months or years?  
**1:21:03-1:21:06:**  Regen Network is in a moment of growth right now.  We've just added three developers to our team over the last couple of months, and we're  adding a couple more developers to our team by the end of the year.  
**1:21:14-1:21:23:**  We're currently heads down focused on developing those layer one tools to provide the ecological  infrastructure for a world of different applications.  Our Regen Ledger, our blockchain associated with our project is launching in Q1 of 2021.  
**1:21:33-1:21:38:**  So it's a big moment for our company where these tools actually become decentralized  and we can galvanize a community of people around those tools to build applications to  address all sorts of needs.  
**1:21:46-1:21:55:**  For Regen Registry, our first credits on the registry are basically going live very shortly.  And we have a pipeline of projects coming behind that will then fill that out.  So the next 12 months, 18 months are going to be huge for our company.  
**1:22:07-1:22:13:**  It's going to be really exciting to see where we can go and how far we can get in that time.  I would also add our entire team is international and our first project is based in Australia.  So we may be a US based company, but our ability to monitor ecological indicators and best  
**1:22:28-1:22:35:**  management practices is really very global in nature and global by design.  Thank you.  Maybe as the final question, what are the main challenges that you face in the next  
**1:22:42-1:22:53:**  months or years to upscale your operation and have regenerative agriculture change scale?  I'll speak from a high level here about the challenges that Regen Network faces.  I think one of the big challenges is for people to understand that we're stepping out of the  
**1:23:06-1:23:13:**  conventional business model and moving into a model that invites a network of participation.  At Regen Network, we often say we want to out cooperate the competition.  We're building a decentralized system that invites in the participation of farmers and  
**1:23:25-1:23:32:**  citizen scientists and universities and others to bring their knowledge and their expertise  to the table so that we can all move forward and advance this.  Reversing global climate change and getting our planet back on an ecological path towards  
**1:23:42-1:23:46:**  health is the most important thing that we can be doing right now.  And personally, I'm just not interested in the old school competitive business model  techniques that people are used to.  
**1:24:00-1:24:06:**  So there's a paradigm shift that is sometimes difficult for people to wrap their heads around  when they're trying to understand how it is that we're working and how it is that we're  trying to bring this to the world.  
**1:24:12-1:24:17:**  That for me is one of the biggest challenges that I've seen going forward.  Yeah, I'm always in a more detailed level than Christian.  I always love his explanations, like a big picture framework.  
**1:24:27-1:24:34:**  I think to accompany what Christian said, carbon credits are inherently complicated.  So a lot of terms you have to understand there's a lot of requirements that carbon credit buyers  have that pin us in around how much we can innovate and still develop a credit that say  
**1:24:51-1:24:54:**  a Microsoft's going to feel comfortable buying.  So that middle ground is challenging for us from a design perspective to simplify it as  much as we can for a farmer while still having this very high quality framework that the  
**1:25:07-1:25:09:**  broader market currently demands.  I think that as companies become more comfortable with ecology, that may shift a little bit  because they may understand why some of those frameworks are a little too stringent for  
**1:25:24-1:25:29:**  actually getting enough projects, issuing carbon credits around the globe and having  companies buy them that we actually do something at a global scale around climate change.  I think that another challenge I see is that a lot of corporations right now have just  
**1:25:41-1:25:47:**  made big goals, but they haven't all come up with an explanation of how they're going  to meet those big goals.  A lot of companies that we're talking to are just kind of mapping their supply chain, trying  
**1:25:54-1:26:00:**  to figure out what their carbon load of their company is in order to then ask themselves  in the next year or two, okay, now what do we do about it?  So we're finding that we're kind of ahead of some of the curve with the number of these  
**1:26:10-1:26:12:**  things that we're developing.  And we spend a lot of time educating farmers and a lot of time educating companies.  So we're really looking forward to when companies start to understand ecology at a deeper level  
**1:26:23-1:26:29:**  and are coming to the table saying, carbon is valuable, but the ecosystem is also valuable.  We're coming to Regen Network because you understand how to couple both together.  And that's the story that we want to align ourselves with as a company trying to create  
**1:26:38-1:26:39:**  climate impact.  We want a whole systems impact.  We're not just trying to put a carbon credit on the accounting board and say, I sunk some  
**1:26:46-1:26:48:**  carbon.  We will look forward to when companies are coming to us saying, we want to restore a  whole ecosystem and when we're storing the Amazon, we want to empower farmers and we  
**1:26:55-1:26:58:**  want to re-hole ecosystems.  When that paradigm shift happens, that's when we are sort of the perfect company for companies  to partner with.  
**1:27:05-1:27:10:**  And so we hold that aim knowing that that's where we're heading because that's where we  think the conversation needs to go.  We wish you good luck with that because it would be amazing to see this grow.  
**1:27:20-1:27:29:**  And as farmers ourselves, it'd be amazing to see these tools come to us and help us  have more profitable and ecologically rich farms.  Absolutely.  
**1:27:34-1:27:42:**  Thanks for having us on and thanks for all those listeners out there who are revitalizing  the ecologies in your landscapes.  We are doing what we're doing because we appreciate so much what you're doing.  
**1:27:51-1:27:56:**  Thank you very much for making it this far and we really hope that you enjoyed the episode  with Christian and Sarah.  As always, you can find all the links below in the description.  
**1:28:01-1:28:05:**  Don't hesitate to visit our website where we have lots more info on the podcast and  the work that we're doing.  And again, please don't hesitate to get in touch with us.  
**1:28:11-1:28:15:**  Give us your feedback, ask us your questions, provide some recommendations of people you'd  like us to interview.  We'd love to hear what you have to say and we'd love to chat.  
**1:28:19-1:28:47:**  So thank you so much and until next time.  