---
title: 9 Selecting Fruit Tree Varieties For Climate Resilience With Pierre Barbieux
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2020-11-10)  

**0:00:00-0:00:23:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:23-0:00:35:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry.  In order to find out how it can help us with these challenges, we'll be interviewing farmers,  
**0:00:35-0:00:47:**  scientists, and other experts to share with you their experiences, practical advice, and  scientific research.  Hello and welcome to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:00:47-0:01:04:**  We're your hosts, Dimitri and Etienne, and today we'll be interviewing Pierre Barbieux  from Belgium, who's working on the project Bois de Rodeau-Beaux.  And Pierre is going to be talking to us about the worlds of variety of alternative varieties  
**0:01:04-0:01:22:**  and his work selecting these varieties and adapting them to his Belgian context.  And it's really fascinating to see how, to see the amount of genetics and of tree varieties  that are out there that we haven't heard about, and also to have an understanding of what  
**0:01:22-0:01:36:**  it takes to find them, to bring them onto his land, and the process that he's going  through to trial them to make sure that they're adapted.  It's incredible the amount of knowledge he has accumulated through experiments when he  
**0:01:36-0:01:51:**  talks about different fig varieties or tree biomass production varieties.  He goes into a lot of detail and it's great because you can really see that through practice  and just a few years you can get to a level of technical understanding that's really useful  
**0:01:51-0:02:02:**  in production.  Along the interview, he's going to be talking a lot about Ernst Gotch and some of the techniques  that are used by this person.  
**0:02:02-0:02:14:**  So we thought it would be interesting to have a quick description of some of the terms and  definitions that are used.  So Ernst Gotch is a farmer and researcher in Brazil who's been for the past 30 years  
**0:02:14-0:02:31:**  developing a system called syntropic agriculture, which you can find out online a lot about.  Basically there's two concepts that are worth defining and the first one is called stratification,  so tree stratification, and that's basically placing trees next to each other quite close  
**0:02:31-0:02:45:**  according to their light requirements.  So you often hear emergent strata, canopy strata, shrub or medium strata, etc.  And this is just referring to how much light they require and how they can be placed relative  
**0:02:45-0:02:54:**  to one another in order to optimize for the light conditions and the productivity of the  land.  The second term that needs to be understood is chop and drop.  
**0:02:54-0:03:09:**  And this is a very important technique in the syntropic system where there are biomass  trees that are planted and that are regularly either copiced or pollarded or heavily pruned  in order to provide biomass.  
**0:03:09-0:03:29:**  And they're also integrated quite intimately with the productive trees in order to not  compete with them so much, but in order to really provide benefits in terms of the biomass  production, carbon improvement, fertilization, and even some things like floral induction  
**0:03:29-0:03:37:**  by the pruning, opening up light to the other trees.  So it's an interesting technique and Pierre is going to be talking a bit about it for  us.  
**0:03:37-0:03:47:**  So with this, we hope that you enjoy the interview.  Hello Pierre and welcome on the podcast.  Hello guys.  
**0:03:47-0:04:05:**  Pierre, it would be really awesome if we could get a bit of an idea of how you got into farming.  Well, it's kind of a long story.  Obviously I don't come from a farming family or I don't come from an agriculture background  
**0:04:05-0:04:20:**  or I didn't study agriculture.  Basically like everything I do is I learn everything by experimenting, doing, and observing  what I do.  
**0:04:20-0:04:39:**  So I majored in public relations in 1995, but I was really bad at it.  So I knew I was not going to pursue a career in public relations.  I've been an entrepreneur for basically all my life.  
**0:04:39-0:04:59:**  So that's what I like to do and that's what I can do.  A few years after school, I started an internet company and it was quite successful.  So we sold it to an American company, TripAdvisor to name it.  
**0:04:59-0:05:20:**  And it allowed me to have a bit of cash to play with after that.  And so right after selling the company, I invested in different projects.  The first projects I invested in were restaurants in Brussels because I've always been interested  
**0:05:20-0:05:34:**  in food.  I just love food and I just love to eat it.  And so I spent basically 10 years within the restaurant business, but it was quite stressful.  
**0:05:34-0:05:48:**  It's a stressful business to be in.  So I started to have health issues, have issues with some business partners and also the work  is quite demanding.  
**0:05:48-0:06:09:**  So you work a lot of hours very late and so I started to feel that something wasn't right  and I needed to change something to my lifestyle.  So that's when I started to get into nutrition and then into agriculture.  
**0:06:09-0:06:30:**  So the first thing I did is that I joined a market gardener cooperative next to Brussels.  A friend of mine gathered around 20 market gardeners and I was there to help him for  a couple of years.  
**0:06:30-0:06:49:**  So that was really an interesting experience because I got to learn about the really small  scale farming and all the problems that those guys and those ladies would have when they  started a small farm.  
**0:06:49-0:07:02:**  So that was really interesting.  And I stayed with them for three years, but I was not paid for this.  I was doing this on top of my restaurant businesses.  
**0:07:02-0:07:21:**  And then after that I discovered the work of Martin Profit who's created a food forest  and I think it was 25 years ago.  So in the south of, in the southwest of the UK, if I remember well, and I went to a training  
**0:07:21-0:07:36:**  with him and then I went back again and I found it to be very interesting, but it didn't  focus on production.  So it's, I think that food forest are awesome for self-sufficiency for families or for small  
**0:07:36-0:07:53:**  communities, but to make a living from it, it's quite difficult.  And that's one of the things that Martin told us when we went to his training is that if  you want to make a living out of it, a food forest is not the perfect idea.  
**0:07:53-0:08:13:**  And I remember the time that he told me, if you want to make it more simple, do it in  lines, not in three dimensions, because it's quite complicated to organize and to set up.  And so after that, I came back and luckily I found a video about the work of Anne Skosh  
**0:08:13-0:08:24:**  that we all know, right?  And that was really interesting as well because he was focused, focusing on production.  And that's what I was really interested in.  
**0:08:24-0:08:45:**  So I came back again from several trainings in Barcelona, in the South of France.  And luckily I got to find a piece of land next to Brussels.  It's really hard to find a piece of land in Belgium because the pressure on land is quite  
**0:08:45-0:09:02:**  heavy.  To find just a few hectares, you have to fight against very rich people.  Obviously people next to Brussels, you always compete with people who own horses.  
**0:09:02-0:09:14:**  They like to put their horses on a couple of hectares.  And so if you want to find a place where you can start a small farm business, you're going  to compete with them.  
**0:09:14-0:09:33:**  So it means you have to put a lot of money into it to have your piece of land.  But luckily I was able to find three hectares right next to Brussels and that was it.  So since then I've been busy experimenting.  
**0:09:33-0:09:44:**  So that's kind of the path that led me to agriculture.  Okay.  I'm going to say first that you're very humble because your English is very, very good.  
**0:09:44-0:09:52:**  You were making us feel like it was going to be much worse than this, but it's very  good.  Yeah, it's just a bit rusty.  
**0:09:52-0:10:03:**  I've been a student in the US.  It was in 1994 and 1995 and it has to come back.  It's perfect.  
**0:10:03-0:10:10:**  You're explaining things very well.  And so could you tell us a bit more about what you're doing there at Bois de Rodeau  Beaux?  
**0:10:10-0:10:23:**  Am I saying it correctly?  It's a mix of French and Flemish.  Bois de Rodeau is actually a city next to Brussels where I bought my piece of land.  
**0:10:23-0:10:36:**  So Rodeau Beaux means the wood from Rodeau, which is the area.  But I had to find a name, so that's what I came up with.  And well, at the moment it's an ongoing project.  
**0:10:36-0:10:59:**  So I wouldn't say that it's a project that is a final.  I still have a lot to experiment, so it's very experimental.  And my goal is to create a smarter fruit and herbs production system with a focus on several  
**0:10:59-0:11:15:**  aspects.  Obviously, trees are going to play a major role in the system, whether it's for producing  fruits, herbs or plants with medicinal compounds or for its role in the system as a support  
**0:11:15-0:11:32:**  species.  That's what we learned with Ernst-Gössch, the importance of specific trees that will  not produce fruits, but actually will help the system to get better and better.  
**0:11:32-0:11:52:**  The second aspect I would focus on is the autonomy in biomass.  And it's something that really excites me in a way, but also worries me because I always  ask myself the question if it's possible to make a production system profitable without  
**0:11:52-0:12:03:**  importing things from outside all the time.  So that's kind of the challenge.  We're learning more and more, but we don't have all the answers yet.  
**0:12:03-0:12:22:**  But I hope that we're going to find out if it's really possible in a way.  And the third aspect is to mix different regenerative techniques all together.  So obviously I grew up first because that's what I've learned for the past three years,  
**0:12:22-0:12:40:**  but also playing with cover crops and also playing with fermentation and kind of mixing  them all together and see what they can bring to each other.  And last but not least, because it's kind of my background, I've always been a geek.  
**0:12:40-0:12:56:**  So I've always been good at finding stuff online.  So if you ask me to find something, I'm going to be able to find something that is very  hard for other people to find because I know how to look for it.  
**0:12:56-0:13:05:**  Very useful skill.  Yeah.  And then a few years ago, I started to dig into the world of plants.  
**0:13:05-0:13:20:**  Obviously I knew a bit of a species, right?  I know that apples exist, pears and cherries, but also there's a lot more to it than the  conventional fruits that we grow in temperate climates.  
**0:13:20-0:13:38:**  And I started to look into the species, but also into the varieties inside the species.  So my goal at the moment is to find and to add the best species, obviously, but also  the best varieties that I've collected for the past few years.  
**0:13:38-0:13:55:**  I think I started four years ago.  And my idea is to find which species and varieties are the best ones for temperate climate.  Which one will cope with climate change, obviously, and also the difference in temperature that  
**0:13:55-0:14:04:**  we can have.  Because the climate, in a way, the average temperature in Belgium hasn't really evolved  in the last few years.  
**0:14:04-0:14:22:**  But the seasons and the different temperatures you can get are really changing.  You get a lot more shocks than in the past.  So it's to find species and varieties that could cope with those changes.  
**0:14:22-0:14:42:**  So basically that's what I've been doing for the last few years.  And we can also talk about the nursery, but it's more of a side project.  It's there to help the business and to make sure I can make a decent amount of money to  
**0:14:42-0:14:55:**  invest in the future of the project.  Nice, I think it's also an important economic aspect as you're describing it.  But yeah, we'll definitely want to delve deeper into a lot of the things you mentioned now.  
**0:14:55-0:15:07:**  But before that, do you think it would be possible to briefly explain to us a bit about  your local ecological and soil context?  What are you farming on and what's around you?  
**0:15:07-0:15:18:**  Well, farmers around say that we have a soil that has a good potential.  So it's a mix.  It's really my piece of land.  
**0:15:18-0:15:33:**  Of course, it can change from a kilometer away.  It can be very different.  But most of the soil around my piece of land is a mix of loam and clay with a bit of sand.  
**0:15:33-0:15:48:**  So it can get quite heavy in the winter in terms of water.  But it has a potential to do really well.  In terms of climate, I'm located in between...  
**0:15:48-0:16:03:**  It's in between an oceanic temperate climate and a continental temperate climate.  So I'm in between both.  So it's never really cold, but it's colder than the seaside.  
**0:16:03-0:16:20:**  But it's never really hot, but warmer than the seaside.  So it's between a USDA zone of 8a and 8b according to the year.  And on one side of our land, we are at the very end of Brussels.  
**0:16:20-0:16:36:**  So I'm next to very nice mansions and villas.  And on the other side, I'm surrounded by conventional farming land.  So it's kind of a weird setup to be in.  
**0:16:36-0:16:48:**  I'm in between two very different worlds, if you will.  And what's the depth of the soil you're farming on?  Well, I've got no idea.  
**0:16:48-0:17:01:**  I think it's pretty deep.  We planted around 2,000 trees so far.  And we did them all by hand.  
**0:17:01-0:17:13:**  So we didn't use any machinery to do it.  So sometimes we went up to a meter deep and the soil stayed the same.  So it didn't change.  
**0:17:13-0:17:22:**  So I guess it's good in a way.  But I cannot tell you because I didn't dig any further.  OK.  
**0:17:22-0:17:32:**  Pierre, you mentioned that you're choosing different varieties  and trying to see which ones will respond well to climate change.  Can you tell us a bit more about that process?  
**0:17:32-0:17:55:**  Well, obviously, if you want to, the first thing I look for, right,  when I look for a species or a variety is first its ability to produce very early.  Because it's a challenge in Belgium because we're not continental, right?  
**0:17:55-0:18:15:**  And we're not, it's not like we're next to the ocean where the weather is quite mild.  So we need to find varieties and species that can ripen very early.  So that would be the first criteria.  
**0:18:15-0:18:33:**  And between the theory and reality, there's always a difference, right?  You can read a lot of stuff in forums or on Facebook from, you know, fruit collectors.  But you have to test them.  
**0:18:33-0:18:48:**  So in theory, that's what I'm looking for first.  And then obviously it's going to be a cold resistance  because we can get to minus eight on the very bad years.  
**0:18:48-0:18:58:**  But usually it doesn't go lower than minus four, minus five.  So that would be the second criteria.  It's called the resistance.  
**0:18:58-0:19:12:**  But our weather is still okay.  So we can basically plant anything we want except the ones that are really exotic.  But it's changing because every day we find new varieties.  
**0:19:12-0:19:33:**  And the weather is still changing and getting a bit warmer year after year.  The third criteria, and for me it's really important, is I need to find trees.  And that's going to be especially important for the future production piece of land  
**0:19:33-0:19:57:**  that I'm going to start working on probably in two or three years, is its ability to be pruned.  I find it always a challenge to learn about how to prune fruit trees.  And finding prunes that can react to harsh pruning without harming the tree is really important.  
**0:19:57-0:20:12:**  So I can take the example of fig trees, for example.  If you take a fig tree and you let it grow, you're going to have all the fruits at the very top of the tree.  And that's what you see in gardens.  
**0:20:12-0:20:28:**  You see always the same pattern, is that people, they plant the fig tree and then it's going to get huge.  And then you're going to have all the fruits at the very top,  because it's the physiology of the tree to produce its fruits at the tip of the branches.  
**0:20:28-0:20:50:**  But with very simple techniques, you can keep it low and you can increase the production by pruning the tree correctly.  So if you take the one-time cropper, the fig trees that only produce one fruit per year,  it's very simple because all you have to do after a few years,  
**0:20:50-0:21:08:**  you need to have it settled first for the first three years, I would say.  And then you can prune it back to your at the very bottom every year.  So it's fantastic because it means that you can plant a lot more trees and then you can increase your production.  
**0:21:08-0:21:31:**  So easy to prune would be my third criteria in terms of research, in terms of selection.  And then the last one, and it's probably going to be the same for any small farmer,  is its added value for the local market.  
**0:21:31-0:21:47:**  Obviously, if you're small, you cannot compete with apple or pear producers  because they work on like 10 hectares or 20 hectares and that's all they do.  So you cannot compete with them.  
**0:21:47-0:22:08:**  So you need to find fruits and also varieties that people cannot compare them to what they find in supermarkets.  So that would be my four criteria.  Of course, there are others like its resistance to drought, which is becoming a problem.  
**0:22:08-0:22:22:**  But in a way, if you want to produce fruit, you need water.  But that's something we can talk about later.  That gives us a lot to talk about and I'm sure we'll come back to the economic aspect a bit after.  
**0:22:22-0:22:34:**  Going back to the fact that you're selecting for early fruit production,  does that give you any additional problems with late frost, for example?  Yeah, yeah, but it's pretty much the same for all fruit species.  
**0:22:34-0:23:01:**  So it's not that it's a criteria that I'm going to be worried about because it's already a problem for all fruit species,  maybe less for some than others.  But obviously, well, it's hard to find species and varieties that are going to flower right after the late frost,  
**0:23:01-0:23:18:**  right in April or May, and then that are going to ripen early enough.  So, yeah, that's something I need to focus more on.  But I think there are already species that can cope better than others with late frost.  
**0:23:18-0:23:43:**  And obviously, I'm also trying to, I'm also looking for techniques to make sure that the flowers do not burn during the,  all the young shoots do not burn during the late frost in April and May.  But that's probably going to be one of the most difficult challenges.  
**0:23:43-0:24:13:**  Yeah, I don't have all the solutions right now, but I hope some of your listeners can help in fixing it or finding the right strategies.  I know I have a few ideas, but it needs to be worked on a bit more.  So Pierre, when we look at your Facebook page, it seems that you've got a lot of quite alternative different varieties that you're testing, different trees.  
**0:24:13-0:24:32:**  Maybe you could tell us a bit about this diversity and some of the weird ones that you're testing.  Actually, the weird ones, I tend not to keep them.  Because at first, I tend to keep the plants that I love.  
**0:24:32-0:24:52:**  That's my first criteria, because my first criteria is that I know I'm going to handle them with care if I love them.  So the plants that I do not like that much, I have the tendency to get rid of them.  It doesn't mean that I'm never going to cultivate apples, but I'm not a big apple fan.  
**0:24:52-0:25:05:**  So I tend not to spend enough time with them.  But I'm going to start with the first one.  It's probably my favorite fruit tree, but also a tree.  
**0:25:05-0:25:26:**  It's pretty well known in the agroforestry community, but in the general public, it's really not well known because I've nested it at my nursery.  People really don't know the plant.  So the plant is the tree is Morris family.  
**0:25:26-0:25:41:**  So you've got Morris Alba, you've got Morris Nigra, you've got Morris Ruba, you've got all the Morris from Asian areas, so Thailand.  You've got those from Pakistan.  That's mulberry for...  
**0:25:41-0:25:45:**  Yes, it's mulberry.  Yeah, exactly.  That's mulberry trees.  
**0:25:45-0:26:09:**  And it's an amazing tree because in the past, they used it to feed animals.  And actually, the animals were encompassing and pruning the trees because they love the leaves and the young shoots.  But what people really don't know is that the fruit is quite amazing.  
**0:26:09-0:26:29:**  And actually, the tree and the leaves are also very good for your health.  So I find the tree to be amazing, at least under a climate.  You were talking about earlier about the fact that we need to cope with the lead frost, but it's not only the lead frost.  
**0:26:29-0:26:49:**  It's that the spring doesn't behave like in the past.  This year, for example, in February, we had like 15 degrees, mid-February, and then it went back to minus three.  And then in March, it went to 20 degrees Celsius and then back to minus two.  
**0:26:49-0:27:09:**  So it's all those differences.  And I think that the Morris is one of those trees that you can really cope with the lead frost.  And I've been able to get a very good crop even after those, you know, lead frost that we had in March, April, and May.  
**0:27:09-0:27:17:**  So whatever it seems like, you can do anything you want to the tree.  It's still going to produce.  So it's quite amazing.  
**0:27:17-0:27:29:**  The fruit is amazing.  So you can have white fruits that you can dry.  Basically, they're all from the Morris Alba or hybrids family.  
**0:27:29-0:28:02:**  The fruits from Niga is quite amazing as well, because it's the perfect mix between acidity and sugar, which is not the case for Morris Alba.  The white mulberry tend to have fruits that get you really high in sugar.  But there is a trick is that if you eat it or if you collect it right a few days or one week before it really at maturity, you're going to have a fruit that also have that perfect balance.  
**0:28:02-0:28:29:**  And you have also the varieties from Pakistan, which produce fruits that are very, very long.  It can get to 15 centimeters long.  But I don't know yet if they will cope with the minus five, six or eight temperatures that we can get during the winter.  
**0:28:29-0:29:15:**  But there are solutions that some people have hybridized the varieties between Pakistan and varieties from Europe or the US or even Russia to mix them together and to have the fruit production and also the ability to cope with very low temperature.  So it's an ongoing research process.  And the more I look and the more we find and the more I get access to the network of fruit collectors that spend their lives traveling around the world to look for new varieties.  
**0:29:15-0:29:52:**  I think at some point we're going to get varieties and that will cope with the low temperatures, which are a problem, at least in South Belgium and also if you get into the continental areas.  But that's one example, but it's not that it's an unusual tree, but people don't know about it, except if you're into a growth forest tree or into food forest.  So it's quite an amazing tree.  
**0:29:52-0:30:01:**  You actually started to answer my next question.  You alluded to some networks of tree collectioners.  I can't remember the exact term.  
**0:30:01-0:30:19:**  So how do you source all these different varieties?  Mostly, actually, it's quite a nice story because to enter this network, it's like the dark net.  You need to go into places you don't know about.  
**0:30:19-0:30:33:**  And I mean, those people, they don't talk about what they find.  You need to go and look for them.  And at first you need to have either plans to exchange or you need knowledge.  
**0:30:33-0:30:51:**  If you don't have any, well, it's a problem.  So what I did is I started to study and then I started to buy plants.  And as soon I was able to buy a few plants that had value within the market and the underground market.  
**0:30:51-0:31:09:**  And then over time, you start to gain trust from those guys because they don't like to give away their little gems so easily.  So it takes, sometimes it takes years.  For example, I've been, and I'm sure the guy, if he listens to the podcast, he will know I'm talking about him.  
**0:31:09-0:31:25:**  It's that sometimes it takes a few years to get access to plants.  And I've been chasing some plants for two years now.  But over time, you're going to get them if you're nice to people, if you have not something back to give them.  
**0:31:25-0:31:36:**  And also one important thing within this underground network is trust.  You cannot just take from people.  You need to exchange.  
**0:31:36-0:31:44:**  That's really important.  So yes, it takes time.  It needs to, you need to find the guys who have the varieties.  
**0:31:44-0:31:53:**  Sometimes you don't find them right away.  It's a lot of talking.  I remember I was looking for variety, specific variety.  
**0:31:53-0:32:03:**  I think it was his variety.  So I asked a guy in the Netherlands and he said, well, I don't have it anymore.  But I asked the guy in Denmark.  
**0:32:03-0:32:12:**  So I sent an email to the guy in Denmark.  And the guy in Denmark told me, I don't have it anymore.  You have to contact the guy in Poland.  
**0:32:12-0:32:21:**  So it actually took me one day to get access to the right variety in Poland.  And it's always the same.  So it takes a lot of time.  
**0:32:21-0:32:34:**  And then finally, when you have it, you need to make sure it's the correct one.  So you need to plant it and you need to verify it's the true variety you've been reading about.  So it's a very long process.  
**0:32:34-0:32:48:**  It can take up to five to 10 years to make sure that one, you have the correct variety and two,  that the variety is going to be successful and work under your climate.  So yeah, it's a long process, but it's kind of fun.  
**0:32:48-0:33:05:**  It sounds more like detective work than farming almost, you know, but that's what the beauty is.  There's so many aspects to working with plants and that's a new one that I didn't know about.  Yeah, and actually it's a hard job to do because you can't do both.  
**0:33:05-0:33:26:**  I mean, if you do both, it means either that you have money or you have time or you have both.  Well, you know, I was lucky enough to have money on the side so I can spend my time working on this  and still, you know, taking my time to build the system, you know, the producing system on the side.  
**0:33:26-0:33:48:**  But over time, you know, the job, you know, the amount of work I put into researching is going to decrease.  And the amount of work I put into the production system is going to increase because at some point,  I hope to be able to assess the fact that, you know, this variety or this species works and this one doesn't work.  
**0:33:48-0:33:59:**  And I'm going to be happy with that.  But in a way, some people say that in the plant collection, I don't know if you say collector or collection,  I don't know the exact word, but they say that it never ends.  
**0:33:59-0:34:13:**  It's like you always want to find new plants and new gems.  So probably my time, you know, researching is going to decrease,  but I'm still going to be involved in this searching and exchanging and testing.  
**0:34:13-0:34:18:**  Yeah.  It becomes an addiction.  Yeah, yeah.  
**0:34:18-0:34:36:**  Well, I try not to.  It's like I'm not a stamp, you know, collector, you know, at some point.  At the moment, I'm testing a lot of varieties in different species, about 120 varieties of figs,  
**0:34:36-0:34:50:**  about 80 varieties of khakis, about 30 varieties of nashi.  But at some point, I'm just going to keep maybe five to 10 of each variety.  And you have to do it for, you know, with a purpose in mind.  
**0:34:50-0:35:06:**  It's not just, you know, collecting the plants because at some point you need to tell yourself,  do I have the use of having, you know, varieties that will produce over a long period of time?  If it helps your production system, it's fine.  
**0:35:06-0:35:27:**  You can play with the fact that, you know, varieties can produce in mid-July or end of July or early August.  If you don't have the time to take all the fruits at the same time, for example, because you're small  or you don't have a lot of labor to work, I mean, a lot of manpower to work with you.  
**0:35:27-0:35:42:**  And if you're bigger, then you're probably going to focus on one variety that is going to produce like hell  and then are going to produce everything at the same time.  It depends on your strategy.  
**0:35:42-0:36:02:**  But yes, yes, it's going to be probably in definitely the amount of, yeah, I don't know.  I don't know what I'm going to do in the future, but at some point I'll have to stop because it's too much work.  Because what I do for now is that during the day I work at the nursery or, you know, within the field.  
**0:36:02-0:36:22:**  And at night, that's usually after the kids are asleep is when I start looking for varieties.  But I usually do it in the winter when I have less work.  Before we move on to the orchard and also to the nursery, I wanted to understand, to get a sense of a timeline.  
**0:36:22-0:36:38:**  Once you find a variety, presumably sometimes you have to wait for the first fruit production.  So that could take many years before you're able to see like this is going to work or not.  Yeah, yeah, you have to test everything.  
**0:36:38-0:36:57:**  So it's, for example, I'm going to just going to talk about two fake varieties, right?  One variety is quite well known in France, but also among, you know, thick collectors, collectionists.  It's the Ronde de Bordeaux, which is quite famous.  
**0:36:57-0:37:12:**  It's even so famous that within the network we call it RDB.  So you have to know it, but it's called RDB.  And Ronde de Bordeaux is a one time, you know, it's a one cropper per year.  
**0:37:12-0:37:29:**  So it's going to produce on the wood of the year.  So it's an interesting fig tree because it's probably the earliest ripening fig that you can find among all varieties.  So it's really interesting.  
**0:37:29-0:37:56:**  But the fig has issues and very humid and rainy climates, especially when the fig starts to ripen.  It's that the fig has a tendency to split, which is a problem because if it splits, it's not going to mature properly and then it's useless.  So it means that it's not a candidate for a production system in a temperate climate.  
**0:37:56-0:38:16:**  But when I entered the network and I started to find out more about fig trees, there was another variety that people talked about.  And that was a variety I've never heard about.  It's name is Michurin number 10.  
**0:38:16-0:38:23:**  So it's the story behind it.  It's quite nice.  It's a lady in the 80s in Bulgaria.  
**0:38:23-0:38:52:**  I've heard that she was a scientist and she collected 50 varieties from around her city, which is called Michurin in Bulgaria.  And she selected 50 varieties, named them from 1 to 50.  And she kept the number 10 because it was the only fig that resisted to a very harsh cold spell they had in the 80s.  
**0:38:52-0:39:09:**  And all the other plants got killed to the ground.  It doesn't mean that they all died, but they were killed to the ground.  And Michurin was the only one who stayed up and well and healthy and didn't freeze.  
**0:39:09-0:39:38:**  And also another reason why she selected the variety is that because she could see that it was really a very early, rapid fig.  And the advantage of this fig for our rainy climate, because most years now we tend to have dry spells, right?  But still in September or October, it can start to rain again.  
**0:39:38-0:39:49:**  And that was the case this year again.  And Michurin number 10 didn't split at all.  So it means that it takes three or four years to really assess a variety.  
**0:39:49-0:40:06:**  I mean, I kind of knew about Ronde Bordeaux, which was really already in the literature.  It was already described as having the potential to split if it rains in September.  But it doesn't happen for Michurin.  
**0:40:06-0:40:43:**  So it's an amazing one for a temperate climate, especially colder climates, because this year it started to ripen on the 26th of August.  Which is quite good knowing that fig trees are going to gain one, two and sometimes three weeks in maturity in terms of early ripening over time as they get older.  So at 10 years old fig tree can produce figs probably two weeks earlier.  
**0:40:43-0:41:03:**  So it's kind of interesting to know that. Don't get rid of fig trees if they seem not to be producing well at first.  Try them for a few years and then assess and then get rid of them if you find out that it doesn't work.  But that's kind of interesting.  
**0:41:03-0:41:19:**  It seems that we have a huge debt to pay to all these amateur collectors.  Yeah, and we don't know about them.  But over time people are going to get access to it because in the end it always happens.  
**0:41:19-0:41:46:**  They like to protect them but at some point there's going to be a leak and some guys like me are going to start selling them.  But yeah, exactly. And those guys they spend their vacations, they go on vacation just to find figs for example.  I know some people go to Spain just to find figs.  
**0:41:46-0:41:54:**  It's kind of crazy but that's what they do.  It's like they post photos of their holidays.  Some people are going to post photos of them on the beach.  
**0:41:54-0:42:10:**  But what they do is that they post photos of their hands opening figs and eating them.  So yeah, it's kind of cool.  But it seems that it would be challenging for a farmer to be doing this work, although necessary.  
**0:42:10-0:42:20:**  Especially in all the different contexts.  You're adapting them to your context but 300-400 kilometers away or even less it will be another context.  It might need other selective work.  
**0:42:20-0:42:38:**  So it seems difficult that a farmer would be able to integrate that into his work.  Yeah, actually he would need to work with someone from his area.  He would need to find a guy like me who's doing the same kind of work and research.  
**0:42:38-0:43:07:**  But I don't have all the answers but I know even 300 kilometers away I could suggest some varieties that have the potential to do well.  But of course, in a way what's good as well is that I can also advise people which ones not to buy.  Which is important because it happens so often that people end up with plants that are not adapted to the climate.  
**0:43:07-0:43:25:**  So it's an advice at least I can give to them.  It's not to buy plants that are not going to work under the climate.  Something that we haven't clarified before is how many years have you been planting these trees?  
**0:43:25-0:43:34:**  How long have your trials been going for now?  It's been going for three and a half years.  Basically four.  
**0:43:34-0:43:51:**  So yes, it's still very young.  It's funny because people who visit, even people from universities, they come to me and say, well I would like to replicate your system.  And I told them, well don't man.  
**0:43:51-0:44:05:**  It's way too soon.  It's not a recipe.  I'm trying stuff and over time maybe in five to ten years we're going to start having more information about the system and about the plants.  
**0:44:05-0:44:22:**  But it's way too soon.  Four years is still very little when you compare to life expenses of shrubs and trees.  It's still the very beginning.  
**0:44:23-0:44:45:**  As a second phase of this interview we really wanted to know a bit more about the regenerative fruit orchard that you are setting up.  And experimenting with and some of the techniques that you're trying out there.  So to start off with, maybe you could tell us a bit about some of the plants that you've planted in this orchard.  
**0:44:45-0:45:04:**  Is it the same plants that you're experimenting with for the variety selection or is it some other plants?  Actually at the moment I'm testing a lot more than I'm going to test in the future.  When I planted four years ago I didn't know enough.  
**0:45:04-0:45:17:**  But now I have a much clearer view about what I want to plant.  It's not that I know everything.  I still need to learn a lot about the plants that I believe to have a potential.  
**0:45:17-0:45:38:**  But I know it's been four years now and I had the time to analyze on how the plants work.  At the moment I'm testing around 100 species and about a thousand varieties.  I'm going to spend a lot of time testing more.  
**0:45:38-0:45:59:**  Because I planted about one hectare four years ago but some do not work.  I'm going to need to get rid of them and I'm going to change with varieties that have a lot more potential.  I've planted rows of trees and a couple of layers.  
**0:45:59-0:46:19:**  At ground level I've focused on plants that are very easy to multiply.  I've focused on one because it grows like really crazy.  It's really a plant that is adapted to our climate and to our soil.  
**0:46:19-0:46:32:**  It's comfrey. Comfrey works really well at ground level for me.  I could try other plants but this one is so easy to multiply.  It's very cheap.  
**0:46:32-0:46:55:**  If you want to buy comfrey, especially the Pucking 14 that is quite well known within the plant amateurs.  It's a comfrey that does not seed itself or do not spread.  It means that if you plant it, it's going to behave and stay where it is for its life course.  
**0:46:55-0:47:16:**  It's also a plant that you can chop one or two times a year.  Worms do love it.  It has a big taproot that can go deep into the soil and take minerals and make it available to the plants nearby.  
**0:47:16-0:47:43:**  It's really an interesting plant, not at ground level but at ground level.  I've been using a lot of different shrubs that produce fruits.  All are well known but there is one that I really like because it's really producing a lot of young shoots.  
**0:47:43-0:47:53:**  Also a lot of fruits is the Josta berry.  I don't know the name.  I think it's Ribes nidigrolaria in Latin.  
**0:47:53-0:48:12:**  It's a mix of one currant with black currants.  It's really producing really well and it's also very easy to multiply.  You just need to take cuttings during the winter and then you need to actually put the cutting into the ground.  
**0:48:12-0:48:23:**  It's going to create a new plant.  That's really one thing I focus on as well.  When you start a project you can invest a lot of money in plants.  
**0:48:23-0:48:38:**  For example, the comfrey.  If you had to buy let's say 2000 comfries to cover all your tree lines, you would end up paying a lot of money for that.  You're not going to make money from it.  
**0:48:38-0:48:56:**  It's a support plant.  But if you start your own little nursery with one comfrey that is two years old, you can divide the roots and make 200 plants.  It means that it's very easy to multiply if you do it yourself.  
**0:48:56-0:49:21:**  Of course you're going to need a bit of time to let the plant settle.  But it means that over time if you plant 20 plants you could do 4000 plants within two years.  It's a strategy for people who do not have the money but have a bit of time to multiply plants in another expensive way.  
**0:49:21-0:49:42:**  That would be a second plant I've been playing with.  For the top layers, those are really the plants that are going to produce the fruits itself.  I've been playing with a lot of different species and varieties but obviously the ones that I believe I'm going to keep in the future.  
**0:49:42-0:49:52:**  I can talk a little bit about them.  First is going to be mulberry because it's an amazing tree.  You can use the fruit to make syrup.  
**0:49:52-0:50:18:**  You have different uses for it.  The second is going to be amenonciel nifolia, I think it's a service berry or service tree.  It produces fruits that are the size of a blueberry but I find the taste to be more interesting because it has a woody flavor.  
**0:50:18-0:50:45:**  Also it's a shrub that can become a big tree if you let it go but it's a shrub that is more adaptable to many types of soils.  Whereas blueberries need a very specific type of soil to produce and even to survive.  I would say amenonciel nifolia is the second one.  
**0:50:45-0:51:11:**  I'm going to talk about the third one which is really a discovery for me.  I don't know the name in English, people would have to find it out but it's cornus mass.  It's a tree that you can find in the wild at least in the temperate climate in Europe that produces red flesh fruits.  
**0:51:11-0:51:36:**  The stone is very big compared to the flesh so it's always been a problem because in Melzia you're going to produce fruits that have a ratio that is not really good.  It means you're not going to make money with that.  But the eastern countries like Poland and also Ukraine and Russia have been selecting varieties for the last 20 years.  
**0:51:36-0:51:48:**  Now you've got varieties that produce huge amounts of flesh.  So it's really interesting.  The fruit is red and when the fruit is ripe it falls on the ground.  
**0:51:48-0:52:12:**  You can transform the fruit by making wine, syrups, jams and also vinegar.  In the eastern countries there are so many recipes for the fruit.  And also there are new varieties that are yellow which is interesting because the birds are really not interested in them.  
**0:52:12-0:52:27:**  And also I find it to have a better taste than the red ones.  So it means that the yellow ones could be eaten fresh and maybe sold locally but I would have to find this out.  I'm going to talk as well about nashi.  
**0:52:27-0:52:49:**  Nashi is the Japanese pear.  It's from the family of pears but it has a different taste than pears.  It's a bit similar but it has the advantage of not having the problems that pears have in Europe.  
**0:52:49-0:53:15:**  Pears can get really sick which is an issue but nashi do not seem to have the problem for now.  When I tried five or six years ago the first nashi I tasted in a shop, I didn't find it to be interesting.  But today there are loads of varieties especially from Japan and from South Korea.  
**0:53:15-0:53:25:**  And the taste is really good. I was really surprised.  That's the tree I'm going to add to the mix.  There are quite a few others. Oh yeah, I forgot one.  
**0:53:25-0:53:51:**  That's one I haven't had the chance to test it properly because I've been looking for a specific sub-species for the last two or three years.  It's the elderberry.  Elderberry I think has a huge potential especially during those crisis times.  
**0:53:51-0:54:09:**  And the virus attacking our health.  It has so many nutritional compounds and it's been studied a lot at the Missouri University.  That's where I find a lot of information.  
**0:54:09-0:54:29:**  There's a grower there that has been selecting and producing elderberry for the last 30 years.  And it's not the elderberry that we find in Europe which is the sambocus nigra.  It's the sambocus canadensis and it's a quite amazing tree.  
**0:54:29-0:54:47:**  It's heavily produced a lot.  And it's also much easier to manage.  It's that the sambocus nigra, the black elderberry that we have over here cannot be pruned very easily.  
**0:54:47-0:55:00:**  It still goes.  It has a structure that is not easy to manage.  And the canadensis is in a way not all varieties can be managed like this.  
**0:55:00-0:55:09:**  But it's the same as the fig tree I was talking about earlier.  Is that every year you can cut it to the ground.  Which means that it's very easy to manage.  
**0:55:09-0:55:25:**  It's that over time after a few years you're going to have really strong shoots that are going to produce on the year's shoots.  Which is interesting.  It means that you can plant.  
**0:55:25-0:55:34:**  You don't have to space them a lot.  You can plant them quite densely.  So it's an interesting one.  
**0:55:34-0:55:46:**  And you can do obviously syrups for the winter.  And you can mix them with plants that have medicinal compounds in them.  So that's one I'm going to experiment a lot.  
**0:55:46-0:55:58:**  You know, I was talking about earlier the time it takes to find species.  And I've been chasing canadensis species for the last six months.  And now I'm in touch.  
**0:55:58-0:56:11:**  And hopefully it's going to go through with the nursery in British Columbia in Canada.  Where there is a grower over there.  And I hope I'm going to get cuttings this winter.  
**0:56:11-0:56:20:**  And we'll be able to multiply them.  So those are kind of the trees that I like.  And that I believe have potential.  
**0:56:21-0:56:33:**  It's really interesting to hear how the knowledge that you're acquiring through your nursery work.  And through your analyzing the species.  All this diversity of species in your selection work.  
**0:56:33-0:56:45:**  All this knowledge is feeding into your understanding of how to set up an orchard.  You can feel it in the talk that you're giving right now.  And that's really fascinating for me.  
**0:56:45-0:56:53:**  And it shows how technical we can get.  And how that understanding tree so technically can really benefit knowing how to place them into a system.  And how to use them.  
**0:56:54-0:57:05:**  I wanted to ask a bit more about the biomass trees that you mentioned earlier on.  I'm not trying necessarily to say they're trees.  But you talked about producing your own biomass on the site.  
**0:57:05-0:57:16:**  So maybe that's something that you could elaborate on.  What's your strategy to produce biomass?  Yeah, obviously I've been really interested in also in cover crops.  
**0:57:16-0:57:32:**  So the first thing we did before planting.  Is we sowed a mix of Dactylis glomerata.  Which is I think orchard grass in English.  
**0:57:32-0:57:41:**  And also Meticago sativa, the alfalfa.  I haven't experimented anything else for now.  Because it's really working well.  
**0:57:41-0:57:49:**  So the alfalfa is quite amazing.  We had three years of dry spells.  Obviously like many people.  
**0:57:49-0:58:02:**  I mean many areas in the world.  And the alfalfa really did cope with the dryness that we experienced during the last three years.  So I don't plan to change.  
**0:58:02-0:58:22:**  And I think we can talk also about the fact that we need as experimental farmers.  We need more science to be put into our fields.  But I read it a while ago that the alfalfa had an interesting...  
**0:58:23-0:58:33:**  It was quite complementary to trees.  If you sow an alfalfa before you implant an orchard.  It means that when you plant the tree.  
**0:58:34-0:58:50:**  The tree is going to have a tendency to go deeper into the ground.  Because the alfalfa is taking up all the space available on the site.  So I think that's kind of a strategy that we are all looking for.  
**0:58:50-0:59:01:**  When we want to set up a system like this.  It's to find a solution that are really interesting.  And that are going to fix problems that we encounter.  
**0:59:03-0:59:10:**  So alfalfa has been quite amazing.  I'm going to try other mixes.  But I need more equipment.  
**0:59:10-0:59:25:**  And I don't have the ability to sow mechanically at the moment.  So I'm quite happy with it at the moment.  So in between the tree lines we obviously use alfalfa as a mulch.  
**0:59:25-0:59:41:**  So we chop it one, two, three or four times a year.  Two cuts are left there just to feed the alfalfa.  And two cuts are mulched on the tree rows.  
**0:59:42-0:59:51:**  So that's what we use as cover crops for fertility.  But we also use trees obviously.  So I talked about the comfrey.  
**0:59:52-1:00:02:**  I use some A. echinus species.  I don't know names in English but multi flora, umbellata.  Multi flora it's called the gumi.  
**1:00:02-1:00:17:**  It's interesting because it fixes its own nitrogen.  So it's quite dynamic when you have to implant the system from scratch.  And for the top strata for the top layers,  
**1:00:18-1:00:29:**  I've experimented with 10 different varieties.  But the ones that do really work well is the arnus cordata.  The Italian alder.  
**1:00:29-1:00:47:**  The Polonia tormentosa which is quite popular within the aquifer history network.  There is the Salix alba which is the willow and also the white poplar.  And I could find, you know, I did the same kind of work with a friend from the network  
**1:00:48-1:01:10:**  that I did for fruit trees, researching fruit trees.  You can also try to find support species that have really, that behave really well within your climate  by researching a variety or sub-varieties or new creations by research centers  
**1:01:10-1:01:31:**  that are going to grow twice faster for example.  So for the poplar you get breeders in the UK for example who created what I call the poplars on steroids.  It means that they grow so fast that it's quite amazing to witness the difference between  
**1:01:31-1:01:45:**  a local poplar and the poplar that were imported from the UK.  It's like twice the speed.  Twice the speed.  
**1:01:45-1:01:57:**  Just to clarify, these support species are on your tree line or these biomass producing species, right?  They're on your tree line and you're gonna be so mixed with your fruit trees  and the different berries that you talked about.  
**1:01:57-1:02:05:**  And then you're gonna be pruning them to produce biomass, right?  Exactly.  I need to learn a lot more about this, right?  
**1:02:05-1:02:21:**  Because the conditions, you know, the work for example of Ernst Gotch in Brazil,  he's got his own climate, right?  And the conditions are not the same within Europe.  
**1:02:21-1:02:35:**  And so I need to learn a lot more about this.  For now I've planted those trees every two or three meters.  But it might be too much or it might be too little when you start.  
**1:02:35-1:02:46:**  I don't have an answer.  So that's really experimental.  It could mean that over time those support trees that I planted every two meters,  
**1:02:46-1:03:04:**  I'm just gonna keep one out of three or four.  I need numbers on the carbon that they produce when they're young and when they are quite mature.  And that's really something that we'd like scientists and people to work on  
**1:03:04-1:03:20:**  and to help us out with because we don't have the proper answers at the moment.  So yes, they are planted on the tree lines, yes.  It's in the very early stages in Europe, all these techniques.  
**1:03:20-1:03:30:**  But how would you plan on then managing the material that you've pruned  or the biomass that you've pruned from the trees?  Yeah, that's also a question.  
**1:03:32-1:03:45:**  Are we gonna, you know, use a shredder?  Well, we don't have a definitive strategy.  At the moment, we would do probably like everyone else do,  
**1:03:45-1:04:04:**  is that we would use wood chippers, either a wood chipper that we would place on our two-wheeler  or a separate machine, that would be an option.  But in the future, and I've been talking with you guys,  
**1:04:04-1:04:25:**  it would be also a good idea to prune the branches and the trees.  To prune the branches and then maybe to shred, for example, the alfalfa  and the branches at the same time and put them on the lines, on the fruit lines.  
**1:04:25-1:04:37:**  It could be a strategy, but I don't have enough knowledge.  I don't know even if those tools exist for two-wheelers.  I would need to learn a lot more and I guess over time  
**1:04:37-1:04:52:**  and the more we exchange information within the network of people  who are starting this kind of project, well, it's going to be possible.  But we're going to need more information to be able to choose the right strategy.  
**1:04:54-1:05:08:**  That will be an interesting one because that was definitely a recurring question  for us at Massey Farm and it still is.  It takes a lot of energy, both human and petrol to be passing everything in the wood chipper.  
**1:05:08-1:05:17:**  So it's a really interesting challenge.  I did want to ask, you mentioned mulching the lines with alfalfa.  Is that the only thing you do for weed suppression?  
**1:05:17-1:05:24:**  And generally, how is that going?  How are you managing to deal with weeds?  Weeds.  
**1:05:26-1:05:37:**  I've not experimented a lot with weed controls.  I've had issues.  So we tend to use different strategies.  
**1:05:37-1:05:58:**  Mulching would be an interesting one, but usually we don't have access to mulch right away.  I mean, we could probably work with gardeners around the area for having wood chips.  It's also a problem because sometimes you believe you're going to do something good  
**1:05:58-1:06:14:**  and it turns out to be bad.  Wood chips are interesting, of course, but when the soil is not ready to cope with wood chips,  you have a tendency to bring a lot of material from the outside and then you're going to run  
**1:06:14-1:06:25:**  into issues.  And I'm not sure that placing like 30 centimeters of wood chips on a heavy clay soil is a good idea.  But you learn by doing.  
**1:06:25-1:06:41:**  But I think the best strategy for weed control is to prepare your fruit lines in the perfect manner.  And over time, after four years, I've developed a few strategies to make sure that weeds are  kept under control.  
**1:06:41-1:06:55:**  So first, what we use is a machine to get rid of the grasses because the grasses are really  the enemy of the trees.  Not the trees, not of a grown up tree, but of a young seedling.  
**1:06:55-1:07:08:**  They cannot cope with the competition in terms of water and nutrients.  And so right after what we do is either we place a mulch or we place a mulch and we plant  the plants.  
**1:07:09-1:07:23:**  For example, comfrey, which was a problem in the beginning, we didn't have enough.  So we planted a few.  But now, as we have about a thousand comfrey that we've planted, it means that we could  
**1:07:23-1:07:44:**  multiply them and make 200,000 comfries.  So now the weed pressure is not going to be as big as when we started with nothing.  So I would first weed the line and then place a mulch and then right away plant the perfect  
**1:07:44-1:07:54:**  plants for your area.  It doesn't mean comfrey is going to work for everyone.  I know people in other places in Europe where comfrey doesn't grow well, but you need to  
**1:07:54-1:08:06:**  find your plant that's going to grow well under your climate and going to grow fast  enough to compete with the grasses.  And so it's kind of a mixed strategy.  
**1:08:06-1:08:17:**  You cannot do one thing.  You have to do everything at the same time and you have to plant it in advance.  That's how you can achieve, you know, because if you don't do that, your plants are going  
**1:08:17-1:08:28:**  to suffer.  And especially if you have a few dry spells like we had for the last three years, you're  going to lose a lot of growth and you're going to lose time and then you're going to  
**1:08:28-1:08:38:**  lose money.  And I'm sure that's where your high level of technicity on different plants is going  to come in handy and finding right combinations.  
**1:08:38-1:08:51:**  And it's great that you've already found that with comfrey.  And the other thing I was wondering is how do you go about in terms of fertilization?  Maybe from just when you prepare the lines and plant the trees and how that works out  
**1:08:51-1:09:09:**  on the following years?  Well, like everyone, I did soil test at the very beginning, but it's kind of hard for  me because I don't have the knowledge to understand, you know, what's going on.  
**1:09:09-1:09:29:**  So after, you know, when I first started, you know, I didn't know much.  But now over time and obviously reading stuff and learning more and listening to podcasts  and reading science, you know, science literature, you get to learn more about what you saw and  
**1:09:29-1:09:46:**  need.  But of course, what I did is kind of the, you know, balance the pH at first.  So I used dolomite and also basalt powder to balance the nutrients and to make the pH  
**1:09:46-1:10:09:**  right for the fruit trees.  But my and that's the question I have is that, are we going to be able to balance the  quality of the soil and make sure that our plants and fruit trees have all the proper  
**1:10:09-1:10:18:**  nutrients to produce enough in the future?  Or are we going to have to import from outside?  Do we have to add animals, for example?  
**1:10:18-1:10:37:**  It's also a debate among the agroforestry passionate is that is the animal necessary  or is the animal taking nutrients from the system?  For example, the alfalfa that I grow that is going to be eaten by the animal and not  
**1:10:37-1:10:48:**  available to fatten the trees.  Is it a good strategy?  Well, I don't have any proper answer, but hopefully I'm going to learn over time and  
**1:10:48-1:11:02:**  from people from helping and who have the desire to help me and finding new ways to  fix this.  Yeah, but I have more questions than I have answers.  
**1:11:04-1:11:16:**  Welcome to the club.  Send your questions to us then, because that's the whole point of the podcast is the endless  number of questions that came out of our experience.  
**1:11:16-1:11:31:**  I did want to ask, I mean, we've talked about so many different varieties in the last hour,  and it kind of makes me think, you know, what would be your optimum level of diversity?  You know, once you've tested out, you found the right varieties and you have your kind  
**1:11:31-1:11:45:**  of cruising speed.  That's that's a good question.  I would imagine maximum one or two layers of fruit trees per line, because I would imagine  
**1:11:45-1:12:04:**  because I find it to be very difficult to play with 100 species and thousands of varieties.  So we need to be reasonable, but we need to be smart and use the proper plant at the right  space.  
**1:12:04-1:12:20:**  So I would probably I know that it has advantages to plant and to diversify on the same line,  you know, for biodiversity and to make sure that pathogens do not attack your fruit trees  so easily.  
**1:12:20-1:12:35:**  But I also find it so complicated to manage.  It means that we don't have the proper tools to, you know, to go and pick up fruits that  are so diverse on lines of trees.  
**1:12:35-1:12:54:**  So I think in the future, I'm going to focus on one line is probably going to be one species  at the upper level and one species at the lower level.  And then on the next line, we may change or every four or five lines we may change depending  
**1:12:54-1:13:05:**  on our strategy and market strategy.  But I would probably limit to one or two fruit trees.  For example, it could be you know, it's I still have to learn about it, but it could  
**1:13:05-1:13:26:**  be khaki as upper level and then it could be cornice mass in between if it works.  But you need to have the proper pruning strategy.  But the more I learn, the more I imagine the future of the regenerative fruit orcharding  
**1:13:26-1:13:38:**  is that over time is just your you just you just have to imagine what's possible.  And the more I learn, the more I imagine what I can do.  But it's still too early.  
**1:13:38-1:13:48:**  I'm going to stand.  So the first phase was to really experiment.  The second phase is the other piece of land I've got, which is going to be I'm going to  
**1:13:48-1:14:03:**  be more reasonable and I'm going to I'm going to plant less species and less varieties.  And then after that, when I learn more from that second experience, I will be able to  start a real production project.  
**1:14:03-1:14:16:**  But that's going to be that's going to be next.  And you talked about the challenges in terms of management, but then there's also the  challenges of selling diversity to a market, especially if you have a lot of niche products.  
**1:14:16-1:14:26:**  So is it the fact that you're close to Brussels, which means that you can really have some  kind of odd and weird fruits and not take a risk there?  Or how are you how are you going to deal with that?  
**1:14:26-1:14:47:**  I think I don't plan to sell fruits directly to the people without transformation.  I think if you want to be successful, you need to transform.  So my strategy right away and I've learned it from the very beginning is that it's hard  
**1:14:47-1:15:03:**  to make decent money doing a small, small scale project and selling fruits without  transformation.  So I'm going to definitely focus on transforming the fruits that I produce.  
**1:15:04-1:15:22:**  Yeah, so I'm not I'm not going to sell the fruits like they are to the local people,  especially the fruits that are not well known, because, you know, it's a long process to  make them adapt, adopt a new kind of fruit tree.  
**1:15:22-1:15:36:**  But people are getting more and more curious.  But my strategy is definitely to go down the transformation route is that I don't want  to sell directly like the fruit like it is.  
**1:15:36-1:15:57:**  But I would like to create mixes with a focus on the medicinal aspect of the mix.  So one example would be to take aronia fruits, berries, and to mix them with elderberries,  which is something that people know already.  
**1:15:57-1:16:10:**  They know about the taste and to mix them as well with aromatics that also have some  medicinal properties.  So that would be the kind of strategy that we'd use to sell my products.  
**1:16:10-1:16:27:**  And also, I will not get into competition with khaki producers from Spain anywhere.  So I would need to be smarter if I want to make a living from it.  Yeah, that's very interesting.  
**1:16:28-1:16:44:**  And so Pierre, just, you know, slowly taking the interview to an end.  I would love to know what were some of the main challenges that you experienced?  Maybe we can just focus on the orchard side or I don't know, I'll let you kind of interpret  
**1:16:44-1:16:49:**  this however you want.  But what were some of the main challenges that you met since you started the project  there?  
**1:16:49-1:17:02:**  Yeah, quite a few.  But first of all, it's obviously it's the kind of the lack of knowledge.  When you start, you don't have access to information.  
**1:17:02-1:17:12:**  You're not part of a network yet.  You don't know where to look for information.  So that's kind of difficult when you start a project.  
**1:17:12-1:17:33:**  So I would say probably the number one.  The number two, I would say as well, the right tools for the right task is that sometimes  we don't know which tools we need and we usually end up buying, you know, equipment that we  
**1:17:33-1:17:46:**  don't need or we find useless because we realize they don't serve the purpose and our  strategy.  So that would be the second problem because you spend you would end up spending unnecessary  
**1:17:46-1:17:59:**  money on the wrong tools.  So that would be the second.  And also the third one, but it's probably the same from for everyone in the world is  
**1:17:59-1:18:18:**  its regulations.  You spend so much time trying to fit inside a system and it takes sometimes years to find  solutions because you especially when you are creating new things and experimenting,  
**1:18:18-1:18:35:**  you're going to hit walls in terms of local regulations, state regulations or regional  regulations.  So it's really sometimes you can get depressed because you believe what you do is interesting  
**1:18:35-1:18:44:**  and it's going to add value to society.  But they don't see it the same way because you know how states are and how laws and regulations  are.  
**1:18:44-1:19:01:**  So yeah, basically those three, I would add the challenges.  I would add the neighbors.  Don't, even if you beg, don't underestimate your neighbors in a good way and in a bad  
**1:19:01-1:19:15:**  way.  It means if you don't communicate well from the start, you can lose as much energy as  you do for fighting laws and coping with regulations.  
**1:19:15-1:19:34:**  So I would say communicate with your neighbors and talk to them because if they become ambassadors  of your project, then the local authorities are going to follow and the state will never  know you even if you do something that is not, that is borderline illegal.  
**1:19:34-1:19:43:**  So focus on the neighbors first.  Bring them fruit baskets whenever possible.  Yes.  
**1:19:45-1:19:58:**  Well, I think I can personally definitely relate to some of those and some of the challenges  you've shared here as well have also been brought up by other guests that we have interviewed.  So we're starting to see some patterns coming out, which is very interesting.  
**1:19:59-1:20:08:**  And to finish off the final question, as an agroforestry practitioner, what would you  like to hear on the podcast?  What would you like us to ask our next guests?  
**1:20:10-1:20:32:**  I would like to have more technical data.  So if you could bring experts or guests that could provide experiences or scientific knowledge  that would help in what we're trying to achieve, especially complex systems to produce food  
**1:20:32-1:20:41:**  with self-sufficiency in biomass.  That's what I would like to ask your next guest.  Awesome.  
**1:20:41-1:20:55:**  And we're definitely trying to interview, we will be trying to interview people with  that technical knowledge, also people working in academia on these issues and then really  experimenting and bringing out data as well as practitioners.  
**1:20:56-1:21:07:**  So awesome.  Yeah, this was really, really interesting.  Thank you so much for sharing your stories and the whole adventure that you've been on  
**1:21:07-1:21:13:**  since you started your farm.  And it was really nice to have you on the podcast.  Thank you guys.  
**1:21:14-1:21:24:**  Thanks for listening to this episode.  We really hope you enjoyed it.  Please feel free to suggest anyone that we could interview or suggest questions, feedback  
**1:21:24-1:21:56:**  or comments.  You'll find all the relevant links just below the episodes and you can reach us through  our website or through our social media.  