---
title: Special Episode #1 - EURAF Conference 2022
---

### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2022-05-31)  

**0:00:00-0:00:16:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:23-0:00:27:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  these challenges.  
**0:00:34-0:00:38:**  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Hi everyone and welcome back to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:00:49-0:00:51:**  I'm your host Etienne.  Last week Dimitri and I travelled to the URAF conference in Sardinia.  We met many amazing people and had fascinating conversations on agroforestry.  
**0:00:59-0:01:03:**  These conferences are held every two years but if you have the chance we recommend travelling  to the next one.  In this short interview with the president of the European Agroforestry Federation, Patrick  
**0:01:09-0:01:14:**  Worms, he explains what the organisation does and its next steps.  We also discuss how we can build additional bridges between research and practitioners.  Enjoy.  
**0:01:20-0:01:23:**  Hello Patrick, welcome back on the podcast.  Thank you, it's a delight to be back.  To give a bit of context, we're here together in Sardinia in the city of Nuro for the URAF  
**0:01:30-0:01:36:**  2022 Agroforestry Conference and we thought it would be the perfect opportunity to present  the work of URAF to our listeners.  So could you tell us a bit about its history and its missions?  
**0:01:42-0:01:43:**  I'd be delighted to.  So I'm Patrick Worms and I'm the president of URAF and URAF stands for European Agroforestry  Federation.  
**0:01:50-0:01:56:**  And it was founded 10 years ago this year in France and it was the first ever European  organisation, European association, European federation if you like, that brought together  people interested in agroforestry from across the continent.  
**0:02:05-0:02:09:**  Its origins were mostly from the academic community who had rediscovered the importance  of trees on agricultural lands in the last 20 or 30 years and had started working on  it in individual European countries and then realised that they could be not only stronger  
**0:02:19-0:02:23:**  working at it together across European boundaries in terms of getting better scientific results  but also be able to influence and work with European policy makers in order to encourage  the adoption of agroforestry.  
**0:02:32-0:02:36:**  And today what do the main missions look like then or activities?  The main mission is really threefold.  First we are trying to encourage practitioners, meaning farmers and farmers association and  
**0:02:42-0:02:46:**  farmers groups to consider adding agroforestry to their toolkit.  Most farmers are well advised when it comes to the use of machinery or genetics or inputs  but they are less well advised when it comes to the use of trees and so we are working  
**0:02:55-0:03:00:**  together with the advisory community and the technical community to help them add that  particular knowledge base to their system.  We are a strong academic component and so we also do research.  
**0:03:07-0:03:11:**  We are involved in a couple of European funded research projects at the moment.  We want to try to digitise agroforestry advisory services for example.  And the third thing that we do is to try to influence legislation and regulatory systems  
**0:03:23-0:03:27:**  in Europe for your North American listeners.  You have the National Farm Bureau, here we have equivalent institutions but we have a  regulatory framework which is far more complex and far more onerous for farmers to respect  
**0:03:38-0:03:40:**  than you have in North America.  And that means that farmers who want to try agroforestry have to be wary of breaking some  rule that they may be ignoring and suddenly losing part of their subsidy payments.  
**0:03:48-0:03:52:**  So we work with policy makers to try to change that and we also work with policy makers at  a more conceptual level.  For example if you look at the big strategies that the European Union proposed last year,  
**0:03:59-0:04:05:**  the biodiversity strategy, the forestry strategy or the farm to fork strategy, each of them  make prominent mention of agroforestry as a result of the conversation we had with policy  makers at that level.  
**0:04:12-0:04:16:**  In our other interview we focused a lot on the policy level so I'll set this aside for  the moment and focusing more on building this connection between academia and projects on  the ground.  
**0:04:24-0:04:29:**  What exists today and if I'm a farmer and I want to benefit from this expertise that  we've witnessed during the World Conference, what can I do today?  The most luxurious way of getting involved, the Rolls-Royce solution as it were, is to  
**0:04:36-0:04:39:**  become part of a living lab network.  A living lab network is a network of farms, of communities or landscapes that have decided  to work closely together with research scientists in order to explore a particular facet of  
**0:04:48-0:04:51:**  agroforestry and thus transform their landscape.  That's the Rolls-Royce option.  If you don't have the Rolls-Royce option, the next option is to look at the Europe website  
**0:04:56-0:05:01:**  and inside the Europe website you will have references to all of the people inside individual  member states who are on national associations.  And again this is then a network of national academic institutions.  
**0:05:08-0:05:12:**  So if you're a farmer in Germany for example and you don't know who to talk to, get in  touch with the Europe website.  You will be directed to the DEFAP website and from there you can then get in touch with  
**0:05:18-0:05:23:**  the university that is close to you and at that university identify one or several individuals,  typically masters or PhD students, who would be happy to work with you to transform your  farming systems if only you had to measure what you do.  
**0:05:30-0:05:34:**  It can be intimidating for a farmer to reach out to academics but you think that's the  way to go and that it's easy and we should just send an email to the closest university  and get redirected?  
**0:05:41-0:05:44:**  It's just as intimidating for a young academic to talk to a farmer.  Who is a farmer?  A farmer is a master of his or her own destiny.  
**0:05:48-0:05:53:**  Dozens to hundreds, sometimes more hectares of land, decisions every single day that are  profoundly influenced by complex factors like weather and disease and price and commodities  and rules and regulations.  
**0:06:01-0:06:08:**  Farmers are not academics but the cognitive load, the amount of decision making, the complexity  of the decisions that have to be taken by a farmer are just as high and probably higher  than they are for an academic.  
**0:06:16-0:06:23:**  So when you have a PhD student or researcher coming on your farm, what you often see is  that it's a meeting of equals, right?  They all have their individual perspective, one is spending most of his time reading scientific  
**0:06:28-0:06:31:**  papers, the other one is spending most of his time figuring out how to run a farm but  they have the conversations are extremely rich and extremely fruitful because they're  both interested in the same things, they both have the same degree of curiosity but they  
**0:06:40-0:06:41:**  bring together complementary perspectives.  So by all means don't be afraid of doing that.  Okay, well that kind of answers the building new relationships but how about taking advantage  
**0:06:50-0:06:54:**  of the incredible amount of knowledge that's already been produced in previous research  programs and thinking of, for example, Ag Forward.  Are there any resources there that I would find practical as a farmer?  
**0:07:00-0:07:06:**  Yes, you will find these resources on the web obviously but how many farmers have time  in the evening to still spend a couple of hours doing research, I don't know.  So if you're a farmer who would be interested in having this but you don't have the time  
**0:07:13-0:07:16:**  to actually do the research yourself, the solution is actually exactly the same, get  in touch with the local university.  Very often a student will be only too happy to do the research for you in order to supply  
**0:07:24-0:07:28:**  you with the right advice and then in effect have your own librarian who is spending time  on the internet trying to find out which paper is applicable to you and whatnot.  So this is basically about making researchers work for you as a farmer, right?  
**0:07:36-0:07:40:**  Absolutely, you make the cows work for you, you make the trees work for you, you make  the plants work for you, you might as well make the researchers work for you.  Great.  
**0:07:43-0:07:45:**  No, I'm serious, right?  I mean you have to remember what a researcher tries to do.  A researcher, especially a researcher in agroecology or farming, has to work with a farmer in order  
**0:07:53-0:07:58:**  to get data, in order to understand what's going on and in order to educate him or herself.  That means that the farmer has the upper hand in that relationship.  You want to work on my farm, Mr. Researcher person?  
**0:08:03-0:08:09:**  Sure, but in exchange please help me answer this, this and that question.  Amazing.  What are the next steps for URAF in terms of the organization's both how it functions  
**0:08:15-0:08:20:**  and its missions, how do you see the next years coming up?  In terms of organization, we spent the last 10 years being exclusively driven by volunteers.  We had a volunteer board and we sometimes had staff that was dedicated to projects but  
**0:08:29-0:08:31:**  we never had a head office if you like.  So this year we are hiring a person who we'll call the Secretary General, full time staffer,  who's going to be based in Brussels and whose job is going to be to more intensively influence  
**0:08:43-0:08:46:**  the policy process and help us better manage the institution.  In terms of the objectives that URAF has, we all know, those of us who have been involved  with agroforestry for a while, that this is an extremely promising field of activity.  
**0:08:54-0:09:00:**  But I think we're all impatient to see more farmers practice it and more farmers adopt  it and more farmers trial it.  That is currently the case and those of us who work at the climate modeling side will  
**0:09:06-0:09:09:**  understand how the increasing urgency of that arises.  The resilience, the impact on resilience of agroforestry based systems is becoming increasingly  important as weather patterns change more and more.  
**0:09:18-0:09:26:**  So the urgency is growing and so in the next few years at URAF the work is really going  to be focused on three main axes.  One ensure that the policy and regulatory framework reduces the barriers to agroforestry  
**0:09:35-0:09:41:**  and makes more money and more technical support available to farmers who want to try agroforestry.  Second try to figure out a way of working with people who have an entree into every  farm, meaning the agrochemical companies, to help them integrate these kinds of agroecological  
**0:09:50-0:09:51:**  solutions to their toolkit.  After all they know how to make money from farmers, we don't.  So if we can work together with people who already have that expertise in marketing and  
**0:09:59-0:10:03:**  that expertise in talking to farmers it would be absolutely brilliant.  And the third would be to knit far closer relationships between practitioners and the  academics.  
**0:10:08-0:10:11:**  URAF is still mostly an academic institution.  It needs to become a practitioner institution in the same way that Copa Córzejka for example,  the network of farming organizations in Europe does have some academics but it's mostly a  
**0:10:22-0:10:25:**  practitioner institution.  URAF needs to be an institution that makes far more room for actual farmers.  You may then ask why we don't have more farmers here in New Orville.  
**0:10:35-0:10:37:**  Well it's spring, farmers are busy.  It's the wrong time to have farmers at a conference.  For the moment the organization of URAF seems to be a lot about sharing peer to peer between  
**0:10:44-0:10:51:**  researchers and I'm wondering can we think of evolving the organization towards more  peer to peer exchange even through farmers or do you think that the identity of URAF  is research and farmers need to organize in other types of organizations that can collaborate?  
**0:11:01-0:11:02:**  No absolutely not.  I think your assessment of what URAF is is skewed by the fact that we are at a scientific  conference so by definition you have mostly researchers but when you look at the people  
**0:11:12-0:11:18:**  who are involved in URAF at the level of the countries or the members you find that the  majority are actually practitioners and some of these practitioners are part of research  projects through Europe, horizon Europe projects or what have you but the vast majority are  
**0:11:26-0:11:31:**  just practitioners that are happy to talk to what they consider to be technical advisors  in order to improve their agroforestry system.  So that's already happening and we just need to ensure that it happens more and more.  
**0:11:37-0:11:42:**  Now URAF is a European federation so yes we have some individual members if you want to  give us 30 euros and become an individual member feel free I'll give you my account  number, well our account number but most of the time people join through their national  
**0:11:51-0:11:57:**  agroforestry or national farmer federation so in Germany for example it's DEFAF in England  it's the Woodland Trust in France there's a couple of associations of Slovakia as well  etc and that's how farmers, practitioners, students and anybody who's interested in fact  
**0:12:05-0:12:08:**  joins URAF and becomes a member of URAF.  Patrick thank you so much.  You're welcome it was a pleasure.  
**0:12:14-0:12:19:**  Thanks for listening if you want any additional information about URAF and the work please  visit their websites I'll add the link in the description we hope you enjoyed this short  episode.  