---
title: The Podcast Introduction
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### The Regenerative Agroforestry Podcast  (2020-08-02)  

**0:00:00-0:00:23:**  Can we change the way we produce food to both meet the needs of humans whilst regenerating  our soils and ecosystems?  And can we do so in a way that improves the financial viability of farms?  
**0:00:23-0:00:33:**  These questions are becoming increasingly urgent to answer and we're here to investigate  a promising technique called agroforestry in order to find out how it can help us with  these challenges.  
**0:00:33-0:00:47:**  We'll be interviewing farmers, scientists and other experts to share with you their  experiences, practical advice and scientific research.  Hi everyone, and welcome to the Regenerative Agroforestry podcast.  
**0:00:47-0:01:00:**  We're your hosts Dimitri and Etienne.  So today we're just thinking of presenting the podcast to you and kind of introducing  ourselves and introducing agroforestry as well for those who don't know about it and  
**0:01:00-0:01:11:**  giving you a bit of a preview into the next episode so you can understand what you can  expect.  So Dimitri, how about you just start and tell us a bit about yourself?  
**0:01:11-0:01:27:**  So hi everyone, I'm Dimitri, I'm 26 and I've been working with agroforestry for the past  four years.  I've been lucky to work and study alongside Ernst Gotch and Mark Sheppard where they inspired  
**0:01:27-0:01:40:**  me to start my own farm with my family in the south of Greece.  So this started, we started the farm two and a half years ago and Etienne joined us shortly  after as well.  
**0:01:40-0:01:56:**  And so we implemented an agroforestry, a complex agroforestry system greatly inspired by Ernst  Gotch's syntropic agroforestry.  And for now I've left the farm in my family's hands and I'm trying to expand my knowledge  
**0:01:56-0:02:10:**  and experience in agroecology and agroforestry.  I'm passionate about all the technical aspects of agroforestry and agronomy from soil science  to tractor tools.  
**0:02:10-0:02:21:**  I love digging into the details.  Over to you Etienne.  Hey yeah so I'm Etienne, also 26, and so Dimitri and I met at university where we were already  
**0:02:21-0:02:36:**  really good friends, although we did speak a bit less about agriculture at that time.  But yeah so when he told me that he was starting a farm in Greece with his family, I got really  excited and I joined him there and that's how I got involved as well.  
**0:02:36-0:02:51:**  And before that, back in university I studied environmental politics and then went to work  for an organization in Paris for about a year.  And while I'm now back in France and I'm in the process of starting an agroforestry farm  
**0:02:51-0:03:07:**  there, I'm really passionate about developing accessible and scalable farming systems where  we can combine high production and ecological regeneration and doing that while producing  a decent income for farmers.  
**0:03:07-0:03:21:**  So let's start by trying to define agroforestry then.  Well there's actually a lot of definitions out there but the simplest one we found was  just that it's the interaction between agriculture and trees.  
**0:03:21-0:03:35:**  And more specifically for us that means integrating trees and shrubs with other productive elements  and creating like that synergistic relationships that make farms more productive, more profitable,  and ecologically sound.  
**0:03:35-0:03:53:**  So among some typical practices you may know, you'll find for example alley cropping where  you just grow crops between rows of trees, silver pasture where you integrate trees and  animals, we also talk about support species which just means putting wild trees among  
**0:03:53-0:04:11:**  an orchard, and then other terms such as windbreaks, hedges, riparian zones and planting them out.  Well you might think I'm not talking about anything new here and exactly, I mean trees  have been playing an important role in agriculture for thousands of years and in Western Europe  
**0:04:11-0:04:27:**  where we're from, hedges and pollarded trees were essential for protecting crops from the  elements at the same time producing wood on a regular basis and also fodder for animals,  so really multi-purpose and multi-functional.  
**0:04:27-0:04:43:**  But what happens is that during and since the green revolution, well farmers were heavily  incentivized to cut down their trees and still are today.  And even if that's the case, well in many parts of the world you still find trees, animals  
**0:04:43-0:04:55:**  and crops all integrated together.  And if you go to Costa Rica you might see coffee grown under shade trees, if you go  to China, paulownia into a crop with grain, or vegetables grown under coconut trees in  
**0:04:55-0:05:06:**  Tanzania.  And today many organizations and farmers are reviving traditional agroforestry systems  or they're inventing new ones altogether.  
**0:05:06-0:05:24:**  And there's a great diversity, some are simple like alley cropping with one type of tree  in a monoculture, while others like the ones we did and are doing in Mazze Farm are much  more complex as they try to mimic forest dynamics and integrate a lot of diversity.  
**0:05:24-0:05:33:**  And we're not really interested in trying to establish that one approach is better than  the other one.  Rather like we really like that diversity and we'd like to explore all the different  
**0:05:33-0:05:49:**  models that they are and what they offer in different contexts.  So what does agroforestry have to offer?  It seems that there is a trade-off between farmers' interests in the environment, or  
**0:05:49-0:06:02:**  at least often so.  But imagine a farm that's highly productive and also hosts a functioning ecosystem.  Imagine we can produce food while tackling some of the key challenges we face, such as  
**0:06:02-0:06:14:**  soil fertility, water quality, and climate change.  And how about doing this in a way that strengthens the farmers' business instead of sacrificing  it?  
**0:06:14-0:06:26:**  And although this seems like a utopia, we're convinced that it's possible.  And agroforestry has a strong role to play in making this a reality.  So let's take a closer look.  
**0:06:26-0:06:39:**  Agroforestry can have a direct impact on the business model of the farm.  And although it struggles to provide short-term cash flow, if done well, it has the potential  to increase farm profitability.  
**0:06:39-0:06:52:**  A study in Europe found that farm profitability can increase by as much as 15 to 53% when  implementing agroforestry systems.  It does this in various ways.  
**0:06:52-0:07:07:**  One of them is bringing more diversity into the farm.  Different types of crops means different sources of income, which means that when it's a tough  year for your main crop, you might get something from those nut trees, for example.  
**0:07:07-0:07:19:**  Diversity in the ecosystem is also very beneficial.  For example, if you're raising sheep in a silver pasture system, in times of drought  where the grass is all dried up, you can still use fodder from the trees that you planted  
**0:07:19-0:07:34:**  for this purpose.  So however you look at it, diversity is a good ally in mitigating risk, whether it is  from climate irregularities or market variations and shocks.  
**0:07:34-0:07:46:**  Another way of looking at it is stacking production.  This means increasing the total production by making better use of the vertical space  on the farm.  
**0:07:46-0:08:00:**  By properly placing one productive element over another, such as walnuts over wheat,  the overall productivity of the land can be increased even though the individual wheat  or walnut yield is smaller.  
**0:08:00-0:08:12:**  So choosing the right associations of the plants and the right spacing is key to this  type of success.  Another way in which trees can be beneficial to the farmer is that they can make the application  
**0:08:12-0:08:24:**  of fertilizers, whether organic or not, much more effective.  Studies have shown that covering 10% of the farmland with trees can reduce nutrient leaching  by more than 80%.  
**0:08:24-0:08:40:**  These otherwise lost nutrients are absorbed by the deep-rooted tree roots and thus cycled  back into the system or even transformed into tree crops such as wood, biomass, or fruit  and nuts.  
**0:08:40-0:08:53:**  All farmers, and indeed all humans, depend at some level on the services ecosystems provide  for free.  Agroforestry is a great way of harnessing several services on the farm.  
**0:08:53-0:09:11:**  Hedges create habitat for beneficial insects and birds, which improves pest management.  Perennial roots reduce soil erosion and increase soil organic matter, which benefits fertility.  These provide windbreaks that reduce plant stress, especially in drought conditions.  
**0:09:11-0:09:30:**  Overall, these services, and many more, create a buffer against climate extremes whilst helping  stabilize production and reducing farm costs.  Not only are these services extremely useful, but at the same time they provide a crop.  
**0:09:30-0:09:48:**  These are all the reasons why, as farmers, we're excited by the potential of agroforestry  and the way it can improve our management and our operations.  If we look beyond the farm, agroforestry can offer tools to address some urgent problems  
**0:09:48-0:09:58:**  our world faces.  Indeed, if applied at a sufficient scale, it can impact positively whole biomes, ecosystems,  and continents.  
**0:09:58-0:10:09:**  And this may seem like quite a bold statement, but there is serious amount of science and  empirical evidence backing this up.  So let's take two examples.  
**0:10:09-0:10:22:**  Agricultural pollution is damaging our rivers, lakes, and aquifers.  This is not only tragic for biodiversity and nature, but it's also costing human societies  a lot of money.  
**0:10:22-0:10:37:**  In France alone, for example, over 1 billion euros per year is spent on purifying water  from pollution specifically linked to agriculture.  And that is paid directly by the consumer through their water bill.  
**0:10:37-0:10:50:**  Reducing erosion and nutrient leaching through increased tree cover, amongst other things,  could bring that bill drastically down.  In addition to all of these things, trees turn out to be really good at something else,  
**0:10:50-0:11:01:**  and that's removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and storing it in their biomass  and in the soil.  Given the disruptive effects that climate change is already having on agriculture and  
**0:11:01-0:11:14:**  the direction we're heading in, agroforestry surely has an important role in addressing  this challenge.  What this means is that farmers can contribute to solving some of the most pressing issues  
**0:11:14-0:11:27:**  of our time.  Not only is that exciting in itself, but there's an increasing number of paying for ecosystem  services schemes, where farmers are starting to get paid for the environmental benefits  
**0:11:27-0:11:39:**  of their management practices.  Farmers are already getting paid for providing clean water and capturing carbon on their  farms, and the trend seems to be growing.  
**0:11:39-0:11:49:**  It's important to remember that our agricultural systems depend on the functioning of our natural  systems.  And although agroforestry is not the only tool out there, it has potential in bringing  
**0:11:49-0:12:00:**  some harmony back into our relationship with nature.  So you might be wondering, if it's that amazing and obvious, why is agroforestry not more  common?  
**0:12:00-0:12:10:**  And although there is a lot to be excited about, there remains a number of points that  we need to work on.  Some of these obstacles are systemic, for example with subsidy systems that often lead  
**0:12:10-0:12:21:**  to cutting trees down rather than planting them.  And some other occur at the farm level.  Many farmers remain skeptical that agroforestry is profitable and are worried that it will  
**0:12:21-0:12:31:**  just make their life more complicated.  These are legitimate concerns, and it will take solid data and successful local examples  to overcome them.  
**0:12:31-0:12:44:**  Even for those who want to give it a go, it's not that easy.  To make it work, it requires smart design and careful integration of various elements,  such as which genetics to use, what is the appropriate infrastructure and where to source  
**0:12:44-0:12:57:**  it, having good management techniques, and understanding the interactions between the  different elements of the system.  This specific expertise takes time to develop, and is sometimes hard to have access to.  
**0:12:57-0:13:09:**  This podcast probably won't single-handedly overcome all of these issues, but we do hope  that it can be a place where we can share valuable information, have good conversations  with the right people, and all learn together.  
**0:13:09-0:13:21:**  And hopefully you'll find inspiration as well as practical tools that help you on your current  or future projects.  You might have noticed that we included in our podcast title the term regenerative alongside  
**0:13:21-0:13:32:**  agroforestry.  As Dimitri explains, agroforestry holds great promise as a tool of regeneration on many  scales, and it's that potential that we want to highlight.  
**0:13:32-0:13:47:**  We don't use the word as another label or to be exclusive, rather it's about stating  the direction of a journey that everyone is welcome to join.  In that journey, we'll investigate all the ways we can make agroforestry work in practice.  
**0:13:47-0:13:59:**  We want this to be as practical as possible, and avoid too much theory where everything  sounds so amazing but you have no idea how to get there.  We'll talk to farmers who have set up successful agroforestry systems to understand how they've  
**0:13:59-0:14:09:**  done it.  We'll ask scientists how their research can help us build better systems, and we'll interview  anyone who can bring their expertise to the conversation, whether it be about funding  
**0:14:09-0:14:20:**  or marketing.  With them, we'll be exploring questions such as what trees to include, how to manage them,  or what business models are appropriate for agroforestry farms.  
**0:14:20-0:14:30:**  We'll have in-depth conversations with them to really establish what works and what doesn't.  So that's the end of our day view episode.  Thank you so much for listening.  
**0:14:30-0:14:45:**  I hope that we managed to get across the essential message of what we're going to be doing on  this podcast and what our approach is going to be like.  So other than that, as you maybe perceived, we're kind of new to this whole podcast thing  
**0:14:45-0:14:57:**  and we would love to receive some feedback or some tips.  And even better, we would really like if you could share with us people that you'd like  to see on this show, be it farmers, scientists, whoever you think has something to contribute  
**0:14:57-0:15:11:**  to this agroforestry conversation.  You'll also be able to find us on social media, on Instagram and Facebook if you type in regenerative  agroforestry podcast, and we also have a website regenerativeagroforestry.org where you're  
**0:15:11-0:15:39:**  going to find all the resources that are backing up everything that we said in this podcast.  So thank you so much for listening and I really hope that you enjoyed this as much as we did  and we look forward to seeing you next time.  