### Farmerama  (2017-17-10)
**[0:00:00-0:00:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:00:00):**  Farmer, farmer llama.  Farmer llama.  Hahaha, did you get it?  We'll write it down.  Okay, thank you very much.  
**[0:00:14-0:00:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:00:14):**  I'm confused.  Welcome back to Farmerama and more stories from the fields and cow sheds around the UK.  Let's hit it.  Today we're going to explore something called natural agriculture  and look at some of the ways farmers and growers involve the local community in what they do.  
**[0:00:31-0:00:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:00:31):**  We'll be at a CSA farm near Swansea, a community garden in the Midlands  and then we're back to Farnham to meet Robert, who you might remember from last month.  And of course Nigel and Veronica are continuing their jaunt around the country.  This time they're off to an urban farm in Bristol.  A week or two ago we headed to the Shumay demonstration farm in the Yatesbury Wiltshire  
**[0:00:52-0:00:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:00:52):**  to learn all about natural agriculture.  We're interested in the farming, but I think first we need to take a step back and ask what is Shumay?  Well, it's part of a spiritual movement which started in Japan about 150 years ago  and they aim, in their own words, to advance health, happiness and harmony  through spiritual health and appreciation of art and beauty and natural agriculture.  
**[0:01:19-0:01:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:01:19):**  So natural agriculture means that nature already has everything it needs.  The soil is perfect, the earth is perfect.  Natural agriculture is based on three principles.  One is the sort of do nothing, so no fertilisers, no animal manure, etc.  The second one is seed saving, so harvesting the seeds from a particular location with a particular crop  
**[0:01:43-0:01:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:01:43):**  saving them for the next year and reusing exactly the same seeds on the same plot of land.  And the third one linked to that is the continuous cropping.  So it's this idea that the seed and the soil and the specific point of land really form this amazing relationship  which makes for a very hardy, strong crop that's able to deal with pests and anything that comes its way.  And there was a lot of really excellent produce on sale, wasn't there?  
**[0:02:14-0:02:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:02:14):**  It was amazing, literally amazing.  It looked and tasted and it kept in the fridge for ages.  That's one of the things that they say is that their produce is actually much stronger, the quality.  What makes natural agriculture different from other agricultural practices  is that it redefines that behaviour of living off the land.  
**[0:02:35-0:02:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:02:35):**  It's necessary that we take to survive, but natural agriculture balances that act with gratitude, humility and compassion.  This very conscious interaction with the natural world is essentially a practice of respect  and one that informs all aspects of life.  Back to Shume. Shinya is the lead farmer and he took us back to 2012,  a year that some of you may remember was a particularly difficult year for growing tomatoes.  
**[0:03:03-0:03:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:03:03):**  Our tomato under the polytunnel got an aphid attack.  I planted 250 tomatoes under the polytunnel and all the tomatoes got an aphid.  I counted how many aphids were there and there were 225 aphids in one stem.  I asked the organic farmer how to deal with these aphids.  He said I have to spray at least five times otherwise I lose all the tomatoes.  
**[0:03:43-0:03:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:03:43):**  But natural agriculture doesn't use spray.  What I did is I spoke to the soil.  What I said is please help the tomatoes.  I also spoke to the tomatoes, thank you so much for the tomatoes growing even in this cold weather.  And also please produce tomatoes to heal people.  
**[0:04:18-0:04:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:04:18):**  I spoke to them every day for two weeks.  Two weeks later suddenly all the aphids had disappeared.  I haven't lost even one tomato.  Tomatoes produce many tomatoes.  Do you talk to all of the crops regularly or is it just when there's a problem?  
**[0:04:47-0:04:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:04:47):**  Every day I talk to them but not voice in my mind.  I just thank them for the potatoes, tomatoes and pumpkins.  Every day I appreciate the soil, vegetables, the earth and the environment.  Nigel, this goes against even what committed organic farmers might believe in.  As a farmer, what do you make of this?  
**[0:05:16-0:05:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:05:16):**  I think my natural reaction would be a degree of scepticism.  Certainly my parents would be very sceptical of this.  I'm quite open minded in terms of natural farming and more agro-ecological solutions.  But by the same token my mum does talk to the animals an awful lot and we have quite happy livestock.  So I think there's room for everything.  
**[0:05:42-0:05:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:05:42):**  So when you say your mum communicates with the animals, what do you mean?  She talks to them, she has quite a special relationship.  As if you would talk to your pet for example, mum will communicate with our sheep and our cattle.  Previously when we had pigs she would talk to them.  They're part of the family almost.  
**[0:06:07-0:06:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:06:07):**  I think that definitely has an impact on their wellbeing, albeit it does sound a bit spiritual or not very commercial.  But I think it can have an impact on that sort of stuff.  Obviously it's just a nice place to be if you're in tune with your environment and surroundings and livestock.  I think there's a lot to be said for that.  Definitely.  
**[0:06:36-0:06:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:06:36):**  We'll get some of the animals on next month's farm, maybe if you'll let us come down with the microphone.  Absolutely.  Your mum can interpret.  It's true, she does communicate.  Assuming that she has a very special way with the animals.  
**[0:06:54-0:06:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:06:54):**  Cool.  Okay, so it does all seem a bit dillelie.  I'm still not sure if I think the aphids left because Shinya spoke to the plants.  I'm not sure he even believes that.  There could have been a whole host of other reasons why.  
**[0:07:09-0:07:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:07:09):**  But I do think that talking to the plants and the land shows an incredible kinship with what he's growing.  That very intense observation of the relationships between things.  Almost as if every seed he plants is a great friend.  This connection is one of the key principles of natural agriculture.  And I do think that kind of communication or understanding with your produce can only be a good thing.  
**[0:07:32-0:07:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:07:32):**  Kind of like Nigel's mum really.  And it does seem to work.  I mean we tried some of the produce and to be honest I'm not sure if I've ever snapped such a tall, crisp, fragrant carrot between my teeth.  Is this all the evidence we need?  Let's hear from Tetsuya who also lives on the farm.  
**[0:07:51-0:07:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:07:51):**  In 2010 we harvested 160kg potatoes.  And next year the same potato, same field, harvested 170kg.  But in 2012 we had a bright attack.  Shinya, the main farmer, asked his friend, the professional organic farmer, how to cope with this situation.  And the advice was to cut all green crops and harvest as soon as possible.  
**[0:08:27-0:08:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:08:27):**  And he followed this advice.  And it was one month earlier than normal harvesting time so potatoes were small.  The amount dropped to 100kg.  Next year Bright came back.  But Shinya wanted to see how his potatoes with this continuous cropping and seed saving, how they can cope with this disease.  
**[0:08:55-0:09:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:08:55):**  So he left it and waited until the usual harvesting time and harvested.  But Bright didn't go away so all leaves were kind of dried and died.  But generally I think organic farmers say Bright's disease will reach to the tuber, I mean the potato fruit and ruin the potato.  Shinya wanted to see if his potato can resist.  Harvested the amount was 180kg.  
**[0:09:30-0:09:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:09:30):**  And all the potatoes, we wouldn't say all, but almost all potatoes were fine and tasty.  So the soil gets to know how to grow potatoes more and the seeds get more suitable to the conditions.  They have demo farms in Zambia, Brazil, California and apparently people have been doing it continuously for more than 20 years in Japan.  Particularly with rice.  And there are examples of this on a really quite large scale.  
**[0:10:01-0:10:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:10:01):**  There was another example, yet another farm we've been to that really had so many people of different ages and different backgrounds all working on the farm, hanging out on the farm.  Keen to really show us what they were doing and talk to us.  I really like this idea, because in urban settings we're kind of having a revival of the libraries being the centre, the core of the community.  Like it's an education base, maybe an internet access base, all sorts of different things based on the library.  And then I kind of feel like the farm is sort of becoming the champion of that in the countryside.  
**[0:10:35-0:10:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:10:35):**  Sort of the hub of the countryside almost.  Yeah, as opposed to the pub. Or maybe both.  Maybe both.  Sorry, I shouldn't. I'm an American, I'm not used to the pub.  You can always have a tap room on your farm if you have a white bread brewery as well, so there's always options.  
**[0:10:51-0:10:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:10:51):**  That's what we need.  We think it's exciting to see the countryside as part of our lives, not just a machine which produces for us from afar.  Not just a place to go for a walk, but a place that we're on, in, beside and something we have a two-way relationship and understanding with.  As we've heard, we're pushing this idea quite far.  Okay, well Tom O'Kane certainly lives with this philosophy.  
**[0:11:29-0:11:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:11:29):**  He's an experienced biodynamic farmer and he's helped run CSAs all over.  And in April he started up his own on the gower in Swansea. It's called Kai Tam.  They're part of the Gower Power Co-op and his field is like this Welsh rainforest.  It's surrounded by ancient oaks and low rain-filled clouds roll in over the hills from the sea.  It really is a very special place and quite beautiful.  
**[0:11:57-0:12:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:11:57):**  He's densely planted fruit, veg and flowers and they flow along the contours of the hillside.  So it's a really successful CSA. They're already delivering 50 boxes a week.  But the Kai Tam CSA is particularly economically sustainable because Tom really has made the field a place to grow the community, including a school's pizza project.  And we should say that there's a special guest correspondent with you here, Abby.  Oh yeah, my dad came along. He's a farmer in Chile.  
**[0:12:35-0:12:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:12:35):**  This is our little sacking shed. And then in September, October, we harvest everything.  We're going to take the wheat to a local water mill and grind it with the stones there.  And then they'll make their own sort of pizza dough.  And then we've got two wood-fired ovens on trailers coming to the school.  And they're going to fire up the ovens and cook pizzas for the whole school with all the ingredients the kids have put together.  
**[0:13:02-0:13:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:13:02):**  So good. And so this is the wheat?  Yeah, so this is, I grew an extra bed of wheat because they only had a small plot in school.  So we just thought we'd grow an extra bed here in case we need it.  It gives us sort of outlets for our produce, connects us to the local community, raises awareness about local food.  And then so I suppose that's the educational element.  
**[0:13:24-0:13:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:13:24):**  I suppose on that educational side as well, we've got a trainee who's been with us this year.  And so that's gone really well. And we're going to take a second trainee next year and hopefully keep her on.  So we'll be like three of us here. And then the other side of it is just the social side of it.  We work with lots of groups. We've been working with a single young homeless project, a mental health group, long term unemployed.  This Swansea City Football Club Community Trust who just gather up young people and bring them here to come and work.  
**[0:13:54-0:13:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:13:54):**  We might have like 25 young people here for the day or for half a day.  And they're generally, generally really motivated and really happy.  If you've got like work that you know they're going to enjoy or they're going to be able to basically do it.  And it's yeah, then they'll engage and yeah, they have a really good time and it's really good fun.  Do you know it like it really brings life to the place.  
**[0:14:17-0:14:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:14:17):**  It's kind of like as far as community, that community supported element.  They're not investing in the project financially and taking produce from here.  But they're coming in the field, doing a lot of work and there's just a lot of fun and banter.  And it kind of just brings the whole place to life. So it's kind of, yeah, it makes it work really.  So I was particularly interested in the volunteer he was working with. And so I delved a little deeper.  
**[0:14:41-0:14:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:14:41):**  Well, Lizzie's been great. You know, she came from, she came from being office based.  She was working for a housing association and she was like fed up with it, wanted to do something different.  And we'd advertise that post and we had 22 people apply.  And like a lot of them had degrees and a lot of experience and they just wanted to do something really different.  And we interviewed five. Our interview that we did, it was sort of partly discussion and partly we just went out and we weeded things.  
**[0:15:09-0:15:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:15:09):**  And actually we set up a task in the field next door over a really sort of dodgy old wobbly barbed wire fence.  So we could see, you know, just practically how's this person going to deal with getting over this old fence.  And it was really interesting to see the difference of how the different people dealt with getting over the fence.  And Lizzie kind of just leapt over it like a gazelle. And we thought, right, Lizzie's the one for the job.  When she came here, what is it? How does it work?  
**[0:15:36-0:15:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:15:36):**  Well, she works, she's basically paid, the government pay her for six months.  And she works four days a week, basically doing anything. It's kind of in a position as a trainee, but she kind of just does everything.  And to the point when, you know, she's only been here, what, April, May, June, well, this is her fifth month.  But I'm going to go away now for a week. And I know, I feel totally confident that she'll just sort everything out for the week, which is, you know, she's really good.  That's amazing. That's really a great find.  
**[0:16:08-0:16:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:16:08):**  Yeah. So what's that government scene called? It's called Jobs Growth Wales.  I don't know if there's an equivalent in England. And they pay, yeah, they basically get people who are either long term unemployed or in sort of very low paid jobs who want to do something.  And you have to be under 24. 24 or under. And yeah, just give them an opportunity to try something different.  And where is she living? She's living locally. She's yeah, she's living really nearby.  That was Abby speaking to Tom O'Kane. Nigel, have you thought about this sort of thing for your farm? Do you think this kind of like extra non farming stuff is important?  
**[0:16:46-0:17:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:16:46):**  I definitely think it's really valuable. And if you can start to involve the local community in your farm, that that can really bring a lot of benefits in terms of additional layers of income.  And just I think in terms of food education, getting people onto the farm, working with their hands, the soil, I think it's so important.  Is it like a economic drive to get to do the education stuff and to get people interested in the farm and what you're doing?  Or do you have a kind of inbuilt need to communicate what you do?  For me personally, I think having lived in London for like 10 years, I'm quite a social person.  
**[0:17:31-0:17:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:17:31):**  So I think it's part of that sort of transition period of like moving back to the farm, just working with my parents, I find it difficult.  So I'm really keen to get more people involved and work in a team of people. And that obviously a community sort of fits the bill quite nicely.  But I also think a lot of farmers could potentially benefit financially from it. And at a time when farming prices are at all time lows, I think, you know, involving the community.  And if that can mean that farms can earn additional streams of income, I think that's hugely valuable.  Yeah, I think as Tom found, it should be a core part of the business. It's like the growing the food isn't just to feed people.  
**[0:18:14-0:18:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:18:14):**  It's also to have people have like a nice day out or educate people. And that can be equally part of being a small scale farmer and make a sustainable business.  Yeah, I agree.  It's time for Nigel to jump on Veronica and head off.  Where is the next stop on your tour?  So this particular farm was in a slightly different setting. It was next to Temple Mead station in Bristol.  
**[0:18:53-0:19:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:18:53):**  So very much an urban area. And yeah, essentially, there's a series of polytunnels and containers where Steve Glover and his team of growers work in growing some herbs and high value salads.  And it's essentially a social enterprise. So obviously what they're doing is they are growing salads and herbs and supplying local restaurants in Bristol.  But it's also there's also a real sort of positive social impact of this work because Steve works with ex drug addicts, ex alcohol addicts.  So these people are sort of obviously going through this huge change and they're actually using growing as a way to kind of focus on something really positive.  And the name of the social enterprise is the Seven Project.  
**[0:20:03-0:20:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:20:03):**  Grow food and we sell food. That's what urban farming is. It isn't harvesting grant fund applications.  Do you know what I mean? Yeah. And so like the only thing that isn't based on business skews the model.  Yeah. But strong business generates social outcomes.  So we are our apprentices get to learn about customer relationships, invoicing, stock control, labelling, marketing, branding, all that stuff that you actually really need to learn.  Yeah. If you can do your own business. What we say to them is that when you've done your apprenticeship, then we'll give you some bits and polytunnels and we'll buy the produce from you.  
**[0:20:44-0:20:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:20:44):**  Got you. So it's like a starter farm. It's a programme. Yeah.  Because what we want to demonstrate is that it is possible. You don't need loads of money skewing.  When I was on Radio 4, I said a lot of people think that to be a farmer, you've got to be like Emmerdale. Yeah. And it isn't like that.  Have all the gear and all that sort of stuff. Sheds and all that stuff. And I owe £100,000 to spend on the combine harvester or whatever it is they use.  That's a perception, but that's a perception like the Farmers Weekly and all the farming press give, you know, because it's agri business, it's big money and stuff like that.  
**[0:21:18-0:21:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:21:18):**  Yeah. And what that does is it keeps people out of their business. You know, it's a barrier.  I would say I started with nothing. £2,500, one polytunnel, no experience of growing food. Didn't know Bristol. I lived in Spain before.  I didn't have any customers. I didn't know anything about growing food at all. Yeah.  Just food, just going basically, oh, what, get seeds, put them in the ground, make sure they're watered, weed.  Do you know what I mean? It's now turned into a business that we started with £2,500, 4 and a half years ago and we take £3,000 a week these days.  
**[0:21:50-0:21:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:21:50):**  You know, I don't know. I mean, I used to sell drugs for a living. I mean, I used to smuggle pot back and sell it.  Yeah. It's a good living, I imagine. If you get it right.  But the scene around growing food is not dissimilar from that.  Yeah. Do you know, it really isn't, oh, you don't want to be using his stuff, it's shit, you want to be using mine, oh, come on, that's you, you've been buying it off him, oh, you don't want to do that, you've gone and bought it off me.  All that stuff goes on, which, do you know what I mean? For me, it's quite entertaining. Apprentices call us the salad mafia.  
**[0:22:23-0:22:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:22:23):**  Oh, really? Yeah. That's funny.  It is funny. But, yeah, so it's all entertainment, mate.  Yeah.  It's like, where would you go to get a job in horticulture in this town? You know what I mean? Where would you go?  There isn't anywhere. There's no jobs in horticulture.  
**[0:22:38-0:22:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:22:38):**  Yeah.  You might get a job as a landscape gardener, which is a sad indictment of society, isn't it? You can get a job as a landscape gardener, but you couldn't get a job growing food.  Growing food, that actually proves a real purpose, yeah.  Yeah. But then, this is the whole back to the Jonathan Porritt thing, it's like, it's fashion. And fashion is dangerous, because it isn't real, it's just, do you know?  It's a lot of photoshopping reality, isn't it? You know?  
**[0:23:04-0:23:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:23:04):**  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  Making urban food production fashionable is like photoshopping reality.  Do you think this trend or this fashion of people trying to buy more direct or support local, do you think that's going to grow and grow and that will support businesses like your own?  Yeah, I do. I think that is, I mean, if you think about it right, in order to be able to sell food to that type of person, all you have to say is, it's not GMO and I don't use any pesticides and herbicides.  Yeah.  
**[0:23:31-0:23:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:23:31):**  To me, that was just completely normal to do that anyways, do you know it?  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  So, and I think in years to come, not very many years to come, maybe in the next couple of years, non-GMO food is going to be seriously big business.  Yeah.  Do you know? I really do think so, I think there's, which, and then the, I mean, then it gets down to ethics, doesn't it? And our ethical position would be, it is not an elitist thing, you know what I mean?  
**[0:24:00-0:24:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:24:00):**  Food shouldn't be elitist, it shouldn't just be like the privilege, like 10, 20% that can go to farmers markets or get everyone a food box or something like that, you know?  But if we're training people to grow food, then it does make it accessible just by the action of actually doing it, you know? So, I think, you know, I think it's good. It's a great industry to be involved in.  Lastly this month, we're going to hear from our farming friend, Robert Simpson, about their community used, but also community built, cob pizza oven.  A great big thing that stands about six feet high and it's massive, you know, it's got about two or three tons of material in it. It's on a great big stone drum, a gabion that we filled with rubble.  We had someone who got specialist knowledge and experience in building cob ovens, they'd done it in the States, came over, Sid, and he sort of led us through building this thing.  
**[0:25:01-0:25:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:25:01):**  And then we had to build a shelter a bit like this, a pole shelter over to keep the rain off the cob oven when we'd finished it.  And we built it in a weekend. We had about five, ten people each all the time there helping to build it.  And lots of people puddling all the cob and putting the straw and the cob and the sand and the clay and everything together to make this wonderful material, which is just, you know, I mean, it's marvellous to build with a cob.  And we have the most amazing pizzas there now. Every other weekend on Saturday we have a harvest day and we just have these amazing pizzas with goo made from products from the garden. It's just wonderful.  And it's become, it's completely transformed the social dynamics of the CSA.  
**[0:25:49-0:26:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:25:49):**  You know, the fire is such a sort of, so we've got people who make the pizzas and have become terribly keen about making the pasta, you know, for it and the goo and the zugo and all this.  You put your hand on the outside when this thing is 400 inside and it's cold. And then you can just bake bread as it cools down.  You know, you get all the ash out after the superheat of the pizza rub. You get it down to about 200 and you can start baking bread.  So we made a clay door. I did some pottery, so I made a clay door for them and they've got fits in and it's sealed it. You've got to seal it.  You take the fire. When you're doing the pizzas, you keep the fire in, but when you do the bread, you have the fire out and it's all cooled down a bit.  
**[0:26:32-0:26:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:26:32):**  Because you're not at this superheat of 400 degrees. But we can cook a pizza on that in about one minute.  Thanks, Robert. OK, remember, we're very keen to hear your stories from the fields. How things are growing, what you're looking forward to.  Maybe you've been to some good events or come across interesting ways to get people involved in the farm. Please do send these through.  We want to make this your show, so please do be a part of it. Or let us know what you liked or what you didn't.  We've had a lot of feedback already and we really do appreciate this.  
**[0:27:02-0:27:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:27:02):**  Hopefully we're going to put something on our Facebook page about a few questions you can answer to make it easier to submit your own stuff.  Not hopefully, definitely. Sorry, definitely, Joe. Definitely.  We're on Instagram and Twitter as Farmawarma with a double underscore. And we're Farmawarma Radio on Facebook.  And exciting news, we're now on iTunes. We're official. We've made it, guys.  And we'll be back next month with more stories from the farm.  
**[0:27:34-0:27:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/02-farmerama#t=0:27:34):**  We're leaving you now with some sound shingyan and our new Japanese friends, mate.  It was an added treat at their farm open day. And a great example of how to develop the local community.  Bye. Bye.  