---
title: 03: Scottish Crofting, alternatives to certification, Irish seaweed & young farmers around the world
---

### Farmerama  (2017-03-10)  
### Author(s): Farmerama  

**[0:00:00-0:00:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:00:00):**  Thank you for being the hope that everyone in my generation has been looking for.  Thank you for turning on its head centuries of prejudice.  The prejudice against rural areas.  
**[0:00:23-0:00:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:00:23):**  The prejudice against indigenous people.  The prejudice that says that if you are a farmer you must be stupid and you must suffer.  I want the next generation to be able to say that this generation made it possible for us to feed the world.  
**[0:00:40-0:00:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:00:40):**  And in fact, I want to record this for my children.  I want to record that I was here when you were here and you said, we will feed the world.  One, two, three.  
**[0:00:51-0:00:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:00:51):**  We will feed you.  Raj Patel there addressing two and a half thousand young people at Terra Madre Giovanni,  We Feed the Planet in Milan from where Farmer Rama has just returned.  
**[0:01:09-0:01:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:01:09):**  The Slow Food Youth Network gathered together young farmers, fishermen and fisherwomen,  shepherds and shepherdesses to bring the voices of the future of food to the Milan Expo.  Under the rallying cry of, We Feed the Planet.  
**[0:01:26-0:01:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:01:26):**  We've soaked it all up and we're going to share so many stories from young farmers from all around the world over the next few months.  What did you make of it in this event?  I was really personally just struck by the energy of this group of people from really all over the world.  
**[0:01:46-0:01:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:01:46):**  I think the biggest message from the whole event was there were so many people from all these different places  who were all young people returning either to the land or the oceans to really, you know,  they are committed to what the future of food is for the planet and that they want to be contributing to.  
**[0:02:04-0:02:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:02:04):**  And they feel proud to be bringing food to people and good quality food.  So many people told me little stories about they'd had one moment and they'd seen how important food was to people  and they felt pride about being able to provide that to people.  
**[0:02:19-0:02:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:02:19):**  There was a sort of energy that I imagine people in their communities are used to being the only person who's voicing this thing  and voicing it again and again and again and looking around the room and seeing the conversations.  It was mostly people sort of elated by finding a brother or a sister or a...  
**[0:02:35-0:02:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:02:35):**  The solidarity. That's kind of what we're hoping to do with Farmerama, isn't it?  Is bring that solidarity between farmers and everyone interested in the farming industry together, you know, sharing the voice.  So that's kind of what it was in one place for a few days but hopefully Farmerama can carry that energy on long past the conference being over.  
**[0:02:56-0:03:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:02:56):**  One person we met in Milan was young crofter Robin Haig.  Crofting, it's a system of farming small plots of land for food and it's specific more or less to Scotland where it began in the 19th century.  Crofters form a really deep personal relationship with their land but they often have to supplement this with other things.  
**[0:03:19-0:03:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:03:19):**  And crofting is a really old craft but Robin's young and like you were saying before,  her experience of kind of coming back to the land and deciding that's what she wants to do with her life  is one that's common to a lot of the people we've met in the last few days.  
**[0:03:49-0:03:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:03:49):**  I come from a crofter. My father is a crofter.  So I always knew that it would be something that I would do.  When I was older and I guess I just had to go away to be able to come back.  
**[0:04:03-0:04:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:04:03):**  So I've been away for 17 years and at the turn of this year I will go back to the Highlands and back to the croft and work on the croft for my father.  Hello, I'm Bella Crowe and I'm from Norwich, Scotland.  We believe that everybody should have access to good food today but we have to do that in a way that doesn't compromise our ability to grow food in the future.  
**[0:04:30-0:04:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:04:30):**  So it's about trying to address food poverty and all the issues surrounding food and climate change.  Massive displacement of people from the land in Scotland.  The Highland clearances, the Lowland clearances were really important in the early 20th century.  
**[0:04:47-0:04:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:04:47):**  Highland clearances, the Lowland clearances were essentially communities were pushed off of their land so that rich people from England and some from Scotland could farm sheep.  And the kind of sticking plaster response to this was that will allow small bits of land which kind of have a special status in Scottish law.  They can only be used for crofting.  
**[0:05:15-0:05:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:05:15):**  Although nothing was really done to halt this process which was hideous and outrageous, there was this kind of really small element of like at least some land has been protected for crofting, for food production.  Normally crofting communities, they're fairly small plots of land and people might not make their whole livelihoods by working the land but they're kind of a way of, yeah,  producing some food and sustaining themselves.  
**[0:05:46-0:05:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:05:46):**  And what's also unique about crofting is that there's also a common piece of land so individuals or families will have their own land to grow vegetables or whatever  but then there's also kind of a common grazing land which is governed collectively.  I think this is a really exciting approach to the food system generally that we need to really rethink the commons and perhaps have more collective ownership of land.  
**[0:06:20-0:06:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:06:20):**  So the importance of crofting in my opinion is that it links you inextricably to the land and it also is a link to culture and to history.  It is the fabric of the highlands and islands and I think crofting is really important in the future because we've become so disconnected with the land  and the way that we produce food has become so unsustainable and I think crofting has a really big role to play in small scale, sustainable food production.  
**[0:06:57-0:07:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:06:57):**  I don't know if it died but a lot of young people left the highlands so they didn't take over any crops from their parents  and the average age of the crofter I think is around about 60 and they tend to keep their crops for quite a long time so then their children don't get the crop until they're maybe in their 40s or something.  But now more people are starting to see how important crofting is for the future and also that crofting needs to be kept alive because it is such an important link to history and to culture and to your wellbeing.  
**[0:07:31-0:07:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:07:31):**  Crofting links you to the land, it teaches you about the land, it cultivates the land and it links you to your tradition and the culture of the indigenous people  so even words for certain things in Gaelic are about the seasons or about how the wind moves across a certain kind of water and a certain kind of weather.  So much of this has already been lost but we really need to link the older crofters, the elders, to the young people so that these traditions and this knowledge is not lost because so much of it has already been lost.  
**[0:08:06-0:08:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:08:06):**  I think there's quite a realisation that we need to connect young and old to pass on these skills.  Apparently Scotland has one of the most unequal land distribution systems in Europe and in the last five years reliance on emergency food aid has increased massively which just seems wild to me because there's just land everywhere in Scotland.  Maybe could crofting be seeing a re-emergence? Well, Norse Scotland certainly see it as part of the wider discussion about the role of agriculture which Scotland finds itself in the position to explore.  
**[0:08:42-0:08:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:08:42):**  In May this year the Scottish Government released a discussion document on the future of agriculture in Scotland  and they're looking to broaden the conversation a bit beyond the Norse stakeholders, the National Union of Farmers or people who normally influence agricultural policy and engage the wider public and citizens in what they believe the future of the agricultural system in Scotland should be.  It's pretty exciting, there's a bit more leanings towards taking into account the role of agriculture in protecting the environment and protecting communities.  
**[0:09:22-0:09:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:09:22):**  So Norse Scotland in November is organising nine events across Scotland to bring in more people to the discussion, explain what it's about and how they can contribute and just create a space where everyone can share ideas and reflect on what they think our agricultural system should be in Scotland.  And so as part of this we've launched a hashtag, launched a hashtag on what is farming for? So we're looking for ideas about how we can maybe create new social contract between farmers and society.  What we're doing at the moment is trying to just ask people what they believe farming is for.  
**[0:09:59-0:10:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:09:59):**  For the first time ever in Scottish history, the 2015 Scottish Crofting Federation meetup was specifically geared towards young crofters and as Robin sort of explained to me, it really is a connection from this new generation to the older generation of crofters which is needed.  And I think it's lovely the way that she describes these people as the elders, it's a really respectful way to talk about an older generation I think.  The Scottish Crofting Federation has started a database to list the skills of older crofters so that young crofters can log on and look at these skills and meet up with the people that they need to acquire the knowledge in order to keep, allow them to sort of run a successful croft.  
**[0:10:42-0:10:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:10:42):**  Is it kind of like a mentor scheme?  Kind of like a mentor scheme in that I think that these skills need to be passed on person to person, sort of using your hands, you need to be talked through how to do it.  I don't think it's the sort of thing which can be accessed by an online course.  
**[0:11:02-0:11:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:11:02):**  But having an online database of what skills people have, I think in itself is quite a powerful use of technology.  Absolutely.  So Robin and other crofters in Scotland are fighting their own battle which is very specific to Scotland actually, to preserve a way of life.  
**[0:11:20-0:11:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:11:20):**  But as we've said before, it's a journey that's mirrored by so many people we've met this week.  Sticking in the same part of the world, sort of, here's a Dutch entrepreneur hoping to see a resurgence in an ancient Celtic resource.  Seaweed.  
**[0:11:42-0:11:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:11:42):**  I love seaweed.  I'm Noor from Seamar Food, it's a start-up in the Netherlands.  We sell seaweed as pasta.  
**[0:11:52-0:11:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:11:52):**  I'm going to ask you why seaweed?  I've heard that if you compare it to land-growing fruits and vegetables, like the kiwi is the king in terms of nutrition but doesn't come close to seaweed.  That's true, it's true.  
**[0:12:05-0:12:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:12:05):**  Seaweed is, for one, super healthy.  It contains a lot of fibres, vitamins, minerals, omega-3 fatty acids, almost no carbs, almost no calories.  So first of all, it's super healthy and second of all, it is super sustainable.  
**[0:12:22-0:12:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:12:22):**  You don't need extra water, you don't need extra land, you don't need manure, pesticides, you don't need anything.  It just grows and it's plentiful.  So why aren't we producing it, why aren't we eating it?  
**[0:12:35-0:12:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:12:35):**  That's a very good question, that's what I'm asking myself.  A long time ago, it was very common to eat it in Ireland.  When you were sick, you had to dip your seaweed into hot milk but then it became poor men's food, so nobody wanted to eat it anymore because it's associated with being poor.  
**[0:12:52-0:12:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:12:52):**  Didn't have any oysters, did it?  The seaweed that we're using is Himontalia enojata or in a common name, sea spaghetti.  It grows in the Atlantic Ocean, all the way down from Norway and then Scotland, Ireland, some in England as well, and then France, Portugal and Spain and the Faroe Islands.  
**[0:13:11-0:13:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:13:11):**  Can it be produced on a mass scale?  Not yet.  Last week, me and the founder of the company, we went to a conference in France about seaweed.  
**[0:13:24-0:13:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:13:24):**  We met up with a lot of scientists and we are trying to get it cultivated but the technology is not yet there, the knowledge is not yet there and nobody actually really knows what to do with this specific type of seaweed.  So it's hard to get the right resources, especially because we want to harvest sustainably.  What we do right now is we have different bays and we practice patchy harvesting, so we get up to 10 or 15% out of one bay in different spots so we don't harm the ecosystem.  
**[0:13:58-0:14:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:13:58):**  Do you have people who have been farming seaweed for generations? Is it a thing which is in families or is it something that people are adapting to now? And who owns the coastline?  All the seaweed that we have right now is from Ireland and I don't really understand how it works but it has something to do with heritage rights.  So it's like one family owns one bay and they are allowed to get the seaweed out of it, it's not regulated anywhere.  
**[0:14:26-0:14:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:14:26):**  So it's basically from centuries ago.  It's a bit strange, they have to change it.  Especially the people that harvest for us now, most of them were fishermen.  
**[0:14:41-0:14:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:14:41):**  Fishing has all these certifications so it's kind of hard to be a small fisherman in Ireland.  And there's less fish in Ireland now?  Exactly, there's less fish as well. So they are changing into seaweed cultivation.  
**[0:14:53-0:15:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:14:53):**  We don't recommend to eat it on a daily basis. Your diet shouldn't exist of it but it is definitely a good additive to your daily diet.  And what's a good recipe?  Our product is only seaweed, it's only dried seaweed.  
**[0:15:12-0:15:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:15:12):**  We sell it as pasta because you can use it as pasta if you prepare it, if you soak it or boil it.  It has a very mild taste. So basically you can use your own favourite sauce.  If you like bolognese, if you like carbonara, you can even use it as spaghetti.  
**[0:15:28-0:15:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:15:28):**  What I like the most is just with chicken and pesto, cherry tomatoes and some cicini.  I love it, I really do.  Firstly, this is really exciting for me. I actually long have had dreams of running a seaweed farm.  
**[0:15:49-0:15:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:15:49):**  It's incredibly good for us, it's easy to grow and it's plentiful.  So in most ways I'm really supportive of what Noor is doing.  But there are a few things about this that bother me a little bit.  
**[0:16:01-0:16:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:16:01):**  The first one is that it seems a bit gimmicky.  Do you think we really need to think of seaweed as pasta in order to be able to eat seaweed?  I mean I certainly don't, I eat seaweed all the time.  
**[0:16:12-0:16:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:16:12):**  But when I saw it being marketed as seaweed I could understand why they did it.  It's much more buyable.  But also more than this, I'm not sure that this model, for all its talk of sustainability and health and environmental benefits,  
**[0:16:30-0:16:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:16:30):**  is actually doing very much to protect the people living in these communities or the resource of seaweed itself.  So this start-up is driven to make money, that's what it has to do.  But if it is successful it's going to put considerable strain on the resources, on the seaweed itself.  
**[0:16:48-0:16:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:16:48):**  And yes they're looking for a breakthrough scientific solution, a way of growing the seaweed.  They're looking at farming this seaweed.  But really I think this asks bigger questions about how we handle these common resources.  
**[0:17:02-0:17:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:17:02):**  I mean like Noor mentioned these ancient rites, to some extent she implies they're outdated and perhaps archaic or not relevant.  But maybe just like crofting they could be seen as effective and fair way of managing access to these shared resources.  Because certainly we need to address that.  
**[0:17:26-0:17:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:17:26):**  Yeah I think what's interesting is just this whole premise of large scale monoculture farming.  Wherever you're going to apply it, whether it's to insects or seaweed or crops in the field or fishing.  I mean obviously it's not monoculture fishing but if you're trying to go after hundreds and hundreds of the same fish  
**[0:17:46-0:17:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:17:46):**  it's always going to end up with the same issues which is like that's not really how nature provides things.  And you're pulling things out of balance, heavily out of balance.  And you're going to have to start finding ways to, you know if it's on soil you'll have to find ways to put nutrients back in the soil  
**[0:18:08-0:18:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:18:08):**  because you've taken too many out, those same nutrients or whatever.  So with seaweed I'm sure there'll be unforeseen repercussions of farming seaweed.  What would be much more interesting is if they had an alternative business model  
**[0:18:22-0:18:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:18:22):**  that somehow really used small scale farming initiatives and maybe they were just a distribution body or something.  I think it should be part of the business model, I think that's what it needs because the business model is only to make money.  Yes they're thinking about how to look after these people and be sustainable  
**[0:18:43-0:18:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:18:43):**  but it's not built into the scalability of the business.  Another issue that was troubling young producers was that of certification.  We spoke to a South African fisherman and, or he calls himself a harvester,  
**[0:19:02-0:19:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:19:02):**  and a Lebanese farmer who both felt certification wasn't necessarily the way forward  which is something I think Patrick Holden expressed at times as well.  And the fisherman in particular felt that the MSC, Marine Stewardship Council certification, was a bit of a marketing ploy.  
**[0:19:24-0:19:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:19:24):**  He thought it was in a way lying to people about what was truly sustainable  and that they were certifying some pretty large scale trawlers that were capturing all sorts of stuff in their nets.  And he saw that that was just a farce and an injustice to people who thought they were buying sustainable fish.  
**[0:19:44-0:19:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:19:44):**  So what I was interested in is, well what would they suggest instead?  Currently in South Africa we are busy developing oil in collaboration with the University of Cape Town.  We have been busy now in the process of developing an app which is called the AbaLobi app.  
**[0:20:03-0:20:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:20:03):**  And AbaLobi is one of the native languages that we speak in South Africa and it means fisher.  So it's the fisher app, part of the AbaLobi app, is always in the control of the fishes.  So whatever information that you put onto the app, whether it be weather conditions,  
**[0:20:20-0:20:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:20:20):**  whether it be fish that was caught, whether it be fish that is available to be sold,  the AbaLobi app is something that we are looking forward to start using in our lives as opposed to certification.  And not just that, but also through some of our partners and other partners that we've had from like other countries,  
**[0:20:41-0:20:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:20:41):**  videos in order to be able to explain and show people the type of fisheries that we do.  Because then we would be able to go on to say that, listen MSC, come on show us the video of this sustainable fisheries  that you are doing because here is our video of our sustainable fisheries that we are doing.  
**[0:20:59-0:21:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:20:59):**  And also personal contact, so if you speak to the fisher himself about these things,  these are the things that we would rather want to encourage and move away from this market  where the consumers and producers are so far removed from each other.  
**[0:21:13-0:21:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:21:13):**  But that's from a South African point of view and from a small-scale fisheries point of view.  But as my friend of Lebanon has said, there are ways and means how we can look at improving these things  and not just about certification.  
**[0:21:25-0:21:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:21:25):**  What I am doing is I go to one small market, we call it SU.  And with the small market you have contact with people, people ask you, you tell them how you work.  And it works about trust. Trust is what, 100% efficient, but certification is the same, it's not 100.  
**[0:21:51-0:21:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:21:51):**  So it works about trust. In Lebanon it can work because it's a small country.  I hope it can work, I think so. I don't know for bigger production and bigger market, I don't know.  I don't want to say yes or no.  
**[0:22:10-0:22:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:22:10):**  But yes, I think the trust and the connection between the people, I don't want to say consumer,  but between people and the farmer. To have this connection and to invite people coming.  They can come, they can harvest apples, they can, you know, this kind of solution that are very easy  
**[0:22:33-0:22:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:22:33):**  and they make a connection between the people. That's part of the solution.  Okay, so trust is obviously the ideal situation.  You know, buying directly from whoever's harvesting the produce, but as Roy had implied,  
**[0:22:50-0:22:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:22:50):**  on a large scale that's not really feasible, especially with so many people living in cities and that kind of stuff.  On the other hand, it seemed like videos and the app that Christian is creating in South Africa with the university,  providing that transparency of sourcing of the fish, it seemed like quite a practical solution.  
**[0:23:12-0:23:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:23:12):**  You know, for those who weren't able to know the farmer or producer directly.  So I'm really excited to hear how that develops.  And I think that's a really interesting use of technology alongside small scale farming.  
**[0:23:26-0:23:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:23:26):**  So we've spoken to a few different farmers about bringing tech to the seas and to the fields.  So far, the message has been clear that people enjoy the manual labour and remaining in tune with whatever it is they're harvesting.  So they're certainly not interested in technology replacing their hard work, are they?  
**[0:23:43-0:23:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:23:43):**  No.  Or taking the place of careful observation and using their intuition about the world around and what they're observing.  However, it does seem that technology could be a helping hand.  
**[0:23:54-0:24:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:23:54):**  You know, it could make small scale farming or fishing more resilient, just providing very practical tools,  kind of like the abalone app. And then it will truly allow us to feed the planet.  A young farmer in the south of England certainly thinks so.  
**[0:24:10-0:24:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:24:10):**  I've had to get someone to make me a database to suit my company.  There's no open source piece of technology to do it.  Yes, what we do is pretty specific, but it takes out human error and it takes out the laborious tasks.  
**[0:24:25-0:24:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:24:25):**  It's all about speed as well. With that salad harvester, I can cut, well, advertisers themselves,  be able to cut 300 pounds of leaf in an hour. 300 pounds of leaf. That's like two or three people of leaf.  By hand, you wouldn't even get a couple of buckets in an hour.  
**[0:24:40-0:24:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:24:40):**  And it makes small scale farming a much more viable business enterprise.  So do you think without the technology, could you compete with the largest scale of the trade?  Oh no, not at all. You either have the labor or you have the technology. It's one or the other, I think.  
**[0:24:56-0:25:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:24:56):**  Either that or you literally will put yourself in an underground.  You will burn yourself out in no time. You have to work smart, not hard. Work smart, not hard.  That was Jack of Jack's Veg. Abi, tell us a little bit about Jack's Veg.  
**[0:25:13-0:25:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:25:13):**  So Jack has been a young guy, really, really friendly and enthusiastic.  And I think he's been growing for a few years now. He's got his own plot of land and he does box schemes.  And he's starting to do honey and he's a real charismatic character.  
**[0:25:30-0:25:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:25:30):**  And I think we'll definitely be hearing from him again because he's got a few different innovative little strategies up his sleeve.  Did you have a sense of attitudes towards tech from We Feed the Planet?  I actually thought that the technology voice was almost completely missing.  
**[0:25:51-0:25:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:25:51):**  There are a few people when I talk to farmers directly, they acknowledged just in conversation that they were using technologies in different ways.  But funnily enough, I thought it was very interesting that none of the conference talks or anything actually ever were looking at how technology could be a useful tool.  And I think there is a certain amount of fear that it's going to be like, oh, the drones are going to take over and the robots are going to come in and it's all going to automate.  
**[0:26:19-0:26:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:26:19):**  And so I think there's a tension with the small scale farming movement and technology, which doesn't necessarily need to be there.  It doesn't all have to be about large scale, scary, expensive tech that is going to put you out of what you're doing, take you away from your craft.  It can be a helping tool with your craft. To me, they come hand in hand and they're there to help each other.  
**[0:26:44-0:26:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:26:44):**  Over the next few episodes, we'll feature a few more excerpts on how different people are using technology to help them make their farming practical and sustainable.  That's a big part of what we want to do on Farmama.  So here we are reporting live from Tierra Madre Giovanni, a mercato surrounded by thousands of young farmers in the mixer.  
**[0:27:12-0:27:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:27:12):**  Guys, you should be here. This is the farming is cool.  As you can hear there, Nigel's still in Europe, so we're pausing with his road trip for a week.  In Milan, I met a couple just two weeks into an epic cycle journey across, well, basically the whole world out to meet people working with the land and cultivating biodiversity.  
**[0:27:39-0:27:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:27:39):**  Hello, I'm Marine. Hello, I'm Maxim.  We just decided to take our bikes and travel from France to Japan because we really love to grow foods.  And thanks to our garden, we met many different farmers because we were searching seeds, non-hybrid seeds, and seeds that we can reproduce ourselves.  
**[0:28:04-0:28:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:28:04):**  And so we wanted to get inspired by different people around the world to be able afterwards to get back in France with all these incredible knowledge that we can learn on the road and to cultivate our lands.  To collect all those seeds, and when I mean seeds, it can be the seeds of ideas, and to come back to find our land and to prepare our future.  And to come back with a mosaic of ideas and to build our own painting of our lives.  
**[0:28:36-0:28:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:28:36):**  Some three associations of Seed Saver in France gave us free seeds, sometimes forbidden seeds, and we have all these in our luggages on the bike.  And we take them as a symbol.  A lot of farmers now are believing they have to buy seeds to feed the planet. That's what we're doing here.  
**[0:28:59-0:29:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:28:59):**  To say, no, maybe there are a lot of other solutions, alternative solutions.  The Seed Bank will be there to share, to be a departure for sharing.  And it's not only about a toolkit on specific knowledge, it's also about telling the stories of the people who are behind and making nice portraits of these incredible people we're going to meet on the road.  
**[0:29:23-0:29:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:29:23):**  Actually, we have a route that is between France and Japan, but then we are really looking for incredible initiatives so we can do like travel for several kilometers to go and visit you and see what you're doing.  So if you're a farmer, a seed saver, a researcher, a food activist, a chef living between France and Japan, please do contact us on our website or our Facebook page and we will be really, really glad to meet you.  We will have a lot to share and it will be really sad to keep it just for us.  
**[0:30:02-0:30:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:30:02):**  We love what Max and Marina are doing, so we're going to be checking in with them over the next few months. So catch updates here or on their website, AutonomiaProject.org.  And if you can offer some support to them on their route, then do get in touch. I know that they will really appreciate it.  Thanks for joining us on episode three of FarmRama. Milan was absolutely great and in the coming weeks and months we're going to have a lot more stories from the people we met there.  
**[0:30:36-0:30:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:30:36):**  Thanks so much to Slow Foodies Network for putting it all together. That was really an epic journey, I think, adventure for all.  We want to close with a message that Raiad wanted to share with farmers across the globe.  I realize that there is so much common things, even with the fishermen from South Africa, the farmers from the mountains of Lebanon, even the guy with the pigs of Holland and the guy from Tajikistan.  
**[0:31:14-0:31:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:31:14):**  There is so much common things and this is very important and gives a lot of positive vibration, a lot of energy for us, for me personally.  It's very nice to hear other stories, how it's difficult to change agriculture, how we are all crazy in our region, in our village. I am the crazy of the village.  They think I'm stupid, they think I'm going to kill my trees because I don't pesticide them, because I don't put fertilizers, chemicals in the ground.  
**[0:31:54-0:32:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/03-farmerama#t=0:31:54):**  That's nice what Slow Food has done, I think it's to connect these people to have more power after that, because when we are together we have more power and that's the very interesting thing.  Farmer Rama is produced by me, Joe Ballott, Abbie Schlageter and Nigel Akehurst. This week with the support of Joy Rose and Amy Cooper who joined us in the land.  Thanks so much. Ciao for now.  