### Farmerama  (2017-11-10)
**[0:00:00-0:00:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:00:00):**  Go on! Go on then! Go on girls!  Welcome to Farmerama and stories from smaller scale farms in the UK and beyond.  We bring you a collection of anecdotes and experiments from the front line of farming.  We're out in the field digging out what's really going on.  Today we're at Hockham Farm in East Sussex to record the show,  
**[0:00:31-0:00:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:00:31):**  which is actually Nigel's family's farm.  So we're starting gathered around the agar while Nigel's shepherdess mum Monica cooks up some of the sheep  which is reared here on the farm.  But today we have reports from all over the place, Belgium, Northern Ireland, Italy, as well as closer to home.  And first we're speaking to some female farmers from even further afield.  
**[0:00:53-0:00:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:00:53):**  Kenya, Tanzania and Burkina Faso.  So Lucy and Rosaline both have successful farms in Kenya.  Lucy, she has a mixed farm with chickens, cattle and horticulture and Rosaline actually grows herbs for tea.  Both were really keen to hear from farmers in the UK, particularly for help with marketing and export opportunities.  But first here you're going to hear them talking a little about male-female dynamics in African farming while in Burkina Faso.  
**[0:01:22-0:01:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:01:22):**  And farming, well in particular in Kenya.  They are doing it as a business.  The only challenge we have with women taking part in the same is that land is given from the patriarchal perspective.  That is, it's given to, if a man has ten children and five are daughters, the others are sons,  the five are sons, the five will be given land.  
**[0:02:11-0:02:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:02:11):**  And the land is given to the family.  So it's a very, very difficult situation.  And the land is given to the family.  The five are daughters, the others are sons, the five are sons, the five will be given land, but it will not be given to the daughters.  Although there is a new constitution in our country, it's trying to bring the issue of equity, but still the boy child owns the land.  
**[0:02:33-0:02:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:02:33):**  So it will be difficult for women to go into it as a business.  But those who have tried are very successful.  We also have groups of women joining hands and doing farming as groups, we call them in our language, charmers.  And the women have been able to grow crops extensively and even export.  But mainly the subsistence farming is still done in the villages by women and children.  
**[0:03:07-0:03:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:03:07):**  As of course the children provide primary labor.  When it comes to farming as a business, mainly men are the ones who are serious.  And at times it's also done as families.  That's why we in the Slow Food Youth Network, we are trying to get our students and pupils to learn about foods, learn about growing crops, small gardens,  and at least spread the word across the board so that those children can now pass the information to their parents back at home.  
**[0:03:41-0:03:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:03:41):**  And then we'll grow good food, fair food, healthy food, and we'll have a healthy nation.  One lady I was particularly inspired by was Gladys from Tanzania.  She's a lawyer who works with the Maasai tribes to fight for pastoralist rights.  There's actually much talk between female farmers about how female empowerment will only happen if men are part of that conversation,  and if they recognize the importance of the shift as well as women.  
**[0:04:08-0:04:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:04:08):**  When I was mentoring Maasai girls, I learned that if we keep advocating for gender equality and then educating women and pressuring women,  it's like putting an attitude against the other side because after all, what are we advocating for?  Why do we want to empower women? From what?  So it's only good that we involve men in this.  We need men in this because who else empowers women?  
**[0:04:36-0:04:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:04:36):**  So it's a lot of work.  It's tough because obviously men in the African context own and they are the dominant.  So it's going to be tough, but I know there's a way that men can help us because it's not a fight.  It's not a negative attitude we want to pressure on men, but we want them to understand that women are also human.  They have roles. They have duties. Also do men.  
**[0:05:03-0:05:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:05:03):**  And we can as well just call work and this thing of abuse should go away.  And so as to build a community, we need cooperation. We need to help each other in the economy.  We need to help each other in building our families. That's the only way you can build a good future.  So far as I came here because I used to think things are tough where I come from,  but then having heard about other people and their situations, I realized that everything is possible.  
**[0:05:35-0:05:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:05:35):**  And I also realized that the power is not with the old or the children, but the youth have the ability to change.  And finally, positive thinking from the lovely Clements Aoudrago.  Oh, I didn't say that right. Sorry.  Who works with a group of female growers to sell their produce in Burkina Faso.  This is very important to include women because in our society, the men have the power.  
**[0:06:05-0:06:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:06:05):**  And the men don't want to share this power with women.  Men can help women to be courageous to attend the objective.  The way is so far, but together we can arrive.  Mind you, your mum was cooking here, but where is she?  We could do with her input here.  
**[0:06:32-0:06:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:06:32):**  Oh yeah, mum. Mother?  Monica?  Mum?  I'm not sure if you're ever referred to as this because I know this isn't what you are or only what you are,  but being a farmer's wife, how does that make you feel?  
**[0:06:48-0:06:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:06:48):**  Yeah, that's fine. I mean, I guess that's what I am.  It's like partners really. It's a farming partnership.  I do find it kind of annoying when in some cases it's quite a male dominated occupation.  Do you think the tables are turning, mother?  Do you think there are more female farmers are getting their recognition?  
**[0:07:17-0:07:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:07:17):**  I think the attitude towards the fact that females do pay a plant is becoming more acceptable.  But there's still a certain number of kind of old, what can you say?  Old school, old garlands.  Yeah, old school who tend to just want to talk to the males about it  and they don't think that females got anything that they could contribute.  
**[0:07:46-0:07:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:07:46):**  Maybe there's more attention being brought to it these days really.  In the past it's been unusual, but now I think it's more acceptable that it is kind of teamwork to a certain extent  and that females can play just as important a part as the males really.  I don't know.  Yeah, well you're pretty, I mean on the sheep side of things, that you've more or less won the sheep enterprise.  
**[0:08:15-0:08:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:08:15):**  We tend to, to a certain extent, I tend to deal with the sheep and Fred tends to deal with the cattle.  You also share responsibilities as well.  We do.  You work as a team.  Yeah.  
**[0:08:34-0:08:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:08:34):**  We're waiting for the gates to come in and I think they've maybe burst through the gates  and obviously the calves got left behind and the cows went into the machine shed  where they shouldn't really go and as a result there's a bit of chaos.  Oi!  Quite well done, wasn't it?  
**[0:08:49-0:08:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:08:49):**  Good old ballerina.  Abby, get her out the back.  I don't know.  No, no, no, not that way.  Go on, that one.  
**[0:08:58-0:09:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:08:58):**  Go on, that one fella. Go on.  Go on.  Go on then.  If you heard last week's show, you'll know that we left Nigel in Milan after the We Feed the Planet event.  He spent quite a bit of time in Europe over the last couple of months, but he has been busy.  
**[0:09:30-0:09:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:09:30):**  You were in Belgium, Nigel.  Yes, that's right.  I was in... I travelled to Brussels on the 7th of September to join a gathering of over 5,000 protesting farmers.  I think there was somewhere in the region of 2,000 tractors.  It was quite a sight.  
**[0:09:50-0:09:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:09:50):**  I'm here in Schumann Roundabout in Brussels in front of the European Commission,  surrounded by protesting farmers.  Some 5,000 angry dairy farmers, livestock farmers, all here protesting against the low prices they are receiving.  Looks to be a helicopter up ahead as well. It's all happening.  I'm Jeanne-Jves Savigny. I'm a farmer and a member of the European Coordination Via Campesina,  
**[0:10:16-0:10:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:10:16):**  which is a broad movement of farmers all over Europe fighting for, especially for milk today.  The price is very low.  A few years ago we decided to open the markets and to be... to be... to liberalise the sector.  And so now the prices are very, very down.  And the thing is that for us it was bound to happen. It's normal. It's normal in this kind of market.  
**[0:10:39-0:10:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:10:39):**  So we want real solutions so that we quit this kind of ideology that the market must solve it all  and that we find solutions to regulate the sector.  We defend the idea to increase or to decrease the production according to the market.  That's not a real quota.  According to the market, if the market needs milk, we produce more.  
**[0:11:06-0:11:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:11:06):**  If the market needs less milk, we produce less.  That's very simple. And for us it's the only solution.  We're here to manifest against the laws that have been imposed on us  and the conditions for the farmers because it's not viable.  The farmers are killing themselves. The costs are higher than what they get.  
**[0:11:25-0:11:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:11:25):**  So that's normal. Nobody can survive that. It's not doable.  We are trying here for over... I'm saying six years, but it's even more to make things move.  But it doesn't work. People don't react and it's always waiting until it's too late to make something change.  How many farmers do have to die to say it like that before something happens?  Michael Oakes, Farming in the West Midlands, and I'm Vice Chairman of the National Dairy Board for the NFU.  
**[0:11:50-0:11:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:11:50):**  It's sheer frustration, actually. Whether you're in the dairy sector or other sectors,  many of us are working for nothing.  We actually want country of origin labelling so that we can identify that things are British  and consumers can actually support British agriculture and British products  because they get the choice at the retailer.  
**[0:12:07-0:12:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:12:07):**  On top of that, the single farm payment exists and at this moment we desperately need it.  And actually any kind of delay in the payments of that will actually push dairy farmers under.  I was a bit worried because there's a big water cannon over there.  A big water cannon? So there's this line of police here and they've got a huge machine with big...  Well, they don't like guns, but I guess they're water cannons.  
**[0:12:29-0:12:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:12:29):**  We know very well this kind of machine.  Oh really? In France you farmers, you like to protest?  It's not a surprise.  So could they pay you more money, do you think?  Are they being greedy? Are they taking all the money?  
**[0:12:43-0:12:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:12:43):**  Yes, of course they can pay more, but actually, I say to you before,  there is too much milk on the market.  Too much supply.  And the market is the result of the production and the consumption.  If you have too much production for the consumption, the price is decreasing.  
**[0:13:03-0:13:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:13:03):**  That's very simple.  James and myself have come from Northern Ireland, flew out this morning  and we're here to support our fellow farmers in this crisis time.  And what is the solution to this crisis?  Intervention needs to be reduced and needs to be risen,  
**[0:13:20-0:13:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:13:20):**  so we can still stay in business.  And are you guys dairy farmers?  Yes, we're dairy farmers.  It's hurting us at home too.  So how much longer can you sustain these really low prices?  
**[0:13:32-0:13:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:13:32):**  End of the spring and that'll finish us.  So it needs to be sorted out immediately.  So people as well as citizens are on our side, but the politicians, they don't know.  Hogan doesn't know what he should do.  The politicians should know that they should have a policy with an aim,  
**[0:13:56-0:14:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:13:56):**  because their current policy has no aim, it has no reason.  And if all the farmers are destroyed, then it's not like the costs are going to go down,  but the costs are going to go up, because our farms are going to belong to the banks.  And this is not what we want.  We need dairy farmers, we don't need banks.  
**[0:14:16-0:14:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:14:16):**  And so you think there's in Holland, there are a lot of young farmers, people going into farming?  Yeah, there are lots of young people that want to be a farmer,  but with these prices that we have now and with the costs that they have,  they are thinking, should we do that for the future or not?  So it's a bit of a struggle.  
**[0:14:43-0:14:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:14:43):**  This sounds like it was really quite a big deal.  Brussels had lots of coverage, there were lots of people there.  It sounds like there was a big police presence.  But this seems like something which in the UK I'm not that familiar with,  as somebody who's not in the farming community.  
**[0:15:01-0:15:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:15:01):**  Would you say that's fair? Is there a different kind of feel?  Yeah, well absolutely. I think in the UK, farmers are definitely more in the background,  they're not so vocal in terms of protesting.  This time, things are getting really serious,  and there were quite a number of UK farmers who actually travelled out with me to protest.  
**[0:15:25-0:15:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:15:25):**  A lot of them, to be honest, were dairy farmers,  because those are the guys that are really up against it at the moment.  They're trying to highlight the fact that the prices they are receiving are unsustainable  and something has to change.  It's a ticking time bomb. Unless prices improve, these farmers are going to go out of business.  
**[0:15:43-0:15:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:15:43):**  UK farmers will be protesting more unless things turn around.  So what can we do to help?  I think it's important, if you can support your local farmer,  so farmers that have set up farm shops, if you can visit your local farm shop  and buy meat and milk directly from those farms, that's great.  
**[0:16:07-0:16:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:16:07):**  I guess I just want to say there that obviously I'm not experienced in this at all,  but I find it frustrating that the EU does have to intervene.  That maybe also another solution is that we need to look for,  and I keep saying this kind of thing, but alternative business models that work  so that the farmer is actually getting paid fairly just from the get-go.  
**[0:16:33-0:16:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:16:33):**  Yeah, it's a tricky one to fix.  Alternative business models are great, but it's quite niche.  The vast majority of people are still buying their milk from supermarkets,  and supermarkets are the ones that are selling it as a lost leader.  Basically people see it as a commodity, and farmers are selling it as a commodity.  
**[0:16:56-0:17:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:16:56):**  I think it's going to take an awful lot of change to improve the situation.  It's a shame. There are real examples, shining beacons, of dairy producers actually making money.  There's not many of them. There's the likes of raw milk as an example,  but I don't think that's a solution for all dairy farmers suddenly to just start producing raw milk.  But there is certainly scope for farmers to collaborate and maybe try and process their own milk,  
**[0:17:30-0:17:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:17:30):**  cooperate, etc.  And that could be a way of making more money, making it more sustainable.  Now onto a report from friend of the show, Ben Ruskin.  He works at the Soil Association, and you may have heard him on our first ever episode.  He was an early supporter.  
**[0:18:08-0:18:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:18:08):**  And here he's speaking to David Love Cameron at his kitchen garden in Northern Ireland.  So I'm here in Helen's Bay Wool Garden. How did you end up here, David?  Well, I won a scholarship to work with Raymond Blanc on a new heritage vegetable garden  in Le Manoir Quat Saison in Oxfordshire.  And that was all about showcasing garden organics heritage seed collection.  
**[0:18:32-0:18:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:18:32):**  And so there'd been quite a lot of publicity around that.  And the owner of the garden here had read some of it.  And when I came back home to Northern Ireland, he asked me to get involved  and help him redevelop this lovely old Victorian wall garden.  Short term plans really are to get the weeds under control and prepare the soil  
**[0:18:52-0:18:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:18:52):**  to take a really wide range of kitchen garden crops.  We've got these two polytunnels that we're growing winter salads in.  And we started to build relationships with local chefs from good restaurants.  So they're really keen to get a good, high quality, fresh local product  that they can put on their menus.  
**[0:19:13-0:19:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:19:13):**  And we'll work with them from there.  Long term, once we've established a really credible kitchen garden here,  we want to run classes.  We'd love to get mental health charities involved.  We'll run classes for ladies who lunch as well.  
**[0:19:30-0:19:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:19:30):**  But then we could have a cafe and lovely high quality stores or supplies store.  That kind of thing. So that's the vision.  So almost like a food hub in the area.  Yeah, definitely. We're very close to Belfast here.  We've got a great demographic in the local area.  
**[0:19:51-0:19:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:19:51):**  So we think there is a niche in the market for that kind of thing here in Belfast.  And as you can see, it's just an amazing setting.  We're surrounded by mature trees and lovely woodland.  And we're just a mile or so from the shore.  So, yeah, we think Belfast is ready for it.  
**[0:20:10-0:20:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:20:10):**  So what do you think your main challenges with the garden are going to be?  Well, I mean, the immediate challenge is dealing with the weed problem that we've had here.  The garden's been cleared several times already.  But, you know, as you can see, we've got lots of problems with cooked grass and docks and so on.  And so, you know, we're just trying to find a strategy to deal with that at the moment.  
**[0:20:33-0:20:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:20:33):**  So over the next few weeks, we might get some goats in.  And so I think they can do a pretty good job of clearing weeds.  And then after that, we'll probably just put it down to black plastic and then roll that back, cultivate the ground,  get it ready for spring and we'll just bring sections of the garden into production as we go along.  And, you know, it's just really me and the owner here at the moment.  
**[0:20:58-0:21:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:20:58):**  And so there's a lot for us to do.  And part of our sort of strategy will be to run a volunteer program.  So giving local people who are interested in horticulture and horticulture students the chance to come along  and work in this kind of unique setting in Belfast.  Fantastic. I noticed you got a couple of really lovely old mature, slightly outgrown style apple trees down there.  
**[0:21:24-0:21:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:21:24):**  Yeah, yeah, they're really beautiful. They're quite kind of craggy and ragged.  But the pear is actually quite productive and the pears are really lovely and almost fizzy at the moment.  But yeah, the apples, I'm not quite sure what the varieties are.  You know, maybe someone will come along and tell us.  But yeah, we'll whip those into shape, hopefully, and plant lots more fruit along the walls.  
**[0:21:48-0:21:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:21:48):**  And we may even have like a nut walk, something like that.  If you want to find out more about the walled garden at Hillens Bay in Bangor County down,  you can check out our Facebook page for more details.  We have been very excited that following our request for you to contribute some of your own audio to the show,  we've already received some submissions.  
**[0:22:10-0:22:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:22:10):**  In fact, we've been so impressed that we've decided to release some of these as short stories on the podcast feed.  The first of these is from Camilla Williamson, who spent some time at Castello de Portentino, a small scale vineyard in Tuscany.  So romantic.  A full report is on the feed, but here's a taste of an introduction to their natural approach to wine production.  My name is Charlotte Horton.  
**[0:22:47-0:22:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:22:47):**  I am English, but I've been living initially for 26 years  and discovered that I had an extraordinary passion for winemaking.  I learned winemaking off the local people 25 years ago,  and that experience has been informing the way that I make wine and I treat the vines ever since then.  It's a technique that's based on observation and really using very, very natural treatment of the vines  
**[0:23:23-0:23:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:23:23):**  and responding to the plants and the particular microclimate that we have.  We have found a whole series of Etruscan winemaking stones down the valley,  which attest to probably a continuous tradition of winemaking for about 3,000 years.  So I'm very proud to be continuing that extremely important tradition.  The Castello di Potentino has a very unique microclimate.  
**[0:23:53-0:24:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:23:53):**  We are in a valley under one of the highest mountains in Tuscany that used to be a volcano.  So we have mixed volcanic soil.  We have a lot of aquifers under the soil, and we have extreme changes in temperature,  what they call diurnal temperature, so from day to night.  So we have very hot, dry air coming in from the coast during the day,  
**[0:24:18-0:24:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:24:18):**  very cold air coming off the mountain at night.  These are perfect conditions for the growth of fruit, and in fact this valley,  which is known as the golden basin in the area, the Concadoro, is very fertile and full of fruit trees,  olive trees, cherry trees, apple, pear, all sorts of things, and obviously, vine.  We have three different varieties of grape in our vineyard.  
**[0:24:47-0:24:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:24:47):**  All three varieties are extremely sensitive to their particular environments.  So they have a particular quality or a characteristic, but they very much reflect or mirror the microclimate,  or what they call in France the terroir of where they are.  So I think plants definitely have an intelligence.  Humans have a different type of intelligence and not able to recognize the intelligence of plants, sadly.  
**[0:25:20-0:25:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:25:20):**  So plants often get quite badly treated.  And what I'm interested in is providing a very good situation for the plants,  because they will thrive and they will produce something that is natural, it's sustainable.  And so that's also very important in how you consider what you're planting and where,  is the sustainability, not only in the sustainability of the plant's life,  
**[0:25:54-0:25:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:25:54):**  but also in the sustainability of the taste.  I believe that you can actually taste in wines or food when they are produced from plants  that are happy and sustainable in their own environment.  So we don't add a lot of chemicals to the wine, we don't add a lot of fertilizers to the soil, and we don't irrigate.  These are things that will become less sustainable.  
**[0:26:22-0:26:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:26:22):**  The use of pesticides and fungicides and treatments for plants in order to produce food or wine is becoming a really problematic issue.  I think that people and plants should be where they can survive without making too much of an effort.  So thanks for joining us this week, from the farm, with Joe, Abby and Monica, my mother, and everyone.  I hope we haven't been recording as you've been cooking us dinner. I hope we haven't got in the way too much.  No, no, no problem. It's all good. It's interesting actually.  
**[0:27:11-0:27:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:27:11):**  My kitchen table is being used for a lot of things, but this is the first time it's being used as a recording studio.  How much is this room an important part of the running of the farm?  Yeah, it's the central part of the farm.  It's the centre of your universe, isn't it?  It all happens in the kitchen.  
**[0:27:32-0:27:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/04-farmerama#t=0:27:32):**  So true. I thought that.  Farmarama is released on the third Sunday of the month, but keep an eye out for the odd special edition like the Potentino report.  You can find us as Farmarama Radio on Facebook, and we're on Instagram, and we're on Twitter as well.  Goodbye. Goodbye. Have fun.  