---
title: 05: Lettuce lawns, no-dig compost, blight-resistant potatoes, mobile polytunnels and festive guests
---

### Farmerama  (2017-03-10)  
### Author(s): Farmerama  

**[0:00:00-0:00:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:00:00):**  Shall I bring some more? I've left the door open.  I think that's loads. We're not going to get through all of that.  It's like slightly smaller bits, like that should lighten the beads, yeah.  
**[0:00:10-0:00:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:00:10):**  Oh, you've got fire lighters. Oh my god! No wonder there's a lot of fires that are going to light.  You don't need kindling with that.  It's a great pile, they're very neatly stacked.  
**[0:00:22-0:00:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:00:22):**  I know! That's what I said.  Hello, welcome to the latest episode of Farmawama.  It's the holiday season and across the world we know many people getting in the mood and slowing down.  
**[0:00:41-0:00:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:00:41):**  If not coming to an outright stop.  But of course life on the farm doesn't stop.  Goats don't celebrate Hanukkah and chickens have little interest in Christmas, obviously.  
**[0:00:53-0:00:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:00:53):**  Or not so obvious, they're not turkeys.  But cows need milking and the sheep need checking as winter rolls into next year.  And Farmawama doesn't stop either, as we continue to reflect on the latest goings on in the small scale farming movement in the UK and around the world.  
**[0:01:13-0:01:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:01:13):**  Right, first we'd like to share with you the story of Pete Douglas, who we met at the recent Soil Association Soil Symposium event in Bristol.  Pete is a farmer without a farm.  He's a true shepherd, he grazes his 400 odd sheep all over the local land.  
**[0:01:30-0:01:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:01:30):**  I was really, well we were really inspired because he has a really self-sustaining business model and amazingly it provides benefits to everyone.  The sheep graze on good farmland to keep down the grasses and of course they add some extra fertility.  And then you get delicious lamb because the sheep are grazing on such good quality arable land.  
**[0:01:53-0:02:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:01:53):**  And for him the golden ticket is really that in summer time when no farmers want his poor sheep, the sheep are let loose on the solar farm, eating all the weeds growing in and around the panels.  So it's perfect.  And of course there are all sorts of benefits to Pete's model, both for his sheep and the farmer.  
**[0:02:11-0:02:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:02:11):**  And we'll let him tell you more.  My business stands on its own two feet in that I have to make the sheep profitable.  I get no income from any stewardship payments, I get no single farm payment or anything like that.  
**[0:02:22-0:02:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:02:22):**  So it's purely a stand-alone business.  So it's farming in its purest form really.  And you said something about you help build fences?  
**[0:02:30-0:02:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:02:30):**  Yeah, I do some fences and I also, one of the agreements I have is I don't pay for the grazing but I equate, I do hedge laying.  So making it feel stock-proof by using the existing material in the hedge.  I equate how much I owe the farmer from grazing into metres of hedge to be laid, which is a nice bartering chip to have.  
**[0:02:53-0:02:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:02:53):**  I think providing you show benefit, what are the landowners going to get out of it?  That's a really big factor.  And if you can sell it to them that way, they're going to get free improvements or they might be saving having to do something.  
**[0:03:07-0:03:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:03:07):**  Sheep are very good at conditioning grassland, they'll help tidy it up.  Especially if it's on a beef only farm for instance, if it's grazed right down and then it's left to grow as a fresh from next year.  So you have good grass growth either for grazing or for cutting forage on, as well as fertility coming in within the rotation itself.  
**[0:03:25-0:03:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:03:25):**  A lot of farming has become specialist in that you have a lot of farms in this country that are arable only or dairy only.  I'm specialist in sheep production but not on my farm, on various different farms taking advantage of all the fresh grass that's around in various areas.  So are you using some sort of app or software in order to monitor which are the best ones, which ones I'm going to keep, which ones I'm going to out, etc.  
**[0:03:50-0:03:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:03:50):**  Absolutely, that's the real benefit of EID, electronic identification.  Lots of farmers saw that as a real burden, that's a real opportunity.  How do you keep records if you're not knowing exactly what's going on?  
**[0:04:00-0:04:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:04:00):**  The lambs are tagged 24 hours after birth and then are related to the ewes.  So I then know that they can only go with certain other typing groups, they're not getting too close to other maternal genetics.  I've got a good memory but it would be impossible to remember from one year to the next.  
**[0:04:14-0:04:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:04:14):**  300 ewes is a lot.  Yeah, so there's all sorts of ways that you can use that to hopefully refine.  There's an old saying that you spend 90% of your time with 10% of your flock.  
**[0:04:23-0:04:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:04:23):**  Now if I can remove 10% a year and then I'm spending my time with the next worst 10% the next year and hopefully I'm whittling those variables down.  It's fundamental I suppose, perhaps as the generation coming through now is very much more tech savvy, so they're used to using this in their everyday lives.  But it's a case of, it costs £800 for the system, you may as well make it work, really make it work for you.  
**[0:04:50-0:04:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:04:50):**  I'm pretty sure it more than paid for itself in its first year because you're recording that amount of information and you're not wasting time with sheep that don't have a future in the flock.  It's much easier to say I've identified you, you're not one I want, off you go.  There are some irrelevant features in some of the technology, I think almost everything is sometimes slightly over-engineered.  
**[0:05:10-0:05:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:05:10):**  But equally there are some factors that are very very good and very useful in there.  And it sounds like the most all-encompassing, well thought out, multi-variable system I've ever heard of.  I don't know quite about that but it certainly keeps me busy and keeps me occupied which is good.  
**[0:05:27-0:05:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:05:27):**  Keen!  Keen but you are keen. This sounds really unusual and quite exciting in a funny kind of way but is there something which is known? Is this a common practice?  Yeah I think a lot of farmers, like say my parents for example, we have a base farm and then we've got other bits of land that we use for grazing and to rotate the sheep around.  
**[0:05:52-0:06:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:05:52):**  But the way that this guy operates is amazing, the fact that he doesn't own anything and he's utilising that.  Everyone talks about how hard it isn't to get into farming because you don't own land or basically he's come up with a system where you can have a business.  He only has to work on it, I think he said like three days a week, so he still has two days a week to do other things and this is making him money.  
**[0:06:21-0:06:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:06:21):**  It's like you hardly ever hear about that in farming where it's actually making you money. That's amazing.  Making you money?  Yeah. Ha ha ha ha ha ha.  
**[0:06:31-0:06:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:06:31):**  Another thing which is interesting to me is this seems like a kind of direct response to just making use of the land that's available and it could be quite an actually ancient idea but it actually seems that this is something which is really made possible by the technology.  Yeah, I mean he didn't really talk about the technology at first but then as soon as we asked him about it, it sounded like it was pretty key to the whole system.  That it was like way too much to remember or organise for yourself in one brain but that if you could keep track of it all quite actively as you're doing things on the farm with your phone, that was the key to this system essentially.  
**[0:07:16-0:07:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:07:16):**  Because that's something I've always thought about is sort of ancient skills that might have been lost. Memory of that type is something that's really important to being a shepherd and I think that's probably something that's quite hard to pick up unless you're brought up doing that.  Yeah, I think as well I mean a lot of the flocks probably years ago would have been smaller. So I don't think his flock was something like 400 sheep or 300 maybe.  So yeah, obviously remembering the good and the bad across that number of breeding ewes is impossible but maybe in the olden days if you had a flock of 50 it was much easier to like, oh I remember that one and perhaps I don't know if there would be different breeds etc.  
**[0:08:02-0:08:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:08:02):**  It would just be easier to identify and act accordingly.  I really liked how he said that so many farms are becoming specialised now and that he, in a way, he's like bringing diversity to specialised farms because he is specialised in sheep but because he's mobile he's able to bring that to many different farms.  And you do hear about more and more, especially kind of organic or smaller scale farmers, talking about how really you need to have that diversity in order to have a fully functioning successful farm.  
**[0:08:38-0:08:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:08:38):**  So it's interesting this perspective where you're actually like using others to bring the diversity to your farm.  It's really interesting, it's like these very kind of, you know, get really good at one thing and then share that with somebody else. And I've got this lovely image of like kind of layered businesses on top of each other and just crossing over slightly and actually building a system, which is sustainable.  Yeah, and works for everyone.  
**[0:09:07-0:09:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:09:07):**  Now it's time to welcome a new member to the Farmerama family. Hannah is a keen and experienced grower working right here in London.  She founded Yard, a company that designs market gardens for cities and is interested in how they can be used to teach people more about the food they eat and also in how they can play a role within communities.  In her first dispatch, she's chewing the cud with Alice Holden, who's with Growing Communities, one of the biggest players in the London organic veg box scene.  
**[0:09:41-0:09:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:09:41):**  So I've just snuck into the office here at Dagenham Farm and managed to pull aside head grower Alice Holden after picking six kilos of salad, which has gone off to a pizza restaurant down in South London.  Alice, you've got loads of salad growing down here. We're in zone five. We can hear the roar of the traffic and the trains. What daunted you most about growing in a city?  Well, I moved from rural West Wales, so I was a bit worried about where I'd get my fertility because I was used to getting it from muck from farms.  
**[0:10:13-0:10:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:10:13):**  But actually, I found that being in the city is a brilliant place for growing because there's so many resources on your doorstep that others consider as waste.  So we've tapped into some of those things here.  So is that kind of like the stuff that people put into their little green recycling box, kitchen scraps and food waste that gets taken away by the council and turned into compost?  
**[0:10:35-0:10:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:10:35):**  People don't often see that. Is that what you're using here?  Yeah, that's exactly the kind of thing. So, for instance, we get green waste compost from North London waste.  It's only got a small percentage of the food bin waste in it, but it all gets composted by the local authorities.  
**[0:10:53-0:11:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:10:53):**  And we actually get it for free. We just pay for deliveries. We get 25 tonnes at a time and it's fabulous weed free compost.  We get through huge volumes of compost, so we need the organic matter to make that compost. And we found that there was a local company called Crush Juice Bars, which is in Barking.  And they were having a problem with all their fresh produce waste and were delivering it to landfill and having to pay for that.  
**[0:11:22-0:11:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:11:22):**  So now we take all their veg peelings and fruit peelings, uncooked stuff and eggshells, and we get about between one and two tonnes a week.  And we compost it and we also mix it with wood chip because it's quite wet and quite high in nitrogen and you need to mix the balance with the carbon, which the wood chip is also free.  And we're finding it's a great source of making our own compost.  
**[0:11:50-0:11:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:11:50):**  Amazing. So, gosh, that's a really big delivery to have.  And I've noticed just walking around that you've got these kind of thick beds of compost that you're growing straight out of.  Lots of them are weed free. So are you just generally applying that and applying that compost over and over again? Like, how are you growing here?  
**[0:12:10-0:12:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:12:10):**  We use a no dig system. So we put compost on top. But when we plant things like our main crops, like tomatoes, we put in the holes a mixture of lots of different types of compost that we've made.  Things like our own compost that's homemade on the farm, things like composted leaf mould and wood chip.  And on the top, we dress it with the green waste compost because it's weed free and that gives nice weed free beds.  
**[0:12:39-0:12:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:12:39):**  That's amazing. So you've got the fertility from the homemade compost, good structure from the leaf mould.  And then I love it, this kind of weed free cap that you're putting using that green waste compost, which doesn't look like the most fecund of compost, does it?  It's a little bit dry, but I like the way that you've utilised that to kind of, so it's almost like EnviroMesh you're putting over the top, but it's compost.  
**[0:13:01-0:13:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:13:01):**  Yes, it's sort of like using Mypex almost because it's so clean and it's so hot composted that it kills off any weed seed.  And it also means that we can just save our own, for instance, lettuce seed and then sprinkle the seed heads over the bed.  And because there aren't any other weeds coming up as competition, just your lettuce seeds will germinate and it's a very quick, low labour system of planting a whole bed of lettuce.  
**[0:13:34-0:13:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:13:34):**  We did that last year and then transplanted them when they were too thick. Yeah, it works really well.  Depending on the bed and the family group, we do it with say brassica salads and we just sprinkle any seed heads we've saved over a bed and it will all be mixed up.  And yeah, you get like a lawn of different kinds of brassica salads coming up and you can harvest it and you get an instant nice mix.  
**[0:13:57-0:14:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:13:57):**  And the same with lettuces. We use lots of different types and we save the seed heads and we sprinkle them over a bed and we come through and you get a nice varied salad.  Which is awesome because you're getting quite a good price, I imagine, per kilo for like a mixed leaf salad, which lots of restaurants want ready to go.  Sometimes we do get beds that have seedlings coming up on them, but more and more frequently they are crops that we can use.  
**[0:14:26-0:14:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:14:26):**  So the longer we've been here, we're finding that different types of salad are self germinating in the beds and we're just letting them be.  And it's just saving us labour. And often if they're in the wrong part of the farm in terms of our rotation, we can use them as seed beds that we then transplant from.  So we can pop them into the right places according to our rotation plans.  
**[0:14:52-0:15:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:14:52):**  Out the back here you've got like a compost village being set up. I saw some of the volunteers today emptying bags of kind of fresh fruit choppings into the compost.  So you must have about 20 bays, I think now, of pallets.  One thing we are finding is avocado seeds don't compost very well.  
**[0:15:15-0:15:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:15:15):**  I know, damn you Londoners and your joy of avocados habits.  That was Hannah Schlutter talking to Alice Holden of Growing Communities based at Dagenham Farm.  Dagenham is an ex-council nursery and they grow organic vegetables which are then sold to local restaurants and people in the veg box scheme.  
**[0:15:49-0:15:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:15:49):**  OK, so right at the very beginning of Farmerama, one of the first people we met was Robert Simpson.  He's a founding member of the UK CSA network.  Now Robert is really relentless in his pursuit of new ways of doing things.  
**[0:16:06-0:16:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:16:06):**  And as we learnt last time, he's also a huge advocate of experimentation.  Here he is again with a particularly innovative solution for housing goats.  And somehow this sort of feels quite Christmasy to me.  
**[0:16:23-0:16:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:16:23):**  I don't know if you can hear it without a minute, but it's a technology which is, I just sort of feel it's in tune with the natural goatiness of goats.  It's nomadic, it's a little bit awkward, but a versatile and rugged response to the practicalities of their environment.  They made a polytunnel with on skids to house goats.  
**[0:16:52-0:16:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:16:52):**  Well apparently someone told me that you need to keep goats constantly moving on different pastures.  So you perhaps kept the goats inside this mobile polytunnel and moved them onto different parts of the field.  Now actually I must say the reason why we went for this mobile polytunnel was because the planning authority for our area had said we'd already got two polytunnels up and they wouldn't let us put a third up.  
**[0:17:21-0:17:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:17:21):**  So we thought right, well we won't put up a fixed building, we'll do something and make it mobile.  And somehow or other we got to hear about, you know, we've asked some people who made polytunnels and they said oh yes, well we have made one which is for goats.  So they made this and it's an absolute treat.  
**[0:17:42-0:17:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:17:42):**  It's a success story and it's an obvious way to one on the nose for planners, you know, because it's not a fixed structure, it's just a mobile polytunnel of considerable dimensions.  Isn't that funny?  Can I ask the really, like why do you need to keep goats dry?  
**[0:18:02-0:18:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:18:02):**  I've no idea. I said my imagination is defeated, I cannot imagine why you need to keep goats in a polytunnel.  Thanks Robert, we look forward to hearing from you again.  Next we hit the road with regular contributor Ben Raskin from the Soil Association who's been at something called the Potato Field Lab.  
**[0:18:25-0:18:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:18:25):**  The event featured potato fans from garden growers up to much larger producers and Ben caught up with breeder David Shaw from Savari Trust.  The focus of the field lab was growing blight resistant potatoes and Ben asked him whether this is something which seems to be taking off.  It certainly seems to be. I mean one of our problems is actually having enough seed grown for the market.  
**[0:18:51-0:19:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:18:51):**  There seems to be a demand and an increasing demand, probably mainly amongst the smaller growers, gardeners, allotment holders and small holders as well.  And you know they haven't been taken up by the large grower who says blight is never a problem for me, I just put on the spray and it always works.  And do you think there's also an issue with people's tastes?  
**[0:19:22-0:19:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:19:22):**  You know so the large retail markets do seem to be dominated by a very small number of varieties and obviously some of these new varieties or very blight resistant varieties might taste different, might need cooking slightly differently.  And getting people to understand that perhaps is difficult.  Yes I think people need to understand the differences in these new varieties that they have qualities in addition to blight resistance that are very useful.  
**[0:19:52-0:20:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:19:52):**  In fact most of ours show very good virus resistance and they have weed smothering ability and they also last through until April and May without sprouting and that's a very useful quality and I think people need to realise that.  And the problem with the large growers, they're plugged into supply chain into supermarkets or larger stores and they have such very strict specifications for a potato.  And they tell breeders like us if you can match our best variety and it might be Marquis or it might be Maris Piper or even some of the newer ones, if you can match that and also make it blight resistance, you know we know all about how to grow that variety, yes we'll take it, we'll take all you can produce.  
**[0:20:53-0:21:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:20:53):**  And do you think that potentially, you know you're seeing a significant increase in amateur growers growing these varieties, do you think that might in time lead onto them being prepared to buy those varieties from customers or do you think they're a different market?  Well it's enlightened people growing for themselves, they can realise the benefits, they know that if they put them in the garden for example that they're going to get a very good yield without really bothering and certainly without spraying, they don't want to spray.  So yes maybe it'll work down in that they'll get used to, they come back for more every year that's for sure, but maybe they'll start asking for a similar potato in the shops, you never know and you know then we might have a chance of selling into the larger supply chain.  
**[0:21:51-0:22:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:21:51):**  I think there was a lot of interest shown by the people in the audience, a lot of them were very well aware of blight resistance and its usefulness and they had come just to hear the latest news about what's available.  Yeah and it was great because we've obviously got the Yaw Sharpo varieties that have been around for a while and we had Graham from Agrico who are off with some other varieties as well.  So it was nice to be able to have a wide range for lots of different palettes and certainly in the taste test we had Chips and Mash particularly that showed them off well.  
**[0:22:34-0:22:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:22:34):**  The Axona I think and the Carola's were the two that seemed to stand out for people, one from each which was nice.  Ben Raskin talking to David Shaw from Savari Trust.  We'd just like to give a shout out to the Innovative Farmers Dutchie Programme, they funded these trials and are making really good work possible in this area.  
**[0:22:58-0:23:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:22:58):**  Nigel, Abby, do you have a favourite potato?  Many people in the UK will be having Christmas dinner, potatoes are a big part of that.  Okay I'm going to hold my hands up so I don't know a huge amount about potatoes.  
**[0:23:12-0:23:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:23:12):**  Okay okay okay, Abby?  I don't either!  I know I've heard of the Maris Piper, it's pretty popular, I think it's a good potato.  
**[0:23:21-0:23:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:23:21):**  Versatile.  But if you ask me to name another variety I think I might struggle. What do we think?  There are a few others but I think...  
**[0:23:32-0:23:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:23:32):**  Mashed.  That's not...  Boiled.  
**[0:23:38-0:23:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:23:38):**  But I think what this comes down to and what's interesting is that ultimately the supermarkets have, or someone somewhere along the line said, oh Maris Piper is the best for chips and mash.  And then now all the supermarkets want is a very specific type of potato and therefore literally that's all we're ever exposed to unless we're growing our own.  And like I said before it's not really up to the farmers to... they're not going to change the supply and force that down our throats are they?  
**[0:24:10-0:24:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:24:10):**  Well yeah they don't have... they can't because how do... unless they sell direct how can they get the potatoes to us if we're not wanting what they're growing?  And Dan Barber mentions this in his book The Third Plate, kind of the importance of chefs and influencers in deciding on what we eat and how things are cooked  in order to really take on new varieties of potatoes, try them out, do something experimental, exciting with them or maybe just mash them and make them taste great  
**[0:24:44-0:24:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:24:44):**  and engage people with oh well this is a potato X or whatever and here it is and people enjoy it and then suddenly they know the name and they can ask for it  and that's how change really happens and that's how farmers are really able to grow new varieties.  So on to next year. What are you excited about in the farmer world for next year?  
**[0:25:16-0:25:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:25:16):**  Well on the 6th and 7th of January there is pretty much the... oh who's at the window?  I don't know.  Oh look at this.  
**[0:25:42-0:25:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:25:42):**  Harry, Nigel come over.  What's going on? Oh my word.  Hang on I just want to let them in. Someone's come to say hello at Christmas.  
**[0:25:58-0:25:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:25:58):**  Hello.  Hey big guy. My god look at the size of their antlers. They're huge. Wow they're so friendly though.  So what do you know about farming reindeers?  
**[0:26:09-0:26:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:26:09):**  Er, absolute zilch.  I mean what I really want to know is just what we can feed them as a snack.  Carrots, they love carrots.  
**[0:26:16-0:26:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:26:16):**  Mince pies.  Mince pies, yeah.  Carrots.  
**[0:26:20-0:26:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:26:20):**  Yeah. Brussels sprouts always go down the treat as well.  Chuck me those carrots.  Patch.  
**[0:26:28-0:26:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:26:28):**  There you go. There you go.  Anyway, we're talking about what we're doing in January.  So back to business.  
**[0:26:41-0:26:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:26:41):**  Yeah so what are you excited about in the upcoming year in the farmer-armour world?  So on the 6th and 7th of January it's the Oxford Real Farming Conference.  Yes.  
**[0:26:57-0:27:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:26:57):**  Which is pretty much the premiere event in the farming sustainable food calendar.  All of us are going to be there. It's going to be really exciting.  But just to be clear we're not going to the farming conference, not the Oxford Farming Conference. We're going to the Oxford Real Farming Conference.  
**[0:27:14-0:27:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:27:14):**  I found this a bit confusing.  It is confusing.  Yeah but, well so the Oxford Farming Conference has been going on since the 50s?  
**[0:27:21-0:27:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:27:21):**  60 years.  Yeah I think like a long time.  Really well established.  
**[0:27:25-0:27:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:27:25):**  And big names are there. The big, big players.  But no real farmers though.  No.  
**[0:27:31-0:27:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:27:31):**  No real farmers.  Some maybe big farmers.  Big corporate farmers. Yeah wearing suits, ties, no Wellington boots for sure.  
**[0:27:39-0:27:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:27:39):**  There comes a time when you've got to decide what side of the fence your bread's buttered on.  That is right. Your bread is buttered. Is that a saying?  I think Jo just made that up.  
**[0:27:49-0:27:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:27:49):**  Yeah.  But you know.  What side of the fence is your bread buttered on?  
**[0:27:55-0:27:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:27:55):**  Well the first year I went to the Oxford Farming Conference.  Oh.  I went to...  
**[0:28:00-0:28:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:28:00):**  Anyway, thanks for joining us and thanks for all your support this year.  Yeah. You know, it was... I was trying to sort of see if there was some way of like bringing the two sides together.  And I don't think it's really possible to be honest.  
**[0:28:15-0:28:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:28:15):**  They're two very different schools of thought.  Different worlds.  Thanks for joining us and thanks for all your support this year.  
**[0:28:27-0:28:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:28:27):**  We couldn't do this without your support and encouragement and input.  So do let us know what you think or go one step further and record something for us.  We really are always so excited to get things people or farmers have recorded for us.  
**[0:28:43-0:28:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:28:43):**  And of course keep updated on our Facebook or Instagram or Twitter.  At Farmerama underscore underscore.  Or Facebook it's Farmerama Radio.  
**[0:28:54-0:28:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:28:54):**  Oh and we have a new website.  Farmerama dot co.  Just that's dot c o.  
**[0:29:00-0:29:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/05-farmerama#t=0:29:00):**  Check that out too.  It's the cool domain name isn't it Abbey?  I guess so.  