### Farmerama  (2017-59-10)
**[0:00:00-0:00:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:00:00):**  We are always in awe at the risks farmers and growers take on. This is not a quick gains  gain and changes or experimentation can take years of believing you are doing the right  thing with little or no agreement from those around you. We share in those learnings and  losses here on Farmerama, so thanks for giving your voices and thanks for listening.  This month we hear from farmers who have gone against the grain to work with the landscapes  
**[0:00:31-0:00:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:00:31):**  around them and we learn about how listening to the land has led to flourishing businesses.  And we go volunteering with Hannah to learn about inner city school kids excitedly eating  home grown carrots and how she's managed to keep them entertained by soil.  So to kick us off we're sticking with kids. Goats are boundless creatures, they'll eat  almost anything and sometimes everything and they're really entertaining to be around.  
**[0:01:15-0:01:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:01:15):**  Not always popular in the traditional British diet but that certainly seems to be changing.  Gourmet Goats based in Borough Market in London recently won the best street food prize at  BBC Food and Farming Awards which we were at. And I wasn't there but you two were, good  time? So nice. Amazing, really good. I felt particularly inspired by the whole thing.  Because every other awards ceremony I've ever been to I was a bit drained by the whole thing  
**[0:01:45-0:01:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:01:45):**  but this was energising to see all these people so humble being rewarded for all their years  of work and effort. Yeah a real celebration of amazing hard work and great food. And innovation,  like most of the people there were really innovative in what they were doing. I particularly  liked that pub. It was a farm shop as well. Yeah so half of the pub they turned into a  farm shop. I just thought that was like, it made so much sense. And you know like the  
**[0:02:15-0:02:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:02:15):**  local farmers they'll come in, they'll drop off their beetroot and then go and have a  beer. And I was like, how could no one have thought of that before? I think it's a model  that could catch on. Definitely, it just made so much sense. And goat was on the menu. Yeah.  It was a very tasty gourmet goat. Yeah, fantastic. Delicious. Delicious goat. Well now it's time  to hear from another farmer who's making a success of a farm built around goats. My name's  
**[0:02:47-0:02:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:02:47):**  Ruth and I'm Harris Farm Meats for me and my five children. I have a small farm outside  Stave in South Lanarkshire and we produce Scottish boar goat and we rear traditional  and rear breed pigs and produce mutton and lamb. The goat meat's a fantastic meat. It's  not only extremely healthy, low in calories, low in cholesterol, high in vitamins, low  in fat but it's also immensely tasty. It's a beautiful meat and the boar goats originally  
**[0:03:20-0:03:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:03:20):**  from South Africa produce a very tender, tasty meat. It's not in any way tough, it's not  in any way overpowering, it's just a beautiful, beautiful meat. What I did is I took about  two and a half years to find the right quality of boar goats and eventually found them and  started Harris Farm Meats. Working with goats, you do need to have a sense of humour. Goats  are funny, really, really funny. They have fantastic characters and they express themselves  
**[0:03:52-0:03:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:03:52):**  in many, many ways. They talk to you, they talk to you by their actions and you need  to be able to read that. A good farmer for me must have compassion, must have compassion  for her animals and must be able to read them really well. I need to know when they're not  happy, when they're not well and also how to help them. Goats, they do talk to you very,  they do talk to you very, very loudly. They've also got great characters and the end product  
**[0:04:25-0:04:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:04:25):**  is they produce a very good, very good quality meat. I don't have a traditional farming background.  I didn't go to agricultural college but I did learn my trade from very experienced farmers  and learned it as I experienced it. Every year as a young girl I used to go up to my  uncle's farm, my uncle David up in the Highlands. He had about 3,000 hill sheep and I'd go up  there for a shearing every year and I loved it. My uncle was so good to his animals and  
**[0:04:52-0:04:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:04:52):**  he demanded that his workers totally respect the animals and for me that's the way the  animals should be kept. I plan to grow my business. I would like to start up a farm  shop. I've found that opening a farm at the weekend has been very successful. A lot of  people in Scotland want really good quality food. They want to know how it was kept, they  want to know what it was fed, where it came from and they want to, more often than not,  
**[0:05:22-0:05:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:05:22):**  and the most important thing is they want to know that that animal had the best, best  life and that's what I can give them. So I do have a lot of people out at the weekends  to see my animals and I welcome that. I want people to see where their animals came from  and the life they lived. My plans is to open a farm shop eventually and then eventually  down the line do an educational programme for people with special needs, basic animal  
**[0:05:47-0:05:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:05:47):**  husbandry and also animal therapy. I think animals are fantastic for people with different  support needs and I do have a background in that so I'd be looking to expand that. I got  a lot of help setting up the business. There is help out there, especially from other producers.  Other producers do want to help you out. They will give you their experience and especially  small producers in Scotland, they want you to succeed. They want Scotland to succeed  
**[0:06:19-0:06:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:06:19):**  as a small producer of very, very fine foods. Also the business gateway has been immensely  supportive. I know that I can phone them up and they'll do their very best to help me  out and give me the information I need. What I'd say to people who ask about goat meat,  why eat goat meat and what does it taste like? Well goat meat tastes very different to different  people and obviously different cuts will taste slightly different. My most popular cut is  
**[0:06:45-0:06:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:06:45):**  diced because it just lends itself to spices and oh it's so beautiful, tender and tasty  and really, really delicious. For me, some people say it tastes quite gamey, other people  say it's quite like lamb. For me, it tastes like lamb and the best roast beef you'll ever  have. So go out and try Scottish goat meat, it's fantastic and you will be helping a small  producer. One route to market for her produce is through Glasgow Food Assembly and it's  
**[0:07:19-0:07:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:07:19):**  thanks to Geraldine Pitt, the Assembly host, that we have this interview. We'll have a  link to the food assembly on our Facebook. One of the multitude of growing related activities  our regular contributor Hannah is involved with is volunteering at a primary school in  Elliftonton Castle, South London. We hear from Hannah here as well as teachers Susie  Gregor and Rachel Fullwood and new contributor Alice Holden. They all come together to explain  
**[0:07:49-0:08:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:07:49):**  how the school get the children engaged with growing and thinking about food.  I've been volunteering for just over a year. I thought it would be for six months but actually  I like it so much that I want to try and keep coming. It's often the best part of my week.  There's different bits. We visited the nursery garden and that was the first area that I  sort of reclaimed as it were and started to garden productively with flowers and vegetables.  
**[0:08:39-0:08:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:08:39):**  So each year I've taken on board another area or another bed. I really always like working  with people and I've got a real enthusiasm for growing so I thought maybe this is a good  idea to share that and particularly with children but going and watching teachers do their thing  and keep control of a class and keep them engaged was a big eye opener for me so I've  been learning a lot from them. Most of them don't have gardens. If they do have gardens  
**[0:09:09-0:09:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:09:09):**  it doesn't mean to say that they garden in them but the majority haven't got gardens.  So they do appreciate it and I dare I say I think the children notice more than the  adults.  They've been getting taller, they've been getting flowers. Now look at the baby poppies.  Don't snatch because there's not enough for everyone to try. So if one or three people  
**[0:09:29-0:09:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:09:29):**  try then a lot of people have got to miss out. I don't think it's fair. You're all going  to get a chance to do it. Can we appreciate the cuteness please?  I've got a new found respect for teachers I'd say. I definitely thought it would be  easier than it is and I also came at it in a way that I thought yeah I'm going to get  them so excited so I'd be like guys this is rainbow chart isn't it amazing and then they  
**[0:09:57-0:10:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:09:57):**  go yeah and run around the playground and then I'd be like guys guys come back we need  to learn about the chart and cut it so I kind of had to learn down to like tone that down.  There's gardening club which happens every Wednesday. That's after school and then now  all the year groups have their own planters so they all have an opportunity to engage  in gardening in their own little plot as it were and the teachers plan those activities  
**[0:10:27-0:10:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:10:27):**  and they have to plan one every half term so that's part of our curriculum now.  Do children connect with growing up with eating? They certainly do in gardening club because  they pick it and they take it home and then they'll always say oh can I eat it now can  I eat it raw or do I have to cook it do I have to wash it so I definitely think they  do and I think that is developing. I think if they saw a tin of sweetcorn they might  
**[0:10:54-0:10:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:10:54):**  not necessarily make the connections but that is developing and certainly with the older  children very much so.  What happens to the produce? Well at the moment it's taken home generally and the aim is I  mean each year we've taken on board something new so we're probably in about our eighth  year I would say so the next thing is that we are actually in this room going to have  
**[0:11:20-0:11:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:11:20):**  a kitchen installed so it's going to go back to us having cooks here and food being cooked  on the premises so once we're there although we do not have the acres that are needed to  provide fruit and vegetables for a kitchen to feed a large primary school like this we  will be able to start putting stuff into the kitchens.  Farmers have had to diversify their farms to survive financially and actually I'm seeing  
**[0:11:55-0:11:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:11:55):**  it more and more often that actually maybe young farmers coming into this it's so hard  to earn a living from farming alone that they have to diversify their skill sets as well  and it's great if you can have it all centered around growing but sometimes you have to think  outside the box rather than being a farmer the whole time.  I do loads of different jobs they're all centered around growing but some of them are doing  
**[0:12:18-0:12:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:12:18):**  media things, teaching, training, growing, working in schools I'm keen to try as many  different things as possible but I feel like you have to be an entrepreneur now if you  want to get into growing which is cool because it suits me and I'm in but it's difficult  as well.  I've heard farmers say similar things about yeah keeping their farms going you know starting  
**[0:12:41-0:12:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:12:41):**  other businesses alongside so you have to be able to diversify your income streams as  well.  Creepy Corleys is always a mixed thing some love them and some scream but one thing I  would definitely say since we have been gardening with more of a variety of flora and we've  had more insects coming in the children are less screamy than they used to be and it's  
**[0:13:18-0:13:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:13:18):**  less of oh everything's a fly.  You know we've started to sort of say oh well actually that's not a fly that one's a bee  that one's a wasp that one's a yeah so it's their karma.  I have asked a few of the kids as I'm sort of like doing jobs and they all enjoy the  garden I'm going to say all the majority they do notice the different flowers they notice  
**[0:13:43-0:13:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:13:43):**  vegetables growing in strange places you know they appreciate the variety and there's just  so much to look at.  Every week they'll come out with something that I you know haven't even thought about  they notice things they're excited about things and just I really love it when they become  like competent and they just casually walk past oh yes carrot you know no big deal and  
**[0:14:07-0:14:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:14:07):**  I just think if we want people to care about you know the future then this is a great way  to start because I just don't think people care about plant skills that much even though  we need plants to live in a major way food oxygen you know flood prevention is critical  to the future but people consider it just like a I don't know a nicer side if you can  be good like with plants.  
**[0:14:38-0:14:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:14:38):**  Thank you to everybody at John Ruskin primary school for showing us around and thanks to  Alice who recorded these interviews.  Alice is the lead grower at Dagenham Farm and we'll be hearing more from her over the  coming months.  And now for something a little different we have some recordings from a poetry competition  
**[0:14:56-0:14:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:14:56):**  which has got people thinking creatively about the food they eat.  The slam was run by Hammer and Tongue Bristol in partnership with Bristol Food Connections.  Here's Sarah McCready with a poem about roast dinners and the people you eat meals with  and thanks to Jane Kilpatrick who sent in these this recording.  Wallace and Gromit went to the moon just for some cheese and I followed them and I've seen  
**[0:15:36-0:15:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:15:36):**  my past my present my future in a chicken nugget.  Age six and not much older baby skin and frakkled shoulders licking ice cream in the shape and  watching in wonder as it pools in the crease of my arm.  Twenty something in high risers and terraced houses hot ready meal slops on a cold plate.  Even I'm old as hell rocking chair on a drowsy doorstep still appreciating the simplicity  
**[0:16:09-0:16:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:16:09):**  the ice particle symphony of a mini milk.  Fat burritos pink juice pulp hot dog sweat swallowing music with a packet of quavers  cheeseburgers and relish on knuckles walks home a cradling hot chips like they were your  first born.  Candy floss your teeth sends into nothing and chilling in Bristol with a blueberry muffin  
**[0:16:39-0:16:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:16:39):**  finding paradise in a back alley with a stuffy nose and curry house spices.  Wallace and Gromit went to the moon just for some cheese and I followed them.  John and Joanna Cherry are farmers who have embarked on an ambitious no-till herbal lay  and mob grazing experiment on their farm inspired by books such as Grass Soil Hope by Courtney  White and by visits to pioneers of these techniques in the United States.  
**[0:17:36-0:17:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:17:36):**  This combination of methods has allowed them to move away from conventional high input  farming to running a farm where the fields are flourishing soils regenerating and running  at a profit for the first time in years.  I joined John along with the Future Farm Lab team and his herd of course for a tour of  some of his fields.  
**[0:17:58-0:18:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:17:58):**  Well they've never seen so many people they're very excited.  Yeah we ploughed this field for 20 years and it got progressed well we've been I mean we  ploughed it for 20 years it's been ploughed for hundreds of years before that.  It just got a little bit worse it was horrible yellow clay and it got a bit worse more difficult  every year and we didn't think there's anything we could do about it we thought we had to  
**[0:18:26-0:18:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:18:26):**  keep ploughing it.  You just got more bigger and bigger machines to break it down after the ploughing and planting  the crop and the crops got worse and worse.  Hopefully we've broken the cycle now by not disturbing it and the soil organic matter's  getting in there and the soil's getting darker and which is a good sign that there's carbon  
**[0:18:47-0:18:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:18:47):**  being locked up in it and it's getting much more water attentive and manageable and full  of worm holes and yeah getting better all the time.  We like it.  This field was full of black grass and it's very much lacking organic matter so we put  it into this herbal lei three years ago and we put this very rudimentary fence around  
**[0:19:17-0:19:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:19:17):**  and a kind of temporary water tank in and then we've been mob grazing it the cattle  were in here about two weeks ago those ones we've just seen and just took the top off  it and then we'll let it grow off again and that's this chicory will grow sort of six  feet tall and be covered in blue flowers that looks fantastic.  Do you ever harvest the chicory?  
**[0:19:40-0:19:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:19:40):**  Well the cows do it for us.  In mob grazing a method that was made popular by Ellen Savery you can use electric fencing  or temporary fencing to keep animals in specific parts of the field.  This practice mimics how animals would behave out in the wild on vast grasslands but it  doesn't come without its challenges.  
**[0:20:08-0:20:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:20:08):**  In this climate the grass spends all winter not growing and then it suddenly starts growing  in March April time and about this time of year it does maximum grow come about June  July it stops growing and then you have another little dip in another little peak in September  time you get the autumn rains.  So it's all about managing that uneven wave of growth so that you've got food for them  
**[0:20:38-0:20:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:20:38):**  all year round and they don't grow they don't grow quite as quickly as animals that get  a bit of grain in their diet.  So some of the two-year-old ones like that black one are really quite small when they  carve but they're, oh do shut up.  What is it?  
**[0:21:06-0:21:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:21:06):**  So I mean I think it's all about just looking at what your ground does what happens in your  climate and adapting it.  There's no point trying to fight nature you just want to go with it.  There's no real C4 plants but native here so but it's an opportunity.  This grain would have been sprayed before we drilled it we've round up to kill any weeds  
**[0:21:37-0:21:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:21:37):**  and volunteer weed coming up and I think that's probably it.  It's had some fertilizer and that's it.  This is a major challenge of no-till how to remove the cover crop before you plant the  beans or wheat or whatever.  As you heard John currently uses weed killer.  
**[0:21:56-0:21:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:21:56):**  There is no clear answer to this conundrum.  Most organic farmers still till the soil to avoid this issue but not tilling the soil  can return lots of fertility and trap beneficial carbon in the soil.  We're on the cusp of so many exciting things happening in farming and it's like the tendency  is to be miserable as hell because everybody wants things to change without them having  
**[0:22:23-0:22:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:22:23):**  to make any changes.  Most farmers stop farming you know now they physically do it but someone else tells them  what to do the whole time and they get a menu of this is you know you plant this on this  in between these two dates and then you spray it with this and then you spray it with that  and then you apply some fertilizer you spray it with something else then you combine it  
**[0:22:45-0:22:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:22:45):**  when it's ready and you sell it to this person over here.  What I find exciting about John is that he was a conventional farmer but has gradually  moved away from using chemicals and artificial inputs towards more natural and agro-ecological  methods.  It's understandable that many farmers running on tight margins to support their families  
**[0:23:05-0:23:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:23:05):**  are hesitant to make the jump into the unknown.  Joanna talked us through her experience.  When the accountant came to do the which they do end of year accounts he's really cynical  about this whole no-till business.  He kept saying I don't understand actually you are in the top say five percent of farmers  
**[0:23:24-0:23:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:23:24):**  in the country in terms of making money but it's just because there's so few costs because  the costs are so low because of the lack of chemical sprays the lack of diesel being used  and all the rest of it and machinery being up kept and all the rest of it and so he then  realized that this was actually financially viable.  It was a year when a lot of people had made a lot more had had a lot higher yields who'd  
**[0:23:50-0:23:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:23:50):**  been plowing and their farm wasn't and this farm wasn't yet getting such high yields and  so it they had assumed it was going to be a bad year for profits and so everybody was  surprised and the farmer kept saying oh this is just probably a blip and almost certainly  this won't carry on and then last year when he came back he had to say again well actually  I don't quite understand why this is the case but it looks as though again it's working  
**[0:24:21-0:24:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:24:21):**  rather well for you but it might not work next year.  It immediately made John very positive because it made it much easier to convince other people  so people who farm in the next door farms are also have gone no till as a result of  this yes so it because that does speak to farmers I mean the bottom line is what people  are interested in because they don't want to take risks there really is a profit aspect  
**[0:24:47-0:24:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:24:47):**  to this which which makes it sensible to do irrespective of any kind of other reasons.  John and Joanna have put together an all day event, Grantswell on June 30th on their farm  in Hertfordshire so fellow farmers and the public can come and see for themselves.  Yes so the Grantswell show is it started off as an idea of just getting all the people  who are doing no till together for a celebration and sharing ideas and exploring new ideas  
**[0:25:21-0:25:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:25:21):**  new ways of doing things but also it's an opportunity for people who are thinking of  getting into of changing their system and giving them the opportunity to find out how  to do it and to see us making a meal of what we do and have a look at land that's been  in no till because a lot of people never come across it I'm just very excited about it  and I'm very grateful to the people who showed us what they were doing and we're just passing  
**[0:25:52-0:25:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:25:52):**  that joy on to anybody else who's interested.  And so the daytime events will all be geared towards active farmers and in the evening  we've got a Charles Dowding who's a great no dig gardening specialist to talk to any  local gardeners who want to experiment with not digging their garden but growing just  as many things and Jill Clapperton the great soil scientist from America will be explaining  
**[0:26:24-0:26:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:26:24):**  to non-farmers the benefits of all these ways of looking after the soil to the planet and  to their food and to the future of farming and all the possibilities for hopefully any  any members of the public can come along to that.  So thanks Abby for that report.  Nigel what do you think about this till till when would could you be tempted to jump on  
**[0:26:53-0:26:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:26:53):**  the no till bandwagon?  Yes in short I think I think it's something that we'd love to try on the farm.  So then what about adding in this mob grazing aspect because you obviously have cows and  sheep on your land would you ever consider taking that honour why haven't you adopted  it yet?  
**[0:27:09-0:27:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:27:09):**  Well from you know farms I visited where they're implementing mob grazing they've seen you  know big a big increase in the sort of productivity of the grass like the lays coming back stronger  and just generally you know producing more grass from the same area of land so it kind  of seems a no-brainer really.  And why now why is this stuff getting attention now why has this not been done 10 years ago  
**[0:27:38-0:27:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:27:38):**  20 years ago like a hundred years ago what is it about this current moment that that  we're hearing more and more of people talking about both of these techniques?  You know in the last whatever 60 70 years high input farming became the norm and so  people were putting loads of nitrogen fertilizers on their fields and just using every chemical  possible because it was producing high yields and it seemed to be making more money but  
**[0:28:04-0:28:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:28:04):**  then in the last I don't know how long maybe 20 25 30 years that's been on the decline  and people are actually getting lower yields from their land and they're having to pay  for these high inputs still and not getting the same rewards.  Broken the soil.  Really ravaged the earth and need to look to something new and what I think is interesting  
**[0:28:28-0:28:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:28:28):**  about John is that he you know he's not organic so he hasn't got you know he doesn't have  that aspect to what he's doing but he's taken some steps that really are helping to become  more agroecological in his ways and for me that's inspiring to see conventional farmers  moving across because 95% of farmers in the UK are conventional so that to me is really  exciting.  
**[0:28:56-0:29:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:28:56):**  So can we get a commitment from you to follow the journey on Farmer Long over the next.  Yeah I think in the next six to twelve months we could we could pilot something.  That's cool.  That would be really cool to follow the journey.  With our Sussex cattle I think yeah that'd be quite well suited to it.  
**[0:29:19-0:29:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:29:19):**  Now to close the show we have another poem from the Bristol Poetry Slam.  All the recordings you've heard today are part of a national competition leading up  to a final at the Royal Albert Hall and to find out more head to our Facebook page where  we'll have the links to everybody who is involved.  We'll be back next month but until then here's Danny Pandolfi to send us off with his experience  
**[0:29:42-0:29:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:29:42):**  of giving up meat.  So I stopped eating meat.  Thought it was the right time.  Thought if I tried it might not be so hard.  When you've been forced to give up the things you love in the past that choice can be liberating.  
**[0:29:58-0:30:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:29:58):**  So I consider waiting but sizzling bacon.  That smell was a meat permeates everything even permeates has meat in it but I'll sit  a dead man and I'm eating it.  I want to feel the same when spring rolls into summer and in case there isn't long to  go I want to know what's best.  
**[0:30:17-0:30:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:30:17):**  They say it's like going from solid gold to monochromes instead but I'm not push over  and now it's like I'm on a roll with veg I take out one then goes the rest like the domino  effect.  I try to pervade this life with meat from frying steaks to dicing beef it's like a game  of hide and seek inside of James's giant peach but then I like the taste.  
**[0:30:36-0:30:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:30:36):**  It's kind to me.  Not quite the same but nice and sweet lost my weight and I'm flying free those frightened  states inside me leave which got me thinking about the wider issues in this and why the  issues persist.  Can we change belief systems like diet plans with the speediness that lightning can see  
**[0:30:54-0:31:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:30:54):**  the easiness of climate plans and greediness of private lands.  Change elitism is just like ingredients in frying pans.  So now how will I feel if I gave up the fight as I think of all those great people who gave  up their rights and the comparatively few things I gave up in life but then just a few  months ago I almost gave up on life and ever since and I've been looking for a purpose  
**[0:31:18-0:31:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:31:18):**  and a reason searching for a meaning in the earth and in its creatures not that person  here for preaching on the perks of being vegan no not a sermon or a teaching this is personal  watching.  Sometimes it takes one strike to make mountain steps ironic when you give up some rights  you can take down what's left and as I think of collectivism no bizarre how there's no  
**[0:31:41-0:31:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:31:41):**  iron man like Tony Stark.  Feminism, Sir Wunder of Wild Wurst and Kraft, Joan of Arc and Rosa Parks how none of them  ever gave a stone to cost whether the length of a shoulder run we've kept them to poles  apart we treat them golden keep them close to our chest like a poker card.  Food and mind the two combined two things I've struggled with through my life.  
**[0:32:04-0:32:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:32:04):**  People ask me are you joking me?  You don't behave like you ain't coping great plus you ain't fat or skinny I said you can  be low on shape without being overweight plus mentality governs and controls your states  I was given dominion over the meats but for what spiritual meaning?  Because remember there's an opposite in every biblical teaching morale and morals are intrinsically  
**[0:32:26-0:32:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:32:26):**  linked in the choices we make and the things that we're eating and I realized 40 days of  fasting isn't 40 days of starving this isn't biblical.  You can desert an extra meal and leave the devil crossed is that I?  Cyanide should be mounting strategies to get to God which lends me the ease to give up  and strength to stop to write freely and not allow this pen to cost and can spirituality  
**[0:32:47-0:32:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:32:47):**  link to animals eaten?  Can callousness be confirmed by pacifist treatment?  I guess this is just another challenge for me than like Adam and Eve with the apple of  Eden with the strength and the power of a marriage agreement where I can live happily  free or be banished from trees and I can travel to Kiev and see if to feud to food I'm a  
**[0:33:02-0:33:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:33:02):**  savor what are the fruits of my labor?  Now I no longer feel like my tooth is a saber more like the broom's infantasia reciprocating  blissful traits through what you do to your neighbor and that's being human in nature  than was Judas a traitor?  Was Brutus a traitor?  
**[0:33:20-0:33:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/10-farmerama#t=0:33:20):**  So I don't have to stand here and act like you need a savior I'm just a student of nature  and I'm searching for beautiful flavor these are the fruits of my labor.  