### Farmerama  (2017-13-10)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:00:00):**  Oh look, there's another little beetle here look.  Oh no he's gone, he'll come back, he'll come back right in.  Welcome Farmer Honors!  Today we are brimming with innovations and new perspectives to share with you.  We get our teeth into crowd farming oranges,  
**[0:00:22-0:00:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:00:22):**  farmer to farmer knowledge sharing in Kenya and Peru and food assemblies with Nigel,  Ben gets an organic perspective on hydroponics  and Avi has been to the States to get the lowdown on a tool that's coming to the rescue of the overloaded salad grower.  And we'll learn to eat like a climbervore.  That's eating based on the landscape we inhabit.  
**[0:00:44-0:00:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:00:44):**  First up, farming without soil.  Hydroponics has been touted as a great way to feed our ever-growing population, especially in cities.  It can be done indoors at high density and the conditions are easily controlled.  Alan Schofield, a long-term organic grower, asks some interesting questions about the principles behind it.  Ben Raskin of the Soil Association spoke to him for Farmer Armor to find out how does hydroponics gel with organic ideas?  
**[0:01:14-0:01:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:01:14):**  To me organic production is a cyclical system.  As a long-standing organic producer I have tried wherever possible to recycle plant waste.  The only materials that we buy in for fertility on this holding are either green manure seeds  or one or two things like a little bit of straw to pad out our composting system.  Beyond that, everything is recycled and that nutrition from, if you like, our waste,  
**[0:01:46-0:01:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:01:46):**  waste out of the pack house, waste from when we've cut a crop and there's all the root systems  and there's all the leaves that we don't sell, etc, etc.  All of that is put into a system where it's recycled and then that's put onto the soil.  That is not the fertility for next year's crop.  The fertility comes from the bugs and the beasts that live within the soil working on that material.  
**[0:02:11-0:02:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:02:11):**  So I always look at it that all we're doing is we're feeding the soil flora and fauna.  They're then making the nutrients that my plants then take up and grow off.  A soil-less system is nothing to do with recycling to me.  It's actually a system where you're having to bring everything in.  So just as I would like to think that my particular system mimics what we do here at what planet Earth itself does,  
**[0:02:39-0:02:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:02:39):**  i.e. it is a closed system and everything within it is recycled,  to me a hydroponic system or growing out of the soil would require bringing in materials for the fertility to grow those crops.  And that to me is a linear system.  So you've got to bring things in from further afield and then you end up with a waste problem  of having to try to get rid of the end products other than the crops.  
**[0:03:05-0:03:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:03:05):**  So I think it actually goes against the principles of what we've been trying to achieve over the last 40, 50 years here in the UK in commercial organic production.  Nowadays with the market being so difficult, if you like, and people questioning why should we produce food organically  when we can use genetically modified crops, etc., etc.,  one of my biggest arguments against a hydroponic growing system is we have built, if you like, wonderful customer relationships  and an integrity for our production system that if we were to allow the certification of hydroponically grown organically grown crops  
**[0:03:49-0:03:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:03:49):**  as they do in the States at the moment, then we would lose a lot of that integrity and a lot of that trust  that I feel that our system of production is based upon in our customer relationship.  Organic standards have always, if you like, protected the consumer in the fact that they guarantee that the farmer is actually doing what he said.  And as organic growing techniques have developed and liquid feeds have become available, and as you've rightfully said,  just at certain times of the growing cycle, maybe the plants do need a helping hand  
**[0:04:23-0:04:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:04:23):**  and it's good that we have that provision of tools in the box that we can use.  But enshrined within the organic standards is this concept that anything like that that you're using can only be used as a supplement to the main sources of fertility.  And we interpret that, that no more than 49% of the entire nutritional needs of any one crop can come from those outside of materials.  And this is why I don't believe you can ever have a true organic hydroponic system because 100% of that plant's needs will be being supplied.  And that is actually against organic standards as set in most of the world today.  
**[0:05:08-0:05:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:05:08):**  Even if those nutrients came from an organic source, you're still not, you haven't got an organic system.  No, no, because they're being bought in.  Here where we have absolutely wonderful soils that all we're doing with modern day agriculture is degrading them,  then no, I actually think it's a nonsense and I think we should go back a step and be paying a lot more care and attention to the soils that we have.  Because let's face it, we don't make any more on an annual basis.  
**[0:05:38-0:05:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:05:38):**  We've got what we've got and it's up to us to treat it decently.  And again, if we don't treat it decently, it's not us that lose out.  It's our children and our children's children.  And we are spending, if you like, their heritage by not looking after our soils correctly.  And we should be doing better.  
**[0:05:58-0:06:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:05:58):**  So what I think is quite interesting is that there is in the EU, there's a regulation which means that hydroponic systems cannot be organic.  But the worry here is that in the United States, there's kind of less control and there's less people monitoring those organic rules.  So there's the worry that that's going to come over here and what is organic is going to be sort of watered down.  So you're saying that in the US you can have organic hydroponics?  Yes.  
**[0:06:30-0:06:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:06:30):**  It's getting more and more that way.  I have to say I hadn't thought of Alan's arguments prior to hearing them today.  But I definitely think they're really valid.  One thing I would argue that I think organic farming is circular in the ideal.  But in the reality, there's quite a lot of organic farms out there that do use organic fertilizers and stuff that is actually being drawn from other systems.  
**[0:07:02-0:07:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:07:02):**  So they're not quite as circular as you might expect.  But I would totally advocate the more circular organic systems.  And I do think that people who are doing it, you know, with a lot of principles involved, that is much better for the environment than a hydroponic system.  If this interests you, Ben's actually planning an extended version of his interview, which he's going to put out through the Soil Association. So keep an eye out for that.  I have lived in these hills ever since I was my mother's daughter. And you just can't take these hills away without me fighting. You made driving sheets when I was born a big strong woman.  
**[0:07:54-0:08:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:07:54):**  And you just can't take these hills away without me fighting.  This whole land's been walked by many people. Some die young, some still living. You might try to take these hills, but I ain't gonna give them, give them, give them.  Vegetarian, vegan, paleo, organic, local. There are so many ideas about the best way to organize what we eat. And the motives are various, from personal health to religion to climate change.  But what about a diet based explicitly on food relating to the landscape we live in? I'm really excited about this idea. It's time to introduce the Climavore Diet.  Cooking sections are a design and architecture studio who have set out to explore the systems that organize the world through food and thinking about food.  
**[0:09:02-0:09:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:09:02):**  They created an installation based around five climate seasons and they created a dish for each climate. Naomi went to investigate for Pharma Rama.  So the food that we choose will also affect climate change in one way or another, but also we would contribute to fight it.  So we propose here five dishes which relate to five different seasons. So seasons for us are not any longer summer, spring, autumn, winter, because we can eat anything, anytime.  But seasons of water scarcity, seasons of invasive species and so on. So we do not believe anymore in being vegetarian for your whole life.  But maybe you need to eat certain kinds of fish if you want to balance the ecosystem in certain parts of the world.  
**[0:09:45-0:09:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:09:45):**  The idea is that you would eat everything based around... An environmental problem. So for instance in California with the drought recently, maybe you would need to eat species during the drought season that require very little irrigation.  So even for instance like a local tomato would be actually bad to contribute to the system because it requires much more water than other grains.  So who you're trying to reach? Are you trying to reach the farmers, the consumers? Like everyone at large. I think it's a matter of trying to move beyond labels and certifications of free trade, organic and so on.  And raise awareness about how you could do like do it yourself contribution to climate change.  So there's a few seasons that I see here on a piece of paper. We have forever fertile and then you should eat...  
**[0:10:34-0:10:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:10:34):**  What we call nitrogen fixation mulch, which is I mean, there are a million things you can eat, but we propose this for today, which is a mix of alfalfa, peas and clovers because they function as a fertilizer.  And this is a very old method that since the Middle Ages people have been using rotational crops of alfalfa to kind of regenerate it.  But there is not enough demand for alfalfa. But potentially if people would be eating it that more, there could be a reduction on the amount of fertilizers.  And then we have drought season.  Which is what I explained before, like these water stress balls consisting of like crops that require very little irrigation.  
**[0:11:15-0:11:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:11:15):**  So lentils, millet, pomegranate, carob. And then we have the invasive season.  Which would be eating invasive species until you get rid of the problem.  So if there's a lot of grasshoppers, we all should have grasshoppers.  In the Caribbean now it's a problem with lionfish. And like the Cayman Islands, for instance, are trying to institutionalize it as a national dish in order to keep their environment as it was.  And then we have the ocean cleaning season.  
**[0:11:48-0:12:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:11:48):**  Which is again like how do you purify the water through seaweeds or mussels or kelp that filter like the different pollution of the water and turn it into like oxygen.  And then the last one we have here is desertification season.  Which is the one you tried, the moringa, which we call desert stoppers as dessert.  And it relates to the new political alliance that happened in 2010 of the countries at the southern edge of the Sahara Desert.  And they are trying to plant the new great green wall from coast to coast of Africa in order to stop the advance of the desert.  
**[0:12:27-0:12:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:12:27):**  And in order to do that they would need to plant more trees that can survive there like the moringa tree.  But again if there is not enough demand, especially in Europe for instance, that no one really knows moringa or very few people do, farmers could have an incentive to grow those trees.  That was Naomi talking to Daniel from Cooking Sections for Farmerama. Thank you!  Some of their ideas are similar to that of Chef Dan Barber's.  Such as the fertile mulch season, which encourages people to eat alfalfa and peas.  
**[0:13:01-0:13:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:13:01):**  They are great at fixing nitrogen in the soil.  So then if more people eat it, then more farmers will be incentivised to plant these crops and nurture their soil naturally.  A locally grown tomato, if you are living in California, would not be a cool thing to eat because it uses huge amounts of water to grow.  I think this is certainly a way of thinking about where I am in the world and what I consume and what I use that really makes a lot of sense.  Yeah, interesting. So many people advocate local as the pinnacle of optimal food choices in terms of sustainability and the environment.  
**[0:13:43-0:13:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:13:43):**  But yeah, amazing to have that example of like in California in a drought, the tomato is actually, even if it's local, could be a really detrimental crop.  And that you could be doing less harm by having grains come from across the country.  It's like a lot of these things seem to be focusing on one problem with the food system where this looks as the food system as a whole.  And that's just it's a much more satisfying thing intellectually to think about.  Totally. That's really cool. And actually, something that took me a little while to get my head around.  
**[0:14:25-0:14:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:14:25):**  Very cool.  I have lived in these woods ever since I was my mother's daughter.  And you just can't take these roads away without me fighting.  You may drive a big machine, but I was born a big strong woman and you just can't take these roads away without me fighting.  And speaking of California, sort of, you were in California, but you also you've just been in Utah.  
**[0:15:15-0:15:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:15:15):**  You visited Eden and Powder Mountain, which is the home of the Summit community.  And I think you had quite a nice time, didn't you?  Yeah, it's a beautiful place on Earth. Really, really incredible.  And lots of really interesting people, an amazing community of entrepreneurs, changemakers, all sorts of great people.  You'll get to hear more next month.  
**[0:15:38-0:15:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:15:38):**  Yes. We're quite excited about it. But there's one thing that we're so excited about we couldn't wait to tell you.  So we're going to give you a little taster.  Exactly. Yeah. So the local farm is run by Pete and Katie.  It's called Sandhill Farms. They farmed in Eden for 10 years, all organic, and they do a local CSA.  And they're actually really renowned for their garlic.  
**[0:16:01-0:16:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:16:01):**  We couldn't resist sharing a few minutes this month about a tool that has Pete super excited.  For the last nine years, we've grown a lot of baby salad mix.  It's profitable. There's a demand for it. And it grows well in our climate.  The challenge with it is that it is very labor intensive as well.  It needs to be planted every eight to 14 days.  
**[0:16:32-0:16:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:16:32):**  It needs to be harvested early in the morning when it's cool, and it needs to be harvested kind of quickly.  And then it needs to be rinsed, packaged, and sold within a day or two at the most of being harvested, whereas garlic can store for six months.  And so the new, I'm calling it scale appropriate technology that we've invested in, we actually got a grant through Slow Food Utah to purchase this.  But it's called a Quick Cut Greens Harvester, and it's basically a 15 inch serrated blade that vibrates back and forth to create a cutting mechanism with a battery powered hand drill.  And so it basically is this structure that kind of fits in two hands.  
**[0:17:17-0:17:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:17:17):**  You hold the button down on the drill and it activates.  You hear this ring ring out in the field. The people that are harvesting radishes the other day kept looking over at me and laughing because I was out in the field with this little hand tool.  Incredibly, incredibly efficient. I cut 40 pounds of greens in 20 minutes.  That would have taken me two to three times, three to four times longer with a harvest knife.  Having something that's a 200 or 300 percent increase in efficiency is a big deal.  
**[0:17:52-0:17:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:17:52):**  You know, if there's only three people on the farm working and you can, one person can get the work done of three in an hour,  that's those are the kind of efficiencies that we need to be figuring out how to have more of.  And I actually got to use it this morning for the first time for a harvest.  And I was just shaking my head thinking, wow, for almost a decade I've cut greens with a sharp harvest knife, which is how a lot of people do it.  And but this is something that, yeah, it's pretty simple in its setup.  
**[0:18:21-0:18:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:18:21):**  And we're going to be able to do a lot more in less time.  So and the quality, I think, of the cut is actually better than doing it with it with with a knife because it's more it's more uniform.  And so we do a lot of salad greens that we cut multiple times.  And after one's sowing, we'll cut two or three times and you need to have a real clean first cutting to get the second regrowth to be quality.  The amount of farm worker being in bad posture, leaning over, harvesting things, we do enough of that all day long that if there's anything that can make our our our lean over less and bending over less, that's a good thing.  
**[0:19:03-0:19:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:19:03):**  And so this is going to take a morning greens harvest from a two to three hour thing down to like a 45 minute operation.  Having gotten to see it in action myself and like I said this morning, used it for the first time and I had to call off two of my workers that I was going to have come early this morning because I was done.  Yeah, really excited about that and excited to share it too with some of my other friends that I know are growing greens with and harvesting with knives.  Thanks, Pete. It's always great to hear about a relatively low tech tool that makes such a difference.  I will definitely get a photo of that water ermine later. Is he out? Oh no, it's white ermine. Water ermine, sorry. Water ermine. He's impressive.  
**[0:19:54-0:19:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:19:54):**  That's a stargazer. Oh you can't see it but it's yellow on the other side.  You might have noticed that we haven't heard from Nigel this month. Well, we can hear him beetling around in the background.  Yeah, what he's actually doing here is he's rooting around for snails, beetles, caterpillars with Sussex Wildlife Trust ecologist Graham Lyons.  So he's doing that on his farm, which is where he is right now. So unfortunately he can't join us right now but I did manage to catch up with him earlier in the week to see how he got on at a panel that we put together with the girls at Rework as part of the Future Food Summit.  So it was a food tech event. It was mainly kind of like start ups, people doing exciting things within the food tech industry.  
**[0:20:43-0:20:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:20:43):**  And our interest is obviously quite near the beginning of that chain. Do you feel that farmers were represented at this event?  They were definitely like, they were spoken about, but there weren't like, there weren't many farmers there, Joe. So it was good to be able to represent sort of farmers and give a farming perspective.  You had three guests, three quite different types of businesses, but all working directly with farmers. And you managed to grab the speakers for a bit of a chat after the panel so we're going to hear from them now.  Your first guest was a name that will be familiar to farmer-farmer listeners, it's Food Assembly.  Yes, I caught up with Carolyn.  
**[0:21:31-0:21:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:21:31):**  So I think one of the main challenges with farming is the low profit margins and that it's actually really, yeah, it's becoming less and less economically sustainable to be a farmer.  And that is certainly due to the pressure on food prices, but also due to the long supply chains and a lot of middlemen and like selling through supermarkets gives them farmer on average 20 to 40% of the value of what they actually sell.  So we are very decentralized model and like anyone can really open a food assembly in their local community.  So all you have to do is go on to our website and basically apply to become a food assembly organizer and then bring people together.  And as a food assembly organizer, you get 8% of everything that's sold in a way we're also creating local jobs.  
**[0:22:14-0:22:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:22:14):**  The whole business model is that 8% goes to the food assembly organizer, 8% goes to us, leaving the farmer with over 80% of everything that's sold.  So yeah, the biggest incentive is really to provide better access to fresh local food to someone's local community.  So eventually it's up to every food assembly organizer how they create and design their own food assemblies.  It could be that they have film screenings or talks at their collections or they organize farm visits.  And that's a really nice thing as well that we are a platform, but we also a decentralized offline network of local food communities.  
**[0:22:52-0:22:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:22:52):**  That was Carolyn from food assembly. Nigel, who's your next guest?  We had Gonzalo from Valencia, a fruit farmer.  Six months ago we created a new concept, a new supply chain that is called crowd farming, where basically we make our customers part of our production.  So instead of selling them oranges, we sell them a tree that will provide them the fruit.  With this model we can connect the consumers with the farmers and produce exactly what they want.  
**[0:23:32-0:23:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:23:32):**  We launched this project, there are a lot of customers that are coming to our finca to visit the tree.  It's very romantic. So after the success of this project we say, okay, we can take the concept of crowd farming to other products that we were producing.  In Spain, most of the farmers think that to have a profitable business they have to produce quantity instead of quality.  And it doesn't matter what you do, you will never be able to produce as cheap as you can produce in Brazil or in Morocco.  So if you really want to live as a farmer in Spain, you have to produce quality.  
**[0:24:15-0:24:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:24:15):**  So we changed the model six years ago, we started selling to end customers all over Europe.  And so that's a good point. So you're basically selling, it's not just to the local community, you're selling across borders to Germany, to other countries, is that right?  That's right. But places where we can go in less than three days. This is important.  For me, as I'm 30 years old, Europe is local. I'm not selling in the US.  But we sell to places where we can bring the audiences in less than three days.  
**[0:24:54-0:25:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:24:54):**  For example, to France we deliver in one day, to Germany in two days, and here in the UK in two or three days.  So this is important for us to produce local but European.  To me, this sounds like a really quite cool idea. It's like a snazzy bit of marketing. It's like a sort of spin on a CSA.  Yeah, absolutely. You're right. It is. It's like a modern day CSA.  It's like basically getting people to share in the risk and letting them take part in almost the running of the farm.  
**[0:25:33-0:25:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:25:33):**  I don't think maybe modern day CSA is going to put off some of our CSA listeners because I don't think there's anything not modern about CSA.  But I take your point. It's a new way of selling a quite similar idea.  And finally, we had Kenny. I think this is a really interesting project about sharing knowledge between farmers in a quite interesting way, which is primarily what we're here to do.  Okay, so what we do at WeFarm is provide a platform to be able to both access and share vital information for small scale farmers around the world who don't have any connection to the internet.  So mostly using text messages as a vehicle, we can have a farmer ask a question in rural Kenya, have it answered in rural Uganda,  
**[0:26:17-0:26:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:26:17):**  and analyze the data that comes out of all of those questions and answers for the benefit of everybody.  In today's discussion, we talked a lot about both that aspect of connecting farmers to each other, but also then connecting the whole supply chain.  So farmers to consumers, farmers closer together to the intermediaries and supermarkets are ultimately buying their products and trying to cut down the cycle of waste and inefficiency.  I can give you a quick example of a farmer called Kefa in Kenya that was a WeFarm member, still is.  Kefa keeps chickens, quite a small number of them, about 40 or 50.  
**[0:26:54-0:26:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:26:54):**  He had a virus that was ripping through his flock of chickens and it already killed 20 of them.  So he sent an SMS to WeFarm asking for advice on how to stop this.  Within five hours, he got several pieces of information back from WeFarm and using that information was able to save the rest of his flock that almost certainly would have died.  That sounds fairly simple, standing here talking about saving 20 chickens, but to Kefa that is his entire livelihood.  That's what pays for his kids to go to school, puts food on his family table.  
**[0:27:24-0:27:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:27:24):**  So that's the kind of basic fundamental information that we tend to deal with, his core agricultural problems and sourcing peer solutions to those.  I can see it doing really, really well.  It sounds like some really interesting stuff there. They're really great projects, which I'd like to know about a bit more.  Did you have a discussion and question and answers with the audience and what sort of things were the audience interested in knowing and how did they respond?  One of the questions posed was why aren't more farmers utilising these tools?  
**[0:27:58-0:28:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:27:58):**  Well, busy farming, right?  This is it. I basically explained, I said, given my own situation, it's more than a full time job.  Just like running the farm, keeping everything ticking over and suddenly to like, you know, start crowd farming or doing something else on top like requires at least an extra person, if not two people to make this happen.  Farmers generally don't get much spare time.  A lot of these platforms and things that are being developed right now can really help farmers, empower farmers to greater things.  
**[0:28:35-0:28:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:28:35):**  Be more efficient, get closer to the consumer, like develop stronger businesses that are less reliant on the industrial food system.  Thank you for listening. All our previous 10 shows are on iTunes or wherever you download your podcasts from.  If you could take the time to write a review or give us a rating, we would really love that as it helps other people find out about farmer on it.  And also do like us on Facebook, Twitter or even just mention us to your farmer and foodie friends.  Let's knit an ever wider web of people who understand the importance and resilience of smaller scale farming.  
**[0:29:18-0:29:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:29:18):**  We'll be back next month. Thank you. Bye. Ciao.  This old man's been walked by many people, some dying young, some still living.  You might try to take these woods, but I ain't gonna give them, give them, give them.  I have lived in these trees ever since I was my mother's daughter.  And you just can't take these trees away without me fighting.  
**[0:29:58-0:30:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/11-farmerama#t=0:29:58):**  You may try big machines, but I was born a big strong woman.  And you just can't take these trees away without me fighting.  This old man's been walked by many people, some dying young, some still living.  You might try to take these trees, but I ain't gonna give them, give them, give them.  