### Farmerama  (2017-06-10)
**[0:00:00-0:00:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:00:00):**  It's July and we've now been following the nitty-gritty of the smaller scale farming  world for one whole growing year. One revolution of this world around the sun. We've chanced  upon and dug up so many stories and met inspirational farmers and growers as the podcast has spiralled  from a discussion at a dinner party into an adventure which has led us to uncover new  ideas, perspectives and techniques along the way. Hello everybody and welcome to episode  
**[0:00:31-0:00:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:00:31):**  12 of Farm Llama. This month we have another bumper crop of interviews and features for  you from farms all over the world. You may remember last month I spoke to Pete and heard  about his new salad cutting tool. Well he's back bringing us garlic galore from the Wasatch  Mountains. We missed Hannah last month but she's back and bristling with enthusiasm as  she talks with one of her trainees down on the farm in Dagenham. And Phil reports from  
**[0:01:05-0:01:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:01:05):**  his recent trip to Valles Veg. And we venture even further afield than Utah as we learn  about sustainable farming practices native to Mexico and sample some of the more diverse  parts of their diet. I'm going to try a red larvae for the first time. Yeah it's really  good you're going to love it. I'm not sure if I want to. Go go go. We'll find out what  Naomi made of those worms later in the show. First let's head to the wild vast mountainscapes  
**[0:01:35-0:01:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:01:35):**  of Utah where Sandhill Farm sits proudly nestled below majestic peaks. The arid landscape hidden  for now as wildflowers glitter and glisten through the melting snow. The salt lakes all  reds greens and blues in the distance. The blue cornflowers billow gently as the sun  rises and harvesting begins. Radishes, garlic, kale, oregano. Oregano. I'm at my most content  when I'm early in the morning or in the evening when it's cool and I'm walking up and down  
**[0:02:26-0:02:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:02:26):**  the rows making notes about what needs to be done or what's ready to harvest or what's  ready to irrigate. And so I like that solitary almost monastic kind of like state of being  of farming and being on the land. My name is Pete Rasmussen and I've been farming at  Sandhill Farms in Eden, Utah for this is actually our tenth growing season this year so that's  something to celebrate that we've been doing it for that amount of time and we're going  
**[0:02:56-0:03:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:02:56):**  to continue doing it. And this is our tractor driver Joro coming into the scene here. Oh  did you go pee pee? Why are you all wet? He's getting water all over his face. Oh that.  You have to go. Do you want me to move that wind chime? I kind of like it. It's giving  the atmosphere. Garlic loves to grow here. Garlic's native to the Tian Shan mountains  of central Asia, the highlands of central Asia so Iran, Iraq, Afghanistan, Uzbekistan,  
**[0:03:41-0:03:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:03:41):**  like fertile crescent area there but high in the mountains and where conditions are  intense. They're real hot and dry in the summer and very cold and often snow covered in the  winter and so it's believed that garlic's real potent medicinal properties and also  its intricate flavors are a result of those kind of dramatic growing conditions. And so  northern Utah and the Wasatch Mountains is very similar and the garlic that we grow is  
**[0:04:17-0:04:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:04:17):**  I think very potent. It's very flavorful and I think a lot of that has to do with the similarities  and the climactic characteristics that exist here. We grow 52 different varieties of garlic.  We collect rare strains and we find the ones that we really like and that really perform  well and have characteristics that other garlics that we grow don't have and we grow those  out. So for example Corona Music is one of our top producing garlics that we grow right  
**[0:04:53-0:04:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:04:53):**  now. We started with one pound of that strain that I got from a garlic grower from Abundant  Life Seed Farm in Port Townsend, Washington and I remember the day he pulled three bulbs  out of the ground and gave them to me just like that and he's like these should do and  there were three heads that made a pound and this year we'll harvest almost 600 pounds  of that. You start with one head with six cloves on it, the next year you have six heads,  
**[0:05:18-0:05:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:05:18):**  you save half of those and you're very quickly expanding your seed stock of a given variety.  That garlic is definitely profitable in terms of its yield per acre and at the same time  it requires a lot of attention and a lot of very timely farmer management to get that  maximum profitability and yield out of a crop. So it's not something I have people call me  maybe a dozen times a year that say hey I just sold my house and my car and moved on  
**[0:05:58-0:06:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:05:58):**  to two acres of land out in Idaho and I've been looking on the internet about profitable  crops to grow and garlic comes up and I want to grow an acre next year. I always tell them  to start with a tenth of an acre and get their system figured out and everything from when  you harvest to when you water to how you cure to where you cure to the temperature it is  where you cure to having markets already established and set up because garlic seed is expensive  
**[0:06:26-0:06:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:06:26):**  and it does take time to gather for the specific seed to get adapted to the new soil and climate  where you're growing. Garlic is a sensitive crop. Maybe all crops are sensitive but garlic  is unique and it does bring joy to the farm that's for sure. My inspiration as wanting  to farm also was in the setting of an educational facility. It was a training center for young  farmers. It's an apprenticeship program at UC Santa Cruz and so that has been something  
**[0:07:06-0:07:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:07:06):**  that's kind of carried on to the growth or trajectory of Sandhill Farms is to not just  have it be a produce farm but have it develop into a training center to be able to have  young people from nearby or even from internationally to come and to be here and see how we do things  and really have it be a spot where new technologies like the quick cut greens harvester or anything  else a new way of composting a new mix of cover crop where that can kind of be tested  
**[0:07:39-0:07:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:07:39):**  and shared with other people. A farmer to farmer education place.  Abby speaking to Pete Rasmussen as part of her recent visit to the Summit community.  I wanted to further what Pete said there at the end because I was really excited about  this idea of the Summit community is you know a collection of change makers and entrepreneurs  and the fact that they're in such close vicinity with this farm. They're working together to  
**[0:08:16-0:08:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:08:16):**  set up a hub. People doing different farming techniques or using different technologies  can come together and kind of trial what they're doing and learn out in the field. And I think  having more of those is so important because there is a lot of advances going on in the  technology world but there's not really many chances to actually develop those on farm  which is so key to making something that actually works and also then farmers will get more  
**[0:08:44-0:08:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:08:44):**  of what they want.  So there's a mixture of non farms as well coming and seeing and learning and contributing  ideas.  Exactly. And what I also thought was really exciting is having an education and apprenticeship  side to the farm as Pete talked about. And that's something we'd love to hear more about  
**[0:09:01-0:09:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:09:01):**  from listeners is maybe if you wanted to share your experience of training or learning on  small farms or maybe there are hubs in the UK where some of this innovation is going  on. We'd love to hear about that.  Absolutely. And we'll be back at Sandhill Farm soon to hear more from Pete and his partner  Katie and learn a little more about what they're doing at the farm.  
**[0:09:35-0:09:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:09:35):**  Over to Hannah who's been speaking to Emma Gain one of the trainees for the Growing in  Dagenham project. This is another excellent traineeship program but of course this one  is a little closer to home.  Had you done any farming previously or what was your conception of working on a farm before?  I mean I wouldn't say farming but I've done a bit of gardening. Farming is a bit different  
**[0:09:59-0:10:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:09:59):**  but conceptionally you think of farming with one animals and obviously we haven't got any  there and two countryside and then sort of folk tractors and wheat and huge scale stuff  so coming onto a smaller scale farm and doing what we're doing it's majorly changed the  conception of everything we do.  I'm 26, I've got an 8 year old son and I come from Dagenham which is why the idea of  
**[0:10:23-0:10:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:10:23):**  growing communities in the area is such a brilliant idea to us. Before this I've done  office jobs, mundane work, Monday to Friday, same people, same everything so working outside  in the environment is just something new, fresh and it's a great idea to be doing.  Oh I love it, being outside and it comes rain or shine is amazing. You used to hate the  rain but now you sort of embrace the rain, you enjoy it and the sun is great. The only  
**[0:10:47-0:10:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:10:47):**  issue is when we're in greenhouses and stuff you sort of sweat out a bit but it's all part  and parcel.  So what do people think when you tell them that you're doing a traineeship at a farm?  They absolutely think I'm crazy, it's not what they expect from me. Yeah I do their  gardening and I'm outdoorsy but a farm isn't that man's work and it's really not and I  
**[0:11:08-0:11:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:11:08):**  think I've sort of shown them that in a sense, that a woman can do manual labour and grow  stuff and be a farmer and in a city you can't still farm.  I mean going from sitting at a table down a computer to then having to do labour in  a sense, it's a huge shift but I think the challenge is so rewarding at the end of it  seeing the end produce that the challenge seems so worthwhile at the end of it and I  
**[0:11:37-0:11:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:11:37):**  no longer live a boring life sitting in an office looking out, I'm outside looking in  and finding it a lot more enjoyable.  And I know you've been through some challenges with like, I don't know, council perspectives  on whether this traineeship is worthwhile to you or how have you found that because  I feel like you've had to be quite strong independently to fight to do this kind of  
**[0:12:02-0:12:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:12:02):**  work and do you think that people don't respect farming as much as other jobs or what do you  think about people's opinions?  Well I was told by a job centre person to go and get a proper job because one my hours  weren't up to scratch and two they didn't like the fact that I was doing a farm job  because where I'm down as a trainee they were like we don't pay you to train whereas I go  
**[0:12:23-0:12:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:12:23):**  on courses for them all the time and they can still give me my money so I've had to  sort of pull in the fact that I don't now go to the job centre for any help or support  which is sort of sad because that's why they're there, that's why the government have put  that there to help single parents, to help people that are in work trying to look for  more hours or trying to get any work and then once that then stops and the ball stops rolling  
**[0:12:44-0:12:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:12:44):**  with the government funding of job centres and with income support that some girls have  found hard you then go on to the housing benefits side and things get stopped spending.  I'm a private renter and then my rent stops and my landlord wants to then start kicking  off about the fact I've got no rent coming in and it's an ever ending circle we're trying  to improve our lives not only by working but by working for something that's needed to  
**[0:13:06-0:13:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:13:06):**  do it and to feel accomplished and have my son say to me well done or I'm proud of you  and money doesn't matter after that. It's always rewarding coming into work meeting  new people especially the volunteers, seeing the crops grow it's just it's an amazing  experience and it's something so different to what I'm used to that I'm sort of a bit  annoyed that I haven't found it sooner than this.  
**[0:13:29-0:13:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:13:29):**  Thanks Hannah and Emma. Okay on to some practical planting perspectives. In the UK we've been  using crop rotation for hundreds of years as a tool to suppress weeds and keep the soil  nutrient rich but as it was highlighted at the recent no-till conference this is just  one way of ensuring diverse cropping on your land. Today we're going to hear about two  other ways. First Naomi reports on intercropping in Mexico but before that we hear what she  
**[0:14:01-0:14:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:14:01):**  made of those worms. To be honest it does taste good. It tastes good. It tastes really  good. Wow. We have different products that come from the milpa and the milpa is a really  ancient time-proofed agroecological system that is based on what we call the Mesoamerican  Holy Trinity which is maize, squash and beans. The squash covers the soil, prevents many  weeds from growing and helps to keep the soil moist because of the shade. The corn is used  
**[0:14:37-0:14:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:14:37):**  to grow beans and it's also the main crop. The leaves of the corn can be used for making  tamales or can be fed to cattle. The beans and other legumes provide nitrogen to the  soil and along with them there's a large number of wild plants that we eat such as many amaranths  and some kinopodium and some solanaceae such as jaltomate and apipisco which are two native  wild tomatoes. We also have some insects such as the chapulines which are grasshoppers.  
**[0:15:19-0:15:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:15:19):**  They're a terrible pest for all of the milpa but we also eat them and they're really high  in protein. What could be a pest becomes a valuable resource. And we have agaves surrounding  the milpa or trees. That's in the central area. There's milpa all over the country but  it's different because some areas are nearly a desert, some areas are jungle. So even in  the capital of the country there's still these communities that are resisting urbanization  
**[0:15:51-0:15:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:15:51):**  and still living in the same way people have growing the same crops. It provides vitamins,  it provides starch and it provides proteins, provides a rich and balanced diet and it's  also ecologically very logical. It's different from the European organics because the European  organics is based on crop rotation while the Mesoamerican system is based on intercropping.  It's very important to do intercrop because over 50% of our caloric intake comes from  
**[0:16:29-0:16:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:16:29):**  corn so we need to be able to grow corn year after year. It's magic that this holistic  farming practice is so intertwined with the culture of the food and the communities and  the way that life is lived in that part of the world.  Beautiful. I actually recently spoke to a farmer in the UK who has just begun to trial  another approach to diverse cropping. It has some similarities but it's called companion  
**[0:16:58-0:16:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:16:58):**  cropping.  I'm Jake Freestone and I farm on the Gloucestershire Worcestershire border and when we started  talking about cover crops then the mind was whirring then about companion cropping and  how we can explore that. So through my Nuffield connections, I had a chat with a Nuffield  scholar who's about to publish in 2016 on companion cropping. Had a chat with him, knowledge  
**[0:17:22-0:17:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:17:22):**  exchange and he was suggesting a mixture of buckwheat and vetches which he's used before  in his oilseed rape. So we tried 70 hectares of that as a trial last year so that will  be harvested in 2016 with very, very good results. No insecticides were applied in the  autumn to that particular crop so whether it's acting as a decoy type crop or it's  sort of sheltering the rape from being visible or available. We saved a herbicide, we've  
**[0:17:50-0:17:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:17:50):**  put 30 kilos less fertiliser on so there's some real benefits that's coming through there  not even looking at the benefits of the soil structure, soil biology.  So it's quite important also the ratios with the companion crops, how much of each type  of companion crop you sow in, is that right? It is because you want to get enough kind  of ground cover but without smothering out and swamping out your actual cash crop. So  
**[0:18:14-0:18:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:18:14):**  talking to somebody who's had experience of it, although it's in a different part of the  country on different soil type, gives you an ideal place to start and that's the first  place to go from and then you can sort of adjust accordingly depending on your sort  of farm, your soil type, your situation and the rotation but every autumn and every winter  is going to be different so what works one year might not necessarily work fantastically  
**[0:18:36-0:18:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:18:36):**  well the next year. We planted two and a half kilos of oilseed rape seeds to get 50 plants  per square metre and we also planted 15 kilos of vetches and 7 kilos of buckwheat and to  be honest I'm probably not going to change too much for harvest 17 so that will be planted  in autumn 16. We had good ground cover, we had great soil minimum nitrogen results in  the February following the establishment of the companion cropping and it didn't compete  
**[0:19:06-0:19:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:19:06):**  with the oilseed rape at all so I think from a starter for 10 if you like I think we'll  just press repeat on that. But again having listened to Sarah speak today at the ground  swell event we should be maybe looking at some faba beans in there as well, lentils  I don't know whether we can grow those in the UK so there's some more trials and ideas  that we're going to have a play around with. That was Abi talking to Jake Freestone. What  
**[0:19:37-0:19:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:19:37):**  do we mean by peasant politics? La Via Campesina, the way of the peasant, is an international  organisation representing around 200 million farmers worldwide. Here in the UK the Landworkers  Alliance is a partner organisation with La Via Campesina so many of the smaller scale  farmers really identify with this group. One of our new reporters Phil went to visit Valisveg,  a small farm in Somerset to get the lowdown from Chris on neo-peasant politics. Essentially  
**[0:20:06-0:20:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:20:06):**  I think there's four components to trying to grapple with the idea of a neo-peasant  vision. The first is to do with productivity of land and the productivity of labour. The  way that agriculture is being discussed in the modern world is there's seven billion  people in the world and counting. How do we grow enough food for ourselves and grow it  sustainably and lots of different people have different arguments about that but an argument  
**[0:20:32-0:20:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:20:32):**  that I want to push is human labour itself is a fantastically productive input. When  you have somebody working a small plot, fertiliser and soil and all these other things are important,  human labour, human hands are very productive. You can produce a lot in a small area and  people say well nobody wants to farm anymore and it's not really true. Historically if  we think about peasantries the reason nobody wants to be a peasant is because you get screwed  
**[0:21:03-0:21:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:21:03):**  by the political system. So when every last drop that you produce gets creamed off by  the aristocracy then sure nobody wants to be a peasant. So we need to think about ways  of designing a society in which every last drop isn't creamed off. I suppose that connects  to the next aspect which is having been a small scale commercial grower it seems to  me you're in a much better position. It's great producing for the market, it's great  
**[0:21:34-0:21:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:21:34):**  selling stuff but if that's all that you're doing, if you're just producing cash crops  for market it makes you very vulnerable and if you have secure access to land and are  producing a good part of your own livelihood then you can go to the market in a much better  position, much much much secure position and that seems to me important. The third aspect  you know there's a lot of discussion about the feasibility of endless growth and consumerism  
**[0:22:03-0:22:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:22:03):**  and it seems to me a key thing that can be delivered by a peasant agriculture is the  fact that it has a notion of limits, it has a notion of enough. You know you're basically  producing for your livelihood, you can do other things, you can work off the holding.  We need to start thinking about a society that isn't entirely reliant on economic growth  and trying to produce more and more and it seems to me that one of the best ways of doing  
**[0:22:32-0:22:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:22:32):**  that is by opening up and democratising access to land and sort of getting people to be thinking  in a different way, not what can you buy for the cheapest price in the shops, that's kind  of magic there through this huge global process that kind of distorts and extracts value from  distant parts of the world. You've got your piece of land, what can you produce for yourself  from it? And yeah the fourth aspect really is just thinking about that politically, how  
**[0:23:05-0:23:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:23:05):**  many farmers do we need in a society, what does that mean in terms of equality and justice  globally because our relative wealth and happiness is predicated on the misery of a lot of other  people and looking to some of the historical traditions of peasant farming societies, agrarian  populism, it's a very kind of buried political tradition that nobody really sort of knows  about, but big populist movements in Eastern Europe, Russia, North America, Australia and  
**[0:23:39-0:23:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:23:39):**  in Britain as well historically. So not that we can just sort of grab that sort of politics  from the late 19th century or the 18th century and just apply it to today, but thinking about  how small producers, peasants, small farmers have thought about their place in the world  and tried to create a politics around it, there's a lot that we can learn even if we  have to do it differently and in a new way now.  
**[0:24:12-0:24:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:24:12):**  Phil Moore talking to Chris Smage from Valisveg which is the farm he runs with his wife Cordelia.  If you want to explore some more of these ideas, a good place to do this is Chris's  blog which is Small Farm Future, which as well as having some great general tips for  the small scale farmer, it tends to link these in with political issues.  Thanks for joining us this time and for being part of this incredible journey over the last  
**[0:24:34-0:24:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:24:34):**  12 months. The Farmarama team has grown from just the three of us to an ever-widening family  all over the place and we're so grateful for all the support. Almost every show now  features a new contributor who's either emailed in or we've met on our travels across the  UK and to Italy and all over the place. And here with us today is the newest member of  the team. Madeleine, hello and welcome to Farmarama. Thank you, very happy to be here.  
**[0:25:01-0:25:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:25:01):**  And maybe you could tell everybody a little bit about yourself and about what you're going  to be helping us out with.  I got interested in farming while I was working with the Wellcome Trust on an engagement campaign.  They were running around the connections between environment, food and health. So it's really  exciting to be part of this project now, helping to spread the word on social media and contributing  
**[0:25:27-0:25:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:25:27):**  wherever else I can. And on that note, listeners, you should help us spread the word. We're  on Twitter and we're Farmarama underscore underscore and also on Facebook, we're Farmarama  Radio.  Fantastic, we're really delighted to have you with us.  But of course, it's you guys who really make the show. And I hope you'll continue to help  
**[0:25:51-0:25:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/12-farmerama#t=0:25:51):**  us as we move into the next cycle. What do you want to hear about? If you've got suggestions  for a theme or topic to cover or a story to share, get in touch and we'll work with you  to get it on the air. Let's knit an ever wider web of people who understand the importance  and resilience of smaller scale farming.  