### Farmerama  (2017-45-10)
**[0:00:00-0:00:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to Farmerama. After last month's words from farmers around the world,  we are now back on British soil. We have stories from Perthshire to Devon and we stop off in  a few places in between. A few of us headed to the first Scottish farm hack to share and  learn from many other farmers, smallholders and food makers. We'll be sharing the highlights  later in the show. We also catch up with Patrick Holden from the Sustainable Food Trust about  
**[0:00:38-0:00:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:00:38):**  fair trade, transparent pricing and how he makes the most of the byproducts from his  dairy farm. We have a great little trick for soil testing on the cheap, a great British  test, the TBI, any guesses what it stands for? And then we are in Shropshire to find  out about some of the ups and downs of woofing.  You may remember Patrick Holden as a guest on this show. He's the man behind the Sustainable  
**[0:01:11-0:01:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:01:11):**  Food Trust. He's also a farmer and has been making cheese for 43 years on one of the first  certified organic dairy farms in Wales. He recently chatted to us about the importance  of farmers receiving a fair price that reflects the cost of production. But first he shares  a story of how a conversation with a neighbour led to a new outlet for one of his waste products.  Well I had a conversation at the Slow Food Terra Madre youth event in Milan with a man  
**[0:01:39-0:01:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:01:39):**  who actually lives down the road from me but who I'd never met last year. He's called  Ilted or Ilted as people who are not Welsh speakers tend to call him. And his wife Liesel,  they set up a charcuterie business near Carmarthen and he happened to know that I was a dairy  farmer and obviously because of that we were producing a lot of calves. And he said what  do you do with your male calves? And I had to be honest and I told him, I said well sometimes  
**[0:02:15-0:02:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:02:15):**  we literally slaughter them at birth because there's no market for them otherwise we just  sold them off to whoever would take them at a reasonable price. And he said to me well  I'd like to buy your calves. And I said to him how much will you pay? Because I knew  straight away that if he was paying a price below the cost of keeping them then there  would be no advantage to us and we were already losing money on our farm. So he said, and  
**[0:02:44-0:02:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:02:44):**  this is what really shocked me, he said I will pay you the cost of production plus a  margin. And I said okay then. And that was 15 months or so ago. Now as we speak we are  selling one veal calf, whey fed and of course silage fed, rose veal really, per month to  Ilthid and he is processing them into a whole range of meats including steaks which are  absolutely delicious but also wonderful charcuterie products including a veal pork sausage type  
**[0:03:21-0:03:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:03:21):**  product which is really delicious. The story of a dairy farm is the story of male calves.  Unless you are using sexed semen, 50% of your dairy calves will be male. And really part  of the story of the farm ought to be to find a market for those calves where the meat will  be appreciated. And for me that's the very special thing. And this meat is already finding  its way into some fancy places like Fortnum and Mason's. That sounds very high end but  
**[0:03:52-0:03:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:03:52):**  actually I think in the long run the meat ought to be sold in Wales by appreciative  citizens who want to be connected with a good story of sustainable dairy farming. And I  believe that this idea of transparent food pricing is a big idea and transferable. I  can't see why that could not be the basis of all future food pricing. So if when you  buy a product, whatever it is, you knew how much of the percentage of the price that you  
**[0:04:24-0:04:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:04:24):**  were paying for the product went to the farmer, that's the essence of transparency. And it  would really transform the marketplace and re-empower both farmers and citizens to establish  a better and more equitable relationship with their food. I had a conversation, some might  call it an argument, with the fair trade movement back in the 90s when I was at the Soil Association  and some of our licensees including Greenland Blacks Chocolate and other licensees came  
**[0:04:55-0:05:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:04:55):**  to us and said we're being certified by you the Soil Association and also the Fair Trade  Foundation. And it strikes us that there's no sense in that. Surely fair trade, in other  words the farmer getting a fair price ought to be part of the organic story. So why don't  you launch a fair trade and organic label combined in one with one inspection? So we  went to the Fair Trade Foundation and we said what about this is a good idea and they said  
**[0:05:20-0:05:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:05:20):**  to us no, fair trade is about tea, coffee and bananas from peasant farmers in developing  countries. It's not about feather bedded European country farmers because they are cap subsidised  and actually very well off, thank you very much. So I said I don't think, first of all  I don't think that's right and secondly surely to coin a phrase, fair trade should start  at home. But the Fair Trade Foundation at that time were adamant that this wasn't something  
**[0:05:51-0:05:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:05:51):**  they wanted to pursue. So we were left at the Soil Association in a dilemma and really  there was a split of opinion. I thought we should have taken the Fair Trade Foundation  on and said no you're wrong. But other people whose counsel prevailed in the end said no  it would be political and it would be a bit messy and best not to do that. So there we  are 20 years later maybe fair trade, the principle of fair trade is coming round again and it's  
**[0:06:19-0:06:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:06:19):**  people, young entrepreneurs like Efted who are developing that.  Thanks Patrick. He covered two things that are constant questions on Farmerama. What  does a future where farmers get paid a fair price for their produce look like? What waste  products from your farm are useful products for someone else?  I think in particular that first question is something that, well we talked a little  
**[0:06:47-0:06:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:06:47):**  bit further with Patrick about it and it really is an unknown, it's like what does a world  where farmers actually get paid, you know the cost of production and then some for what  they're making, how does that happen?  It's like such a huge unravelling that needs to happen first, it's kind of very hard to  sort of see where you start that process and how you can make little steps towards it because  
**[0:07:17-0:07:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:07:17):**  there needs to be such a huge sea change for us to get to a better place.  I think that is the key isn't it, we need to start thinking about what are those little  steps and then the other thing we talked about was that being true at the other end of the  system so consumers really understanding what the farmer was taking away from what they  were paying for food and how much of an impact that would have on the whole system as well.  
**[0:07:49-0:07:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:07:49):**  We featured a few things about soil science over the last few months and we understand  the importance of knowing what is going on in the hidden depths beneath our feet.  Today we're going to share an idea which is most definitely low tech and also making use  of a waste product, this time a tea bag.  Here's Abby with Tom who she met whilst part of the field of wheat project.  
**[0:08:13-0:08:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:08:13):**  I'm Tom Powell, I work mostly on the global environmental implications of food systems  and land use. As part of field of wheat I ended up doing some much more local and specific  research on the variability of soil across an individual field and its implications for  the growth of crop plants.  Being part of an artistic project we had absolutely no budget so I've had to find very cheap methods  
**[0:08:38-0:08:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:08:38):**  of doing soil science which has been a really interesting process in itself.  One technique I particularly like that I found in the methods section of a paper in Nature  where it was referred to mysteriously as the TBI and I had to dig into the references to  find out what that actually meant.  The TBI is a method for measuring rates of soil decomposition of organic matter in the  
**[0:09:05-0:09:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:09:05):**  soil. It stands for the tea bag index.  It's developed by a Dutch research group who use Lipton's tea bags and they bury one Roybosh  tea bag and one green tea bag next to one another, leave them for 90 days and when you  dig them up the differential rate with which they've decomposed tells you about not only  how quickly organic matter decomposes in the soil but also how much of that, the carbon  
**[0:09:33-0:09:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:09:33):**  within that organic matter ends up being respired back to the atmosphere and how much ends up  being stored in organic matter in the soil.  So it's actually an incredibly neat tool for doing quite complex science but a very very  cheap and very available and they're trying to use it as a citizen science project to  calibrate global earth system models and climate models to get worldwide soil respiration data  
**[0:09:57-0:10:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:09:57):**  so they have a very good website which you can find by googling tea bag index where they  have all of the methodology and the equation that you have to put your tea bag weights  into to get results and you can share your results with them.  Amazing and if you want to learn more about Field of Weeds we first featured them in episode  six there will be definitely more from that project again soon.  
**[0:10:40-0:10:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:10:40):**  So Nigel tell us what woofing is.  The acronym stands for willing workers on organic farms and actually no no hang on hang  on it's world wide opportunities on organic farms but it used to be I think it started  out as weekend workers and then it was willing workers but they basically took the work out  of it because it's like it's a voluntary thing.  
**[0:11:08-0:11:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:11:08):**  So essentially they've it's evolved over 45 years so they actually had their 45th birthday  recently I think it was held in Cumbria which is pretty impressive for an organisation and  it really you know it started from very humble beginnings in a small farm a table hearse  farm in Forest Row so actually not very far from our farm in East Sussex and from very  small seed it's grown into this huge like global organisation it's used by thousands  
**[0:11:39-0:11:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:11:39):**  hundreds of thousands of people and it's a great way of farmers hosting people interested  in learning about food and doing some work on a farm.  So Carolyn from the Food Assembly spoke to Barbara from Babins Wood Farm in Trupshire  for us to hear all about their woofing experiences.  Yeah I think the woofing idea is a really good idea we've been a woof host for four  
**[0:12:05-0:12:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:12:05):**  years now we get people from all over the world they all seem to enjoy coming to our  place some have some experience of growing or working with animals and others have absolutely  no experience a lot of people come because they want to learn the language which is fine  but what our aim with having woofers is to educate in environmental issues we try to  show them films as well in the evenings to encourage them to look at things to teach  
**[0:12:39-0:12:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:12:39):**  them about the importance of organic farming not using pesticides and chemicals and also  not to waste as well and we find actually most people have a really good time they work  very hard overall it's been a really good experience the slight downside of it is if  you only get people for a very short time by the time they've got into the routine then  it's you know they're off again but if they can come for at least a month then that's  
**[0:13:06-0:13:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:13:06):**  not an issue they soon get into things the other issue is it does mean that you have  people in your house all the time which works well for me but other members of the family  aren't always that happy about it so that's something we we need to work around the other  thing I was going to say was one of the things when I was first introduced to the idea some  maybe six seven years ago I said I haven't got time to look after people but as it turns  
**[0:13:33-0:13:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:13:33):**  out we have fairly big groups of woofers and basically they run a rota and they cook for  themselves or and cook for me as well so that's all part of the experience and I think that  encourages and we have a we make a rota up and that actually encourages them to work  with each other and not necessarily with a person they've come with so they all meet  people from other countries and other cultures as well but all the time we're reinforcing  
**[0:13:58-0:14:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:13:58):**  the the organic the environmental the sustainability of it and as far I would much prefer to use  human power than oil so for me it's a brilliant scheme personally I think the garden does  rely on the voluntary help because there's not a lot of money in growing vegetables but  if somebody can have an experience and in return give their labour then it's a win-win  situation I don't feel that we exploit them because they seem to enjoy what they do that  
**[0:14:34-0:14:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:14:34):**  is an accusation that sometimes levels but it's not been the feedback we get really good  feedback from them they will fill in a book when they leave and write nice messages to  us and and quite a few have come back as well I've come back for a second or even third  time if you want to find out more about woofing there's lots of info online it really is a  great way to explore the countryside and fields we're often so far removed from as well as  
**[0:14:58-0:15:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:14:58):**  learning about farming and growing in different lands I've always wanted to do some woofing  abroad and I have kind of worked on different organic farms at different times and you it's  a whole new experience and a way of meeting people from that culture to me it's almost  identical to internships so I would say that almost every company in the world you know  they seem to have internships and there you're only in the UK legally having to get paid  
**[0:15:23-0:15:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:15:23):**  150 pounds a week whereas with a woofing you're getting room and board and food yeah so I  mean it is a it's a pretty good deal I think it's a great deal and I don't think people  should feel bad about it although I do agree that we should have agriculture where we can  pay for the labor just through the produce itself that would be the ideal it's kind of  coming back to our point earlier where we were talking about you know farmers receiving  
**[0:15:49-0:15:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:15:49):**  a fair price for their produce and you know again it's like woofing with I don't know  if it highlights this but there is a problem especially with vegetable production and horticulture  it's this culture of you know trying to I know almost produce it at below the cost of  production and it's just not it's not sustainable.  Now we've got a special report from Farm Hack recorded by regular contributors Abby and  
**[0:16:20-0:16:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:16:20):**  Keisha. It's really great to see Keisha and Abby working together on this. Neither of  them had met before the event and a year ago had not recorded any audio in their lives  so it's lovely to see what Farmorama has become especially since the first UK Farm Hack was  where we had the idea for making a podcast in the first place.  Heya it's Abby Aspin here from Future Farm Lab reporting from the Scottish Highlands  
**[0:16:43-0:16:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:16:43):**  of Farm Hack Scotland. This weekend sees a series of workshops discussions and debates  about the hurdles within our system from how to acquire land to fixing tools.  The word hack you might think in common parlance nowadays has got negative connotations to  it but in actual fact the introduction to us at Farm Hack talked about where the word  comes from and hack originally referred to hackney ponies which were ponies that rather  
**[0:17:14-0:17:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:17:14):**  than having specific specialist uses so for racing or ploughing etc they were used for  a variety of things and that's kind of what us as farmers or small holders do we do bits  and pieces of everything.  My name is Laura.  My name is Andrew.  
**[0:17:35-0:17:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:17:35):**  We're here because we've been interested in creating a small holding or finding a  croft for a number of years now and we just had an offer accepted on a designation of  a croft on the Isle of Lewis and so we wanted to meet other people who are involved in doing  similar things, hear some other people's ideas and experiences and learn some of the  techniques that we'd like to use and in particular some old techniques the skills that have been  
**[0:18:06-0:18:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:18:06):**  lost through a mechanisation of farming.  So we learnt how to use a scythe today which is very interesting and useful in fact we're  going to buy a scythe before we go today.  What kind of scythe are you going to buy?  We're going to buy a Norwegian scythe from this man here Charlie and a hand scythe for  
**[0:18:30-0:18:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:18:30):**  the steep hill and cutting the heather.  And we now have a new rake as well.  Yeah you made a rake.  Yes we do.  We built a rake with woodworking techniques, all hand tools, splitting fibres.  
**[0:18:49-0:18:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:18:49):**  Neil Donaldson, I live in Kintyre which is on the west coast of Scotland and we have  a two acre wild garden over there about half a mile from the beach.  I was saying earlier on that I think one of the things I really enjoyed was the blacksmithing.  I like the idea which is a kind of thing that's being lost in rural areas now is this kind  of make do and mend aspect.  
**[0:19:25-0:19:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:19:25):**  This way the past generations of farmers and rural people used to work but those people  have kind of died out so it doesn't happen so much.  So it's quite nice to see somebody making things from scrap and repairing things which  I think in today's life whether you're in a, even if you're in a city, you know, we  can't afford to keep on using resources the way we are.  
**[0:19:54-0:20:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:19:54):**  My name is Ruth Hancock and I run a small organic vegetable farm in Devon where I operate  vegetable box scheme to market vegetables alongside free range chickens that we tractor  in amongst the vegetables.  I'm involved in and we're looking at initially is agroecology, agroecological farming a good  thing and the conclusion has generally been yes.  
**[0:20:25-0:20:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:20:25):**  Now we're looking at very practical real world solutions or little tweaks that maybe we can  make in the system to make it possible for more of that to happen.  Cool.  And what have you thought of the workshops?  Did you know if you learned something new with those?  
**[0:20:42-0:20:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:20:42):**  I've learned lots of new things.  I was very excited and inspired by the Mac Lab people with their bespoke recreation of  maybe old parts for machinery but new applications and one offs rather than having to buy something  where you have a 200,000 round of production and just have something that fits your system.  I'm Richard Clifford and we've got Alan Rockhead and we're both from Mac Lab which is a network  
**[0:21:14-0:21:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:21:14):**  of makers spaces across Scotland focused on the empowerment of people through making.  I know nothing about the processes, about the science behind it but hugely fascinated  how we can use sort of citizen led making and prototyping to change those systems.  So I thought when I came in that you guys were predominantly 3D printing but you're  so much more than that so what was the range of things that you look at?  
**[0:21:42-0:21:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:21:42):**  We don't like to limit ourselves.  We pretty much say we can work with any material, any process or we'll at least give it a tent  at it.  So things like the smaller scale like 3D printing through to textiles up to large scale industrial  processes like CNC routing, plasma cutting, even welding and traditional, some traditional  
**[0:22:04-0:22:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:22:04):**  things like that.  A lot of the time our focus is on the individual and what they want to achieve in a purely  practical sense where they are just to facilitate them making something.  So that can be a product designer who wants to create a new product to take to market  but our social purpose is more to look at how we use making as a means of empowering  
**[0:22:28-0:22:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:22:28):**  people that can revolutionise and change their own situation, their own life, their own sort  of skill set.  So that can be working with people who perhaps have a disability and want to create a device  that will change their life or it can be working with somebody in industry and to come up with  a new product, a new process that allows them to transform the way that things have been  
**[0:22:51-0:22:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:22:51):**  done or tackle the way things could maybe be done in the future.  Has anyone come up to you with any problems today?  Yeah, we've had some, we've had some architecture, we've had some domestic, we've had some livestock  related, all sorts of different things.  Some of the interesting ones we're just about to go into a sort of plenary session to get  
**[0:23:14-0:23:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:23:14):**  everyone together, pin those ideas onto a washing line and then everyone sort of co-ops  the problems and shares the problems.  So we've had people looking at how they might repair devices or equipment, how they might  change the design of something because it doesn't quite work properly.  One in particular being a gentleman who has a very efficient rake that no modern rake  
**[0:23:42-0:23:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:23:42):**  will do the same task, it won't grade the soil in the same way.  So we're going to 3D scan that to allow us to then work with a digital model and try  and understand the difference between what might the characteristics of his 70s rake  be versus the modern Chinese model that's not doing the same job.  So what did I take away from Farmhack?  
**[0:24:17-0:24:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:24:17):**  Well we all crave community, whether we'd be living in central London or out in the  Scottish Highlands and that's what Farmhack's all about.  Brainstorming, connecting with the land, presenting problems and investigating solutions, sharing  ideas, learning, inspiration and well fun.  Not only was it about work but we sang, danced, cooked, laughed, swam, yep in the icy lot  
**[0:24:39-0:24:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:24:39):**  and had a bloody good time.  I think that we often make the mistake of talking about our food and farming system  with these big umbrella terms like the meat industry or crop production and actually forget  the people and small communities often involved in actually making our food.  It was amazing seeing people sharing old school practices, combining them with new ones and  
**[0:25:00-0:25:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:25:00):**  evolving.  I think we're very quick to condemn older practices as inefficient or pre-modern when  sometimes they're actually more modern than our current conventional practices.  Some may see this as an idealistic view but the more I delve into the spectrum of small  scale to industrial agriculture, I can't believe that economically, socially, environmentally  
**[0:25:20-0:25:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:25:20):**  and politically that industrial farming is the way forward.  As all these aspects plus more need to be considered in food and farming.  But mostly what I took away from Farmhack is that farming can be rather solitary and  to entice more people in and support the people already working in the sector, more of these  events will be appreciated to promote the feeling you're just not alone.  
**[0:25:43-0:25:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:25:43):**  Thank you to Abby and Keisha for that report.  We'll no doubt be hearing from both of them in the future and many more of the projects  which have come out of Farmhack.  We tend not to have themed episodes because we like that each week it's a bit of a mixed  bag but sometimes things just seem to come together.  
**[0:26:01-0:26:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:26:01):**  This week there's been a bit of an unconscious focus on things making use of waste products  or mending things or finding new uses for things such as Patrick's cuffs.  Or the soil sands squeezed out from your morning cup of tea.  Or also tinkering away in a field in Scotland.  In these stretch times this is something which is always going to be relevant for farmers  
**[0:26:22-0:26:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:26:22):**  and it's a recurring theme in Farmerama generally.  Do you have any ideas for how to make the best of this?  We'd love to hear from you either at farmeramaradio.com or by joining the community on Facebook or  you can find us on at farmerama underscore underscore on Twitter.  If you like this you might want to check out the Restart podcast which are really excellent  
**[0:26:48-0:26:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:26:48):**  exploration of this though not limited to agriculture.  And a second podcast recommendation for you is the Female Farmer Project who released  their first episode last week.  We've been fans of their photo project for some time.  Thanks very much for joining us this time.  
**[0:27:04-0:27:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:27:04):**  We'll be back again next month.  We can't wait.  See you then.  See you then.  Bye.  
**[0:27:10-0:27:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-15#t=0:27:10):**  See you then.  