### Farmerama  (2017-53-10)
**[0:00:00-0:00:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:00:00):**  Welcome to Farmerama. We have a bit of a food sovereignty focus this week. We hear two reports  from different ends of the country, both building people's food policies. And we learn about  how planting trees within the farm can have huge benefits for us all, helping us to think  about our ecosystem in new ways.  And Abby will be sharing a tool she initially built for her family's farm to help them generate  
**[0:00:30-0:00:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:00:30):**  a more resilient business. It's something farmers can use to generate insight and help  inform the ways we are farming.  A sustainable future of farming is all about demonstrating positive economic models that  build long-term businesses with resilient revenue streams. We've learnt one of the best  ways to do this is with clever multi-purpose use of land that mimics nature. Agroforestry  
**[0:01:04-0:01:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:01:04):**  is a great example of this. Here is UK agroforestry pioneer Stephen Briggs to tell us about his  own combined apple-alveol project and why it makes so much sense.  Agriculture is not forestry or agriculture. It's taking the best components of each and  then combining those so that the complementary aspects actually increase productivity and  increase ecological processes. Nature doesn't do monoculture. If we look around us there  
**[0:01:39-0:01:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:01:39):**  are trees and there are good reasons for trees because nature stacks the way it produces  things to make best use of sunlight and water and nutrients. So let's take keys from that  and try and implement that at a farm scale. I spent some time working in Africa and seeing  how people are farming them all in a three-dimensional way for small-scale production. And then as  part of a Nuffield Farming Scholarship I travelled the planet looking at agroforestry in about  
**[0:02:07-0:02:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:02:07):**  20 different countries. I realised that we were missing a trick and there's been a massive  division between agriculture and forestry in this country. We farm 250 acres of tenanted  land and have 125 acres of agroforestry where we've created lines of apple trees on 24-metre  rows growing cereals and field-scale vegetables between the rows of apple trees. The reason  for doing that was that we suffer quite badly with our light source from wind erosion and  
**[0:02:45-0:02:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:02:45):**  we wanted to create windbreaks, but windbreaks which were productive, that earned us an income.  So that was partly the reason for using the fruit. The second thing is as farmers we harvest  sunlight and turn it into carbon but we don't do that all of the year. And using trees or  integrating trees into the system means that when many of the field crops have ceased existing  or have matured and aren't actually growing, the trees continue to put on leaf and capture  
**[0:03:17-0:03:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:03:17):**  sunlight and turn it into carbon and into crop. So we have a longer growing season.  So what we've tried to do is create a three-dimensional farming system by integrating apple trees  with field-scale crops orientated north-south so we get an east-west sun rise and fall so  we minimise shading and to make best use of sunlight and best use of water and nutrients  all year round. The challenge for most farmers is, or most growers, is they know little about  
**[0:03:49-0:04:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:03:49):**  trees. So go and talk to arbor culturalists, try and get over your arborphobia and learn  about trees and which are the best ones to integrate into as a grower or as a farmer.  Foresters or anyone involved with trees, or organisations like the Woodland Trust are  great places to start. They know a great deal about trees and can help you select things  to put within an agricultural context. The European Federation of Agroforestry was started  
**[0:04:26-0:04:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:04:26):**  in 2012. From small beginnings there are now 27 European countries involved with about  450 members. I would say try and key in to things like agroecology where there are case  studies on agroforestry, the Organic Research Centre has done work on agroforestry so there  is information there and talk to other agroforesters. Often if you put a forester and a farmer  in a field they will never make eye contact because the forester is looking up and the  
**[0:04:58-0:05:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:04:58):**  farmer is looking down at his feet and it's only the agroforesters that are looking forward  and maybe mixing those perennials and annuals together is helping combat climate change  and we need to look forward with different farming models maybe we've had in the past.  So you heard it here first, get over your arborphobia and get involved. There's been  talk of an agroforestry conference in the UK June next year, details to come. We went  
**[0:05:25-0:05:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:05:25):**  on a walk with old friend of the show and sometime reporter Ben Raskin of the Soil Association.  He's been working with organic farmer Helen Browning to start an agroforestry scheme on  her farm. They are in the beginning stages of planting trees so we wanted to hear what  they are thinking now. Here's a little of what was a very windy conversation so apologies  for the sound quality in places.  
**[0:05:49-0:05:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:05:49):**  Amelia initially had just put in a double row of alders, one coppiced and one to let  grow. Hamish thought we should have something a bit more diverse. We're possibly going to  review the initial plan on that one.  In terms of keeping the grass down I guess you're not going to put cattle in it, you'll  put sheep or something.  
**[0:06:06-0:06:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:06:06):**  Yeah that's the other big discussion is how you do it in such a way that the farm staff  don't hate you. So in the small field we're probably just going to mow it initially and  then at some point have chickens. If we have chickens it will have to be a proper enterprise  that's run commercially and stacks up on its own. Probably there won't be enough chickens  to keep the grass down so we'll probably still need to mow so I think we're thinking initially  
**[0:06:32-0:06:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:06:32):**  we'll just mow and mulch until the trees are big enough to carry. It's got to be workable  for them because otherwise they'll either just not want to come down here or they'll  cut corners and we'll lose trees.  Over the last two years I've been developing an app called Sector Mentor that we use to  collect information about our olive trees and vines on my family's farm in Chile. Seeing  
**[0:07:07-0:07:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:07:07):**  it work on our farm our neighbours became interested and now they're using the app too.  And at the start of this year Davenport Vineyards in the UK contacted us about using it to record  information on their 24 acres of vines. A big part of our focus is that anyone on the  farm can be able to use it with just a few minutes of training. Will Davenport and Assistant  Vineyard Manager Ben spoke to me about how they've been getting on using Sector Mentor  
**[0:07:32-0:07:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:07:32):**  in the vineyard.  We're recording information that we were recording before but the data comes through  in a way that it's usable. It's also I think quicker to do and could be developed into  much, much more complex things if we wanted to record something more detailed it's got  to do that. And also we are using it to record general day to day vineyard operations like  
**[0:07:58-0:08:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:07:58):**  mowing or spraying or something like that. So at the end of the year we've got a record  of everything that's been done on a plot by plot basis. So we can say this plot of vines  has been mowed three times, sprayed five times, was pruned on this date and dates of things  like flowering and stuff like that. You could record anything on that really. It's just  a way of keeping records in a format where you can access the data easily and turn it  
**[0:08:27-0:08:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:08:27):**  into whatever way you want it.  We counted flowers and things so we know how many flowers there are on each plant on each  vine. And then obviously it's always going to be an estimate that early in the season  but in June when we're still five months away from harvest we get an early prediction of  what sort of yield the vines have got based on how many bunches.  
**[0:08:51-0:08:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:08:51):**  Yeah, I feel that with the previous system where we had notepads and we had to go back  and enter it into a computer we meant that because we obviously don't work with computers  in our job we would have to do it in our spare time and then it would mean that you'd put  it off and off and it would be really slow to get the data into the computer and therefore  you can't compare it to say previous years estimate of bunch sizes so you can't get an  
**[0:09:19-0:09:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:09:19):**  estimate of crop. Whereas now as soon as we scan this and sync it with the computer it  goes straight to the system where we've already got the recorded data of the average bunch  weights we have from previous years and then we can get an early course estimate.  And things like flowering dates as well. You can say oh we're flowering a week earlier  than we did last year or lots of things. The other useful thing about it is that because  
**[0:09:39-0:09:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:09:39):**  it's based on an iPhone anyone who's got an iPhone can enter data into it so it's not  reliant on one person doing all the recording. I think before when Philip was here last year  he sort of feels his job was doing all this stuff and certainly when it comes to recording  jobs that have been done in the vineyard one guy might have done the job but not put it  into the system because Philip's got the notepad.  
**[0:10:05-0:10:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:10:05):**  Currently because we haven't got years of data to compare it against but in the future  we'll be able to find out are we mowing more, what date was this happening last year so  we'll be able to get an estimate of what we're doing wrong, what we're doing right and how  we can change that as well as being able to see how far ahead or behind we are so maybe  get a really early sort of harvest estimate to see if we're ahead or behind time.  
**[0:10:32-0:10:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:10:32):**  If you asked last year if you'd asked me how many bunches of grapes we had on each vine  I would have had to find the right notepad, work out what on earth Philip had written  in it and then probably add up a list of a whole load of numbers to calculate the average  per vine and all that sort of stuff whereas this is all done just from putting a number  into a phone.  
**[0:10:53-0:10:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:10:53):**  I'm pretty confident with a computer but I'm not someone who takes on new technology very  quickly.  Yeah and I feel Sextament is a really easy system to use, it's labelled really clearly  and there's not so much options that it means that you know what you're looking for and  as soon as you've found it you're there and you've got your data in and whatever you wanted  
**[0:11:14-0:11:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:11:14):**  to record and there's no complication with it which is what makes it really easy to use.  Yeah you could make it really really complicated and I think it's quite good that it isn't  really really complicated.  You don't want lots and lots of rubbish in there you just want the raw data really and  it's very adaptable you know because you can put in your own headings you can actually  
**[0:11:32-0:11:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:11:32):**  record anything you want.  I want to be part of a future where small to medium scale farms are thriving.  I think that will require many resilient small businesses and that's where I think recording  and collecting small amounts of data can have a really positive impact.  Our apps are now available to all farmers.  
**[0:11:50-0:11:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:11:50):**  We will put links on the Farmerama Facebook and Twitter or you can head to our website  tech.videcycle.com.  Please do get in touch if you're interested.  And also just to say that Will Davenport's wine is amazing so check it out it's a great  natural wine something that we'll talk about a little more on a future programme but if  
**[0:12:12-0:12:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:12:12):**  you're looking for some Christmas wines yeah definitely check out their horsemen in white  and pinot noir.  Sounds good.  So Nigel what do you think about obviously I'm saying I think it's really important  to have small data for farming what do you think?  
**[0:12:28-0:12:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:12:28):**  I think yeah I mean data there's so much information available within any sort of farming system  and if you can capture just some of that and make use of it in order to improve your business  make it more resilient then I think it's a great idea.  I think probably if used properly it can really help transform your business.  What would be your concerns about it though from a farming perspective?  
**[0:12:56-0:13:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:12:56):**  I suppose like how easy it is to use so how like how can you integrate it into your day  to day practices on the farm so making it really simple you know using an app on your  smartphone using yeah like sensors that are kind of picking reading information without  almost you know knowing that's going on I think that's essential so it's just it's  sort of automated as much as possible yeah and it's collecting it with a real focus to  
**[0:13:30-0:13:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:13:30):**  find out information which is going to be useful for your business.  That's funny because in a way I have thought from a different perspective because my idea  one of the things I thought was that automated data collection is very disempowering because  this data is just being built up built up it's up and you really don't know what's being  collected and what to do with it so kind of one of my ideas about small data is also that  
**[0:13:54-0:13:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:13:54):**  if you're actually out there having to collect it yourself you only collect data that you  really need and that's something actually you talked about with Will a lot because I  think you know they were collecting a few things this year that they thought actually  you know it's not worth collecting that because we're not actually gaining much from that  and because they had to do it manually they very quickly decided we're not going to do  
**[0:14:14-0:14:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:14:14):**  that anymore.  Okay yeah.  So I think there's a balance to be struck because also you know I heard a stat the other  day that only 0.5% of the data collected is actually used and analyzed in the world.  So is that why you talk about dates small data it's different to big data.  
**[0:14:32-0:14:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:14:32):**  Yeah this is something actually Joe was at the GoDown summit earlier this year and I  think and he works a lot with data that's actually usable and interesting for people  and that's really where the value is to be had everyone chats about big data but like  what does it really mean yeah what is it and really at the moment the only people who could  possibly benefit from it are like huge corporations or you know it's massive scale insights it's  
**[0:15:01-0:15:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:15:01):**  not something that's going to help you on your little in your business on a small scale  providing insight and small scale trends in a way.  Yeah and looking for patterns that are actually true to your little piece of land in the world.  Yeah great exciting very exciting times.  Recent votes in Europe and the US show that many people are angry. Our countries are divided.  
**[0:15:47-0:15:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:15:47):**  I always think back to Rebecca Lawton of the Land Workers Alliance closing last year's Oxford  Real Farming Conference. She called on us all to build bridges. That's exactly what we need now.  We need to go out and speak to our fellow humans. Let's start with everyone in our own community  not just neighbours but those on the other side of the town as well. People who are not just like you.  Maybe that way we can discover how to create a world that works for all of us. In our painfully  
**[0:16:20-0:16:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:16:20):**  divided world we wonder if food and farming could be a web that will connect us all. We're about to  hear from two different groups of people who are actively weaving that web in Scotland and then in England.  The food sovereignty movement has a global following backed by the 200 million smaller scale  farmers of La Via Campesina and more. But what is food sovereignty? The world development movement  defines it as the right of people to define their own food systems. I like that definition.  
**[0:16:53-0:16:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:16:53):**  Food sovereignty they say that food sovereignty puts the people who produce distribute and consume  food at the centre of the decisions on food systems and policies rather than the demands of markets  and corporations that have come to dominate the global food system. At the end of October around  500 people from over 40 countries converged in the Romanian city of Cluj-Napoca for the Nelini  Europe Forum on Food Sovereignty. Among them were seven Scottish delegates drawn from a range of  
**[0:17:26-0:17:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:17:26):**  organisations. On their return the Scottish delegates shared their experience in a public discussion.  Our newest contributor Katie Revel went along to find out more. Ten days after their return the  Scottish delegates met in Edinburgh with other producers, researchers, activists and interested people.  It was a chance for them to share their experiences at the forum and for the wider community to explore  next steps for food sovereignty in Scotland. These are just a few snapshots from that evening.  
**[0:17:55-0:18:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:17:55):**  Overall I guess what I felt most value was talking to yourselves from the Scottish delegation, people  from the rest of the UK and just getting an idea of what's the lay of the land in the UK food sovereignty  movement. For me one of the main themes was how we'd start to build an exchange of knowledge in Scotland  that includes the diversity of experience that people have and trying to think what does peasant-peasant  learning look like in a culture where we don't really have a great wealth of peasant culture remaining.  
**[0:18:25-0:18:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:18:25):**  We were going from this incredibly agribusiness supermarket dominated food culture into a forum  surrounded by a lot of peasant farmers, particularly in Romania. It was quite an interesting experience  feeling quite on the outskirts of things and wondering what we could contribute and then we had a bit of  a realisation on day two or three that's what we could offer as a UK delegation is an example of what  happens when you are so far removed from your peasant culture and you have allowed your food system or  
**[0:18:51-0:18:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:18:51):**  the powers that be have allowed the food system to become so dominated by large business that you come  to the point where you know things need to change but you don't know where to start. Using that as a  starting point and being able to give examples to people from other countries is to this is what can  happen when you don't stand up for your rights as peasants, when you don't recognise what you've got  until it's lost kind of changed around my experience and gave me a real way to interact with this massive  
**[0:19:14-0:19:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:19:14):**  process that was going on. The inclusion of marginal voices and the representation of whether by choice  or not the largely urban consumers who may want to be producers but can't be and very much it seems like  there's this balance between striving to protect what is already there which I see as being the roots of  food sovereignty coming from the global south and a kind of peasant way of life and then complementary  movement for food justice which is about campaigning for things which people don't have.  
**[0:19:40-0:19:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:19:40):**  The delegates and participants then split into smaller groups to talk about specific areas of focus at the forum.  One group was discussing food and agriculture policy and in particular how Brexit might affect it.  In Scotland there's a further complication and an opportunity, the upcoming Good Food Nation Bill.  Its ambition is to cut across food, farming, health and other topics.  Just like in Europe we're trying to say this policy has to go wider than support to farming.  
**[0:20:09-0:20:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:20:09):**  And if it doesn't include health and the environment and social justice then we'll end up with a,  exactly like you say, a farming support system which keeps on supporting the barley farmers on the East Coast  who don't even need the money and get 80% of the money and not supporting food for people which is what food sovereignty is all about.  We also I think need to have clarity not just what we want a new agricultural subsidy system to look like  but how we get there as well. I think one of the big issues and one of the big challenges that the NFU face  
**[0:20:43-0:20:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:20:43):**  obviously they are there to defend the status quo but it's what you get all the time from them when it comes out from policies.  We have to defend the status quo because farming is such a delicately balanced financial system at the moment  and farmers are in crisis and if we make any changes to it it will pull the rug out underneath the farming system.  What we can take on board from that I think is that there needs to be a way of presenting this as a system of transition  which isn't going to instantly bankrupt all the barley farmers on the East Coast but at the same time is going to build a system  
**[0:21:15-0:21:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:21:15):**  that rewards people for growing stuff for food as opposed to growing stuff for alcohol or growing stuff for sale.  There's supposed to be a consultation on the new bill in 2017. There's a real opportunity to do something different here in Scotland  but I think the same discussion about transparency and about broadening engagement are crucial here too.  Part of it is just about chapping on doors constantly and asking to speak to the government and asking to speak to decision makers  and asking to speak to civil servants and that's what the NFU are incredibly good at and that's what large businesses are incredibly good at as well  
**[0:21:50-0:21:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:21:50):**  because they have the money and the resources to employ people just to do that.  It's always going to be a challenge to what is largely a grass roots movement and the Scottish Food Coalition are going away towards addressing that  by coming together as a variety of organisations and using the weight of numbers and of people to have a unified lobbying force.  We do need to get better as a movement at creating good workable examples of policy and making sure it gets into the hands of the people that need to see it.  The second thing that struck me though is the amazing opportunity that we've got over the next few years in Scotland to influence food policy  
**[0:22:24-0:22:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:22:24):**  and how incredibly lucky and privileged we are, especially within the wider UK context.  So I think we've almost got a duty on us as civil society and as activists in Scotland to make the most of this upcoming law and this upcoming opportunity that we've got  so we can at least set the example to other parts of Europe and to other parts of the UK as to what a comprehensive change making policy can look like.  But how can we make sure the Good Food Nation Bill is inclusive and far reaching? Pete Ritchie from Nourish explained one idea.  We've made a pitch to the people in the civil servant who were charged with thinking about the consultation  
**[0:23:03-0:23:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:23:03):**  and only civil servants could say this when we went into a meeting and they said we have to lower your expectations.  So you know that's what we're up against, we're up against our expectations being systematically lowered, so it's quite important we say no, we're raising our expectations.  We've put in a pitch for us a multi-level engagement process but the core of it is kitchen table conversations  and we've argued for at least a thousand kitchen table conversations involving at least five thousand people.  We get to marginalise groups, we talk to older people in nursing homes, we talk to kids in special schools, we talk to people who are in prison,  
**[0:23:36-0:23:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:23:36):**  we talk to lots and lots of people and we listen to what they have to say about what sort of food system they want to.  So that's a suggestion for one thing we might do in terms of a way forward and as people said this bill is actually a bit like our land reform stuff, it's quite unusual.  No other country that we've found is doing this cross-cutting legislation.  So if we can make it exciting then it would be something we can be really proud of.  If you want to find out more info about the Good Food Nation Bill mentioned in the piece, there's some on the Nourish website and also you can find out from the Scottish Government website.  
**[0:24:10-0:24:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:24:10):**  The links will be on our ACAS feed and our Facebook page along with a link to a good forum to take the discussion on a bit further.  More on food sovereignty up next, this time from an event in London early this month.  This perspective comes from members of the Land Workers Alliance, the UK arm of Via Campesina, who are putting together a policy that they feel represents the people's perspective.  We hear from Dee Butterly, coordinator of the People's Food Policy Working Group, who have been consulting various people to create a national food policy in England based on agro-ecological principles,  drawing inspiration from cultures and communities across the globe.  
**[0:24:52-0:24:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:24:52):**  She spoke to Phil, the farmer arm.  My name is Dee and I'm an organic vegetable producer.  I'm currently coordinating this work around a people's food policy.  A couple of years ago the Land Workers Alliance published a document called Feeding the Future and one of the key policy proposals was to create a national food policy based on the principles of food sovereignty.  This is in the context that at the moment in England there is no national food policy that actually connects the dots between food, farming, health, labour, trade, environment and community well-being.  
**[0:25:25-0:25:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:25:25):**  This whole idea came about at a food sovereignty gathering that happened last year where the Land Workers Alliance did a whole day workshop around what we want in a national food policy.  A group of us decided to take that forward and do a much wider spread consultation with people that have experience of being in the food system, so a real grassroots process.  The importance of it being based on food sovereignty as a movement and as a process is really trying to promote that food and farming policy making really needs to happen and be governed at a grassroots level.  We feel that using a food sovereignty framework can actually allow clear, tangible guidelines as to how we would go about making a people's food policy.  There are other countries that have done this, that have made these kind of policies, those in Canada, in Australia, the people's food policies and Brazil has an amazing, long process in trying to get the right to food in all their legislative processes.  
**[0:26:27-0:26:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:26:27):**  I guess a really important part of the people's food policy is that if we're going to try and work towards having a really visionary agricultural policy, I guess the feeling is that we also need to look at how is that food going to be accessed and how is it going to be distributed and what's the experience of people in rural communities and urban communities and all the different stories within that.  I guess the idea with the people's food policy is we really want to put forward a whole food systems narrative that really comes from the voices of people who are really affected by the way the food system works, which is the majority of the population.  The idea is that we'll actually have this document ready by April and we've had this quite widespread consultation and we're going to take the draft that we have and go back to people and say, are your stories, are your voices, do you feel you're heard in this, if not, what else is it that you want to see.  I think what's important and what I think we're all seeing is that we started this process before Brexit and sure we don't have a government that's at all in favour of interest in these kind of processes, but what we're hearing this weekend from Scotland, these incredible stories of land reform acts and community empowerment bills.  Andy Whiteman, who's talking about the Scottish experience, is really saying if we want to see a radical reform or an act in parliament, we just should start writing them. Don't just make the demand, actually make the draft, make the proposals.  
**[0:27:55-0:28:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:27:55):**  It's a really interesting one and I guess there's a lot of power in building alliances and coalitions. A lot of people are participating and contributing already, but if we can get a lot of people on board, then that will give it momentum, like ideas that are going on this weekend.  There's so much stuff going on, like what are we going to do with our food system after Brexit. So I think it will contribute to a really powerful stream of ideas and action that's gaining momentum at the moment.  Nigel, I mean, obviously food sovereignty is something we hear a lot about. And what do you think about these two projects and also just in general, how do you relate to food sovereignty?  I think it's something a lot of people don't really think about. So I think it's a positive thing that we encourage more communities and people to think about where their food comes from and what sort of future of food security and food sovereignty we have in the UK.  So yeah, I think it's really positive that these issues are being discussed.  
**[0:29:07-0:29:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:29:07):**  After all, it's a very empowering idea, really food sovereignty, really allowing the people who are involved in food, which actually, funnily enough, is everyone, obviously.  But just bringing the power back to the people who are actually every day interacting with it and eating it. And rather than markets and corporations, I find that inspiring and exciting. And both of these policies, you know, there is it's really important right now to be going out and actually talking to people and seeing what works on the ground because I feel like there's not enough of that going on.  And I really hope and I'm sure they are both talking to people, not just people like them. Yeah. But all sorts of people. Sure. And that it's representative. Yeah. Yeah.  Yeah. Because like, you know, it's important to have they talk a lot about the peasant ideas, but it's also important to have the perspective of people who are eating who are maybe much more interested in alternative ways and to really understand why and how they got to their decisions.  Yeah, I mean, it's making it accessible for everyone, really. I think that's key. And we should all get a say in what type of food system and that we have.  
**[0:30:41-0:30:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-16#t=0:30:41):**  Thanks so much for listening. That's all we've got time for this week. But yeah, thanks for joining us as ever. It's so great to know you're out there listening and please do send in any ideas, thoughts, comments, whatever. We really love to hear from you. We do.  And can you believe the next time you'll be hearing from us is on Christmas Day? It's getting close. Thanks so much. Thanks, guys.  Lots of help on PharmaRama this week. PharmaRama is produced by me and Abby and presented with Nigel. And reporting this week was from Nigel, Abby, Katie and Phil.  And this week we've got additional sound design by Eightfold Way, music from Michael and very much appreciated social media support from Madeleine and Richard.  