### Farmerama  (2017-20-11)
**[0:00:00-0:00:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:00:00):**  The farming is life.  Farmers are the backbone of the farming.  If the farmers are being disorganised or if the farmers are not able to do farming, then  the farming won't survive.  Ashwini Shanakodi, who we'll be hearing from later in the show, when she tells us about  
**[0:00:46-0:00:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:00:46):**  the work she's doing to tackle social problems in farming communities in India and her experience  of moving to the UK.  We'll also be hearing from Rebecca Lawton of the Landworks Alliance on her investigations  into the productivity of small scale producers.  And we get stuck in to no-dig experiments with Charles Dowden, learning about soil biology  
**[0:01:08-0:01:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:01:08):**  and the intriguing results from his latest forking trials.  January means the Oxford Real Farming Conference.  And this year, Farmerama was there in full force.  This was the eighth annual Real Farming Conference held at Oxford Town Hall, where over 800 farmers,  chefs, makers, scientists and activists came together to share highs and lows encountered  
**[0:01:38-0:01:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:01:38):**  on the journey towards an agro-ecological future.  This is a conference where communal silence is the welcome call and singing and stomping  are part of the programme.  Nigel was with us, recorder in hand, and helped us to capture the spirit of the room.  Alexandra Sexton.  
**[0:01:57-0:02:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:01:57):**  I guess what my biggest takeout is hope, which is quite nice to start the year.  A lot of the stuff I've heard has been really positive about the future of organic and a  lot of other different approaches as well and how the evidence is mounting that the  way that a lot of conventional farming is done, it just can't continue to do with whom.  My name's Emma Oliph.  
**[0:02:31-0:02:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:02:31):**  I'm from Village Farm.  I run a company called Cliff Veg, so we're doing the market garden at Village Farm.  My sort of takeaway from here has been a lot of talk about soil science, which is amazing.  I'm really, really pleased that it's kind of getting into more of the, what I now consider  mainstream farming because we are organic mainstream.  
**[0:02:52-0:02:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:02:52):**  It's amazing to see how many different ways there are to fix the soil and nice to see  lots of people doing them.  My name is Howell Lewis.  I'm a beef farmer and forester in West Yorkshire.  My biggest takeaway from the conference is being very inspired by other farmers telling  
**[0:03:10-0:03:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:03:10):**  their stories of how they're making their farms work in a sustainable and viable way.  Hi, I'm Rebecca, aka the Wild Shepherd from Village Farm.  It's my first year at Oxford.  I've really enjoyed it.  There needs to be more talks about sheep.  
**[0:03:25-0:03:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:03:25):**  Yep, like weeds.  But it's so lovely to meet the sustainable community.  I've really loved how many no-plow and soil carbon themes there are.  I'm Peter Kindersley.  Right.  
**[0:03:43-0:03:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:03:43):**  And I, we run the Sheepdrill Trust and it's just wonderful to see us now twice as big  as the old farming conference down the road.  That's really impressive.  It really is amazing.  I think in fact we're probably more than twice as big.  
**[0:04:01-0:04:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:04:01):**  It's an amazing buzz here for anybody who comes and I really do encourage people to  come because it really is looking into the future and what we can do to really help our  farming system fit in with nature and supply really good quality food.  Peter Lundgren, I'm a conventional arable farmer in Lincolnshire.  The really good thing with this event is the energy and enthusiasm for farming.  
**[0:04:30-0:04:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:04:30):**  And when you meet Lincolnshire farmers, they're very down, oh they've only got 2,000 acres,  they've only got one quad track.  When you come here and you meet young people who are desperate to get into farming, I was  talking to a young couple last night who are milking seven goats, they've just got their  first cow, they're living in a converted bus and they're desperate to get into farming  
**[0:04:49-0:04:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:04:49):**  and that level of energy and enthusiasm is what will take farming forward.  Well obviously the big, big debate this year is Brexit and that is one of the big things  that's being discussed a lot here.  The other is of course the nutritional differences between organic and conventional food and  there's no doubt that the result is really coming home to say that organic is better.  
**[0:05:41-0:05:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:05:41):**  Abby's not here today in person, she's back on her family's farm in Chile.  Nevertheless here she is with some thoughts from the conference she's sent over.  It's a very precarious and sad time here in Chile right now.  I'm stuck inside as the smoke is too thick to go outside.  There are over a hundred fires burning as we speak and only a few of them are under  
**[0:06:19-0:06:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:06:19):**  control.  The fire is literally less than a kilometre away right now and all I can see is smoke  pouring over the hill where we live.  It's been like this for over seven days now and more fires are started each day in new  locations.  
**[0:06:33-0:06:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:06:33):**  It's chaos and camaraderie on the ground.  Sometimes people are coming to help but the volunteer firemen are speeding around saving  one person to the next.  No one is even trying to save the forests any longer.  We evacuated our farm a few days ago as a new fire was started in the pine forest in  
**[0:06:49-0:06:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:06:49):**  front and the flames licked towards us.  We're all safe and for now our farm is okay too although a new fire is passing through  as we speak.  Living in a deserted blackened landscape it becomes ever clearer that we must work together  combining farming, forestry and native lands to keep our earth a beautiful place.  
**[0:07:12-0:07:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:07:12):**  The natural world never stops reminding us that working with the land is a very risky  business.  Something I think the non-farming community don't always understand.  Vast tracks of pine forest are tinderboxes that the natural world would never have created.  Going forward I hope we learn.  
**[0:07:30-0:07:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:07:30):**  It's been hard to do anything other than track fires, prepare breaks and help others over  the last week so I hope my thoughts have some consistency this month.  Back to the wonderful ORFC.  The three main things I came away with were that one, storytelling is key.  We need to create an alternative narrative to tell a story that offers a different vision  
**[0:07:52-0:07:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:07:52):**  than the overarching we need GM to feed the world which has been a paradigm for many years.  Secondly, the importance of combining modern tools and technology with older farming methods.  Joel Salatin calls it new fashioned farming where GM and chemical inputs are now old fashioned.  And thirdly, what an opportunity we have right now in the UK to rethink subsidies and farming  policy post Brexit.  
**[0:08:22-0:08:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:08:22):**  One of the highlights of us at ORFC in 2016 was Rebecca Lawton and we were lucky enough  to corner for an interview this time.  Rebecca is a long time organic market gardener in Dorset as well as campaigns researcher  for Landworkers Alliance.  She spent the last two years researching the productivity of small scale farms in the UK.  
**[0:08:43-0:08:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:08:43):**  She felt that in order to have the government take her seriously and think about how small  scale farms might offer a very valuable contribution to agriculture, she needed to provide some  real data.  Anecdotal evidence was not enough and so the master of scale report came into being.  So I'm Rebecca Lawton and I am a member of the Landworkers Alliance and I grow vegetables  
**[0:09:08-0:09:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:09:08):**  as a tenant farmer on a large organic farm in Dorset.  As part of my role in the Landworkers Alliance I'm campaigns researcher.  I started the Matter of Scale project which I aimed to find out about how productive small  scale farms are in relation to large scale farms and to find out generally a bit more  about the small scale farming sector in the UK.  
**[0:09:35-0:09:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:09:35):**  And I wanted to do this to actually find out whether claims that small farms are more productive  than large farms were actually accurate.  There are a lot of claims that are going about both ways.  The government sees small farms as being hobby farms or at best niche farms producing luxury  value added foods.  
**[0:09:56-0:10:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:09:56):**  Whereas a lot of small farmers are saying well actually we can provide significant amounts  of food to feed the UK population and we can be more productive than larger farms.  So I really wanted to find out what the truth is whether small farms are more productive  than large farms or whether they're not.  I managed to get about 70 respondents to the online surveys that we conducted which is  
**[0:10:25-0:10:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:10:25):**  actually a very very small sample when you consider that there are 98,000 farms of 20  hectares and less in the UK.  The dominant enterprises were vegetable production followed by fruit production and poultry production  but vegetable production was by far and away the most frequent enterprise.  And really the only data set which I feel it's legitimate to draw many conclusions from  
**[0:10:55-0:11:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:10:55):**  is the vegetable data because the others are just too small and too patchy and too diverse  to draw any conclusions from.  There were some very very productive farms but then there were quite a lot that were  below average in the data set.  When you looked at the median and compared it to organic farms and then to standard organic  
**[0:11:22-0:11:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:11:22):**  data for non-organic farms the median actually compared quite well both with the standard  organic data and with the non-organic data particularly for crops such as broad beans,  salad and other leafy vegetables, the ones that require a high labour input which is  perhaps not that surprising but it was good to actually see the figures support the fact  that small farms that are producing labour intensive vegetable crops can actually be  
**[0:11:54-0:11:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:11:54):**  highly productive.  I mean other crops such as potatoes, onions, carrots and even things like squash didn't  compare so well.  The ones that use quite a lot of machinery and you don't need so much hand labour for.  But I mean they were about the same rather than a lot less or well potatoes and carrots  
**[0:12:18-0:12:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:12:18):**  and onions where actually they were lower.  But I think what the results point to is that there's a productivity advantage for small  farms producing certain categories of produce and as we're coming into an era where potentially  we might have higher prices of fresh produce if it's being an import from Europe I think  there's potential to be really increasing domestic productivity of fresh produce using  
**[0:12:51-0:12:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:12:51):**  small farms at the same time as creating some really good employment for young people on  farms.  There were various examples when I asked people about what their barriers to productivity  were of lack of infrastructure mainly things like buildings and places for storing hay  or good fencing which required quite an input of capital at the beginning and the lack of  
**[0:13:32-0:13:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:13:32):**  those resources was meaning that businesses weren't as efficient as they could be.  So for example one of the farmers was talking about how when they started they bought their  land and they had about five thousand pounds of capital after they bought their land and  two thousand pounds of that was spent on putting in a track.  So for years and years they've had to do things like storing their hay under tarpaulins or  
**[0:14:02-0:14:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:14:02):**  using electric fencing which although it can be effective sometimes it's not so effective  and animals escape and that kind of drains the business because you're running out to  cover the hay when there's a storm and stop it getting wet or you might lose the hay because  it does get wet and then you're spending out on more forage and the animals escape or you're  keeping the animals without a concrete yard so you're wading around in mud.  
**[0:14:33-0:14:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:14:33):**  Having capital to invest in infrastructure from the start just makes everything so much  easier and more efficient and means that more can be done for the same effort rather than  just draining the effort.  What I'm finding interesting in thinking about where we go post Brexit is looking at the  scale of farm subsidies that are being paid out each and every year just to keep farms  
**[0:15:03-0:15:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:15:03):**  going.  I think if even a fraction of that could be diverted towards capital start-up grants which  would then enable small farms to develop and become efficient and then not need any subsidies  at all.  So I think that if money that goes into agriculture was being spent on helping develop the environment  
**[0:15:25-0:15:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:15:25):**  the infrastructure and the tools and the training that would actually create a much more resilient  farming system.  Small resilient agroecological farms they're actually minimising their input.  I mean the biggest cost really is labour for most of these farms and although that's a  cost in one sense I don't see that as being a big problem because that's income and that's  
**[0:15:49-0:15:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:15:49):**  creating livelihoods for people who then go and spend it in the local economy and these  farms can be generating money that then can be used to pay workers without relying on  a lot of subsidies which I do think is possible then that would be a really good way forward  for agriculture.  Well in looking into how productivity and efficiency are measured in conventional terms  
**[0:16:14-0:16:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:16:14):**  there seems to be a real bias towards looking at productivity per unit labour rather than  productivity per unit land and it's quite hard to find statistics on productivity per  unit land now because labour efficiency is just so much the measure of how successful  a farm is.  It would be very interesting to look at the increase over the next few years in productivity  
**[0:16:41-0:16:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:16:41):**  per unit land which I think as knowledge grows could follow the productivity per unit labour  graph.  The productivity per unit labour that implies that labour is a bad thing whereas I think  labour is a good thing and if we're wanting to employ people which is often given as a  measurement of economic success then creating jobs on farms is a good thing and creating  
**[0:17:11-0:17:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:17:11):**  livelihoods on farms is a good thing and particularly creating satisfying diverse socially enjoyable  working environments is very valuable.  I suppose the one thing that's really come out of this is for me is that there's a real  need for the small scale agroecological farming movement to be creating more data to be keeping  better records because I think that the government, if we're going to change policy to make it  
**[0:17:46-0:17:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:17:46):**  more supportive of what we're trying to do I think we can't expect the government to  just see that we're offering environmental benefits and social benefits.  The government has really got to see convincing figures for how economically viable small  farms can be and also how productive small farms can be.  The argument that's always used against particularly organic farming but also small  
**[0:18:14-0:18:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:18:14):**  scale farming is well we need to feed the world and we've got to produce enough food  to feed the world.  Now that can be unpicked in many ways.  You can criticise that because you can say well a lot of food is wasted but ultimately  I think we've got to be able to show that small farms can provide significant amounts  
**[0:18:36-0:18:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:18:36):**  of food and maybe even more food if the right training and the right security of land tenure  and infrastructure is available.  So I think it's essential that we're producing enough data and for that I think that we need  to be creating comparable forms of data collection and also really easy to use record keeping  methods for all farmers to be using because farmers are busy people and it's hard to  
**[0:19:13-0:19:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:19:13):**  encourage people to keep data and a lot of people have gone into farming because they're  not so interested in figures and record keeping and economics.  They want to get out there and be working on the land but making it easy and appealing  and offering incentives is really important.  At the conference Abby also caught up with Charles Dowding who runs a commercial market  
**[0:19:43-0:19:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:19:43):**  garden in Somerset.  Since the 80s he's been growing many different vegetables organically and without disturbing  or digging the soil at all.  He's also a great experimenter and he's been doing comparison trials for many years.  Charles is the no dig market garden expert.  
**[0:20:03-0:20:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:20:03):**  He told us about some of his latest trials and what he thinks is really going on down  there in the soil.  I'm Charles Dowding from Somerset, South West UK and I'm a market gardener vegetable grower  primarily and always organic and in fact in the 1980s that was the starring role part  of my growth because people were fascinated, gardening groups for example who I'd go and  
**[0:20:30-0:20:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:20:30):**  give talks to, you mean you can really grow vegetables organically, you don't need pesticides  or fertiliser.  That was the common response.  I was a farmer's son, a young man at that time.  In 1982 it was a very chemical world, fertiliser and insecticides were predominant.  
**[0:20:48-0:20:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:20:48):**  They were bringing in the warble fly spray for example but in fact my brother got poisoned  by organic phosphates in the 80s.  It was just everywhere and I was seen as very odd for being organic.  Now organic is seen as at least possible by most people I think it's more a question than  whether they want to do it but in the 1980s I was also no dig.  
**[0:21:09-0:21:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:21:09):**  The interest in soil is quite a recent thing.  I've been a member of the soil association since 1981.  Even they only recently started talking about soil but it's only recently that soil has  become a topic of interest to many people and that has led to much more interest in  no dig or no till.  
**[0:21:28-0:21:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:21:28):**  Just to clarify the terms no dig is more the British gardening word and I think in America  it's more no till and farming is no till but it's the same thing of not disturbing or disturbing  the soil as little as possible and it's about feeding soil.  Initially I started with a rotavator I have to admit because it was the only tool I had  is rotating my father's pasture land I've rotavated an acre and a half and actually  
**[0:21:51-0:21:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:21:51):**  then I shaped up beds.  I really like raised beds so with a spade I took soil out of paths put it onto beds  and I had my raised beds there.  The question then is how do you go from that if you're going to do any kind of cultivation  without losing your beds?  
**[0:22:04-0:22:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:22:04):**  If I'd rotavated again it would have all gone flat and I'd have lost all that precious time  I put into making these lovely beds and so I started looking into whether you know what  do I need to cultivate?  You know it's like perhaps I don't actually and I found a book by Ruth Stout an American  gardener who was using her husband a farmer spoiled hay as a mulch and she found that  
**[0:22:27-0:22:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:22:27):**  everything grew fine doing that so why not just feed the soil with hay.  Her reasoning was the cow hadn't eaten the hay so the goodness is still in there and  I just put it straight on the ground and that's feeding my plants through feeding the soil  and so I actually bought some old hay at first and I thought I'll do try that and mulch my  beds with old hay like she does and then the following spring so many of my plantings were  
**[0:22:49-0:22:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:22:49):**  killed eaten by slugs.  Duh where she's from Midwest USA continental dry climate they don't have slugs so that  taught me the dangers of taking methods from one part of the world and bringing them into  a different area so you've got to always if you're taking things off the internet particularly  it's not always said where they're coming from so be very careful to make sure it's  
**[0:23:10-0:23:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:23:10):**  applicable to your condition.  And in my work now I'm using compost as the mulch because that does not encourage slugs  so you know you could say I'm doing the same as Ruth's out she was mulching with hay on  that mulching with compost.  You're feeding soil all your plants benefit in a very simple way you're getting high yields  
**[0:23:30-0:23:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:23:30):**  for low input of time because that's the other brilliant thing about no dig less weeds.  You know in growing nowadays costs are the killer if you like you know if you if you  don't keep your costs down you will not survive as a grower well as a farmer really so if  you look at many growing operations it's one of the main costs is time spent weeding.  Weeding is necessary I'm not anti-weeding but I just want to keep it to a minimum so  
**[0:23:53-0:23:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:23:53):**  no till undisturbed soil obviously doesn't grow weed seeds so much because you're not  bringing them up to the surface but there's one other very important factor which has  been discovered by Elaine Ingham in the USA that if you have a high fungal population  near the surface of soil that discourages germination of pioneer weed seeds.  Now this is a really important piece of knowledge and it's one explains for me something I've  
**[0:24:19-0:24:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:24:19):**  always noticed why my gardens grow so few weeds and you know it's like there's more  going on here than just the fact that I'm not bringing up weeds.  For me it's almost felt something like the soil is happy why does soil grow weeds in  the first place weeds are often our response to cultivation and it's soil recovering itself  and if you then think of the meaning of that word recover it does have that other meaning  
**[0:24:42-0:24:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:24:42):**  you know we need to recover if we've got an injury and that's how I see it when soil  is disturbed over disturbed particularly it's injured and so it recovers with weeds even  if some weeds are there they're less inclined to germinate the soil feels happier.  That's interesting that ties into you're talking about that you're doing some trials  around forking some of the ground and no dig some of the ground can you explain about that?  
**[0:25:05-0:25:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:25:05):**  Yeah I'm doing two separate trials actually well more than that but the two main ones  I'm doing dig no dig and on one of the original dig no dig which is now in its 10th year and  I turn over the soil and incorporate manure in trenches traditional single digging and  ten years of results on that trial show that eight years out of ten the no dig less work  actually gives higher yield and then in my new garden I've also started a separate  
**[0:25:29-0:25:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:25:29):**  trial where for the last three years I've got a bigger strip of ground two meters by  nine meters where each of the six beds within that strip is forked before every single sowing  or planting so we put a garden fork in the ground about every six inches or so maybe  a bit more to its full length which is 11 inches and give it a wiggle to loosen the  soil but without inversion so in theory you'd think less intrusion into soil but maybe aeration  
**[0:25:55-0:26:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:25:55):**  or whatever it's supposed to do you know this broad forking idea and then next to that similar  strip two meters by nine meters no dig so basically no disturbance whatsoever and the  same amount of compost goes on top of each of these strips of ground so again it's slightly  different to my other dig no dig where the dug bed the soil is being incorporated so  three years results in each of the three years again the no dig is ahead in terms of harvest  
**[0:26:21-0:26:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:26:21):**  so we grow the same vegetables in each of the strips and I record all the harvest which  yeah it takes a bit of time but it's actually a really enjoyable job because it's fascinating  you know even apart from the fact I've got the trial results side by side I'm also getting  total yield figures which are getting more and more impressive as well so that's a very  nice body of evidence to have the results this year were really quite staggering actually  
**[0:26:42-0:26:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:26:42):**  15 increase by doing less what I think is happening on you know this suggests is happening  the forking is disturbing the fungal threads you know if you think about it well that does  make sense so that any kind of intrusion into the soil that we do I think particularly with  iron tools as well you know this goes back to Victor Schauberger's work in Austria a  hundred years ago where he invented copper tools and discovered that they you've got  
**[0:27:09-0:27:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:27:09):**  much higher yields of wheat from using his famous copper plant than you did from using  an iron plant for example you know what's all that about but you know I think that there  could be an element of that as well but for me the big one is soil life you know I think  that's the thing that we need to both protect and encourage for our businesses to be really  successful and profitable and for us to spend less time doing it as well because it does  
**[0:27:33-0:27:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:27:33):**  seem that healthy soil with vibrant soil life across this whole spectrum a diverse soil  life is going to give you high yields for less input of time feeding the soil on the  surface which is nature's way you know naturally all organic matter lands on the surface and  then nature is equipped it has equipped itself the soil with all these organisms that can  take this matter and process it and turn it into plant food and working with those processes  
**[0:27:59-0:28:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:27:59):**  I think is very exciting for farmers and growers.  Abi talking to Charles Dowding. If you're interested in learning more Charles runs courses  on his farm and I really think there's so much to learn if you've got the time to spend  a day with him down there he's also got a new garden diary out so if you want to know  a little bit more take a look at Charlesdowding.co.uk.  
**[0:28:36-0:28:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:28:36):**  Back to that intriguing and powerful voice from the start of the program it belongs to  Ashwini Shanakodi who's recently left her family farm in India to join her partner in  the UK. Here she speaks to Darla Eno for Farmerama about her work in community development the  role of women in Indian agriculture and the calling back to her home also about the power  of street play as a tool for civic engagement. Performances acted out on the streets in local  
**[0:29:06-0:29:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:29:06):**  languages in order to describe ideas concepts and ways of understanding the world to people  within local communities and apologies for the small amount of machine noise in this  recording.  My name is Ashwini Shanakodi I'm from India I born and brought up an agricultural farm  I sometimes feel very guilt about the family farm is there and I'm here I have to go back  
**[0:29:35-0:29:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:29:35):**  that is that feeling is still there. Over the time I observed that how the farming is  transition is happening what happened was that when I was growing up there was this  disconnection from the farm myself I myself went through that stage because you being  always told that okay let's do go work in the farm because it's something was imposed  rather than came for me when I when I was a kid but over the time when I started going  
**[0:30:05-0:30:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:30:05):**  for college that's when I observed that there are other social problems which are not being  discussed and we saw that there is alcoholism there is financial problems where they are  problems with the abuses different kinds of abuses and people were not aware about lot  of issues relating to within agriculture may be relating to industrial farming the traditional  farming and straight play is an approach to convey the message to the people.  
**[0:30:39-0:30:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:30:39):**  So what we done was that I asked the college students to come join me and we trained them  in a local language that is Kannada to speak with the local people and to convey what is  happening what is organic farming what who are the actors are in it what happens when  you call yourself as organic farmer because many people won't read how many people will  read I will read only which is required for me but I feel always that visual media which  
**[0:31:12-0:31:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:31:12):**  is more effective rather than documents because that's where you express yourself so there  were there is still a connection if I go back people will recognize me it made lot of changes  because it's not only me many people are doing straight play in India across India when it  comes to if you are introducing any project if you look at social media if you look at  internet also you will find incident you will find the clips stories about how street plays  
**[0:31:46-0:31:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:31:46):**  are being used as a community you are part of that one community if I am taking Oxford  as a community whole example each and every activity which is happening within Oxford  becomes part of it so if you tell that okay I have work but in my agricultural land and  I'm not able to become part of the community then you are actually you are going away from  the reality what is happening within your community yesterday they were talking about  
**[0:32:18-0:32:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:32:18):**  there is lot of education information is available but it is not available it's not available  in the mainstream it's available if I am connected to you I may get but see I was coming and  going for last two years to UK but I was not aware about many things I was not connected  with a lot of networks because it's been from past one year I'm here like majority of my  time so I'm able to connect now I know that these things are happening we don't talk about  
**[0:32:51-0:32:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:32:51):**  the gender issues much I haven't seen anybody talking about gender issues here in the conference  I see a lot of girls here and they are interested in the topic they are very interested they  have that interest do you say that because is it something you feel when you're back  home is gender an issue in farming yeah because a lot of ladies they do a lot of hard work  and they are the people who preserve seeds they are the people who transfer traditional  
**[0:33:19-0:33:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:33:19):**  knowledge my mom she's a very good vegetable garden person she knows how to do beekeeping  she know how to because I learned from her how to do basic beekeeping I'm still learning  the skill and everybody from surrounding area they come and collect seeds from her vegetable  seeds specially because people from small village like from my farm they took and it's  there in like in Bangalore Bangalore is a metropolitan city so people take it there  
**[0:33:54-0:34:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:33:54):**  and also they do some vegetable gardening inside the house still it's coming up so the  woman is actually like the pillar in Indian agriculture would you say is like yeah they  are the pillars because they are the people who go and work in the farm in the land and  they save they save the seeds for the next generation definitely they are very inspiring  because it is over here there is a bit of an archetype of the male farmer I think and  
**[0:34:28-0:34:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:34:28):**  there's still a lot of gender issues around strength and like what women can and questioning  about what women can bring to agriculture and I think that's come with mechanization  yes because of the tillers and big tractor but valuing things like seed saving and yeah  if you have a family farm in UK or a 20 50 60 acres of land the management of it everything  they look after which is not been we don't hear their stories there's no narratives about  
**[0:35:04-0:35:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:35:04):**  the contribution of women in the agriculture of UK that is one of the interesting research  topic maybe that was Darla speaking to Ashwini for farmerama and we're now going to go back  to Abby once more on her family farm with a few points to follow that interview I was  so pleased that Ashwini brought up the lack of female narratives at the ORFC although  the crowd in the room was quite well mixed I too never once heard gender brought up in  
**[0:35:35-0:35:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:35:35):**  the storytelling session two men spoke and I didn't hear them speak about a single story  that involved a female farmer I'm ashamed to say that for some reason I felt too scared  to get up and say anything about it like we had much more pressing issues to worry about  but after much reflection I think biodiversity in the environment must be reflected in the  narratives we tell after all we are part of this environment so not only do we need more  
**[0:36:02-0:36:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:36:02):**  female narratives but those are people from different backgrounds religions and so on  if the farming community is going to generate a positive environment we must reflect that  in our world view and the voices we share ORFC was a huge success this year I had a  great time and going forward something we would like to see more of is workshops for  example people could learn how to tell their story not just hear from someone who has been  
**[0:36:29-0:36:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:36:29):**  successful telling their story and things like that I really hope things in Chile get  back to some order soon and people stop lighting the fires you can follow what's going on on  our Twitter at VEDA cycle we live in a crazy world. Thank you all for listening to Varmarama  this week and every week and thank you to all this week's contributors Joy, Darla and  Nigel Lauren, Phil and Richard at ORFC and Owen who recorded the new music we've had  
**[0:37:11-0:37:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/18-farmerama#t=0:37:11):**  on today's show and of course thank you to all of our guests we're very much looking  forward to the rest of the year we'll be back next time with more voices from the Smaller  Scale farming movement in the UK and beyond.  