### Farmerama  (2017-48-25)
**[0:00:00-0:00:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:00:00):**  I suppose my earliest reference to my personal involvement with the soil is using it to make  mud cakes with the doll's head I think and you know, liking to play with its London clay  stickiness watching my grandmother, my maternal grandmother cultivate the soil in our back  garden and transforming it into sweet corn and squash and various other things. It's  the soil that absorbs all the pollutants that we unfortunately spread throughout our different  
**[0:00:43-0:00:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:00:43):**  atmospheres. It's trodden upon. And if I should quote my daughter's rap trodden upon she says  cut by spades. We take our feet for granted and we take that which comes into contact  with it for granted assuming it will go on forever and it will always be this capital  asset. We have to be a lot more intentional about how we're relating to it and not only  in a way to regard it as a dry asset but as something which carries our histories.  
**[0:01:33-0:01:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:01:33):**  We'll find out who this is and hear more about soil later in the show but first hi.  Hello it's Farmerama. The 23rd month in a row that Joe and I and the rest of the team  are bringing you a half hour of stories from the smaller scale farming communities around  the world. Today we visit a project in Malawi before we're in the Garden of England talking  to a farmer about his experience growing seed buckthorn. And we have a special feature from  
**[0:02:02-0:02:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:02:02):**  a podcasting pal. But first back to that wise voice we heard welcoming you at the beginning  of this episode. Mama Dee was one of the speakers at the first ever soil hack gathering a few  weeks ago. People met to discuss soil in all its aspects from its science to its history  as well as practical tips and we'll be sharing some of this in future episodes. Mama Dee  talked about how she believes care for the soil can reflect an awareness and respect  
**[0:02:29-0:02:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:02:29):**  of our culture's relationship with the land.  I'm Mama Dee and I'm in the middle of curating a project called Community Centred Knowledge.  Soils evolve at the same pace as humans who live with it do. So if soil were to be an  indicator of our level of civilisation what would it say? We cannot compartmentalise the  soil into the inorganic and organic ingredients of it and we can't measure aspects of it in  
**[0:03:04-0:03:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:03:04):**  isolation. The socio-economy if you like of the soil needs to be understood together with  its biochemical properties because these are so related. My belief is that the knowledge  that we need, that we need to apply is centred within the various communities that inhabit  these islands. It can be brought to the fore by encouraging people to remember it, to recall  it, to share it and to make sense of it collectively so that it can be a source of strength and  
**[0:03:40-0:03:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:03:40):**  resilience for the times which lie ahead. I have formulated indigeneity, being indigenous,  to mean that which is generated from the land. So we were talking about the soil, so the  soil being the womb lining if you like of Mother Earth. How can we get in touch with  that which is generated from this soil? We grow food on it but not all the food. There  are lots of the food that we consume is grown in different countries in the world and we  
**[0:04:18-0:04:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:04:18):**  have the people from those different countries here in Britain. There's a trans-indigenous  a sense of soil being something that covers lots of parts of the globe with whom Britain  has had contacts in time and space and so a respect for all of those soils because after  all we just have the one planet. There's a lot of talk of localism but what does that  mean in terms of a respectful way one lives in an inclusive way? So how are we treating  
**[0:04:59-0:05:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:04:59):**  our soils with imported products? How are we treating our soils with imported knowledge?  Often not the knowledge that has come from the community that has lived on that land  for a long time. So some kind of respect for what comes out of that land and making linkages  between what comes out of that land with what comes out of other lands from which we eat  and to make a global sense of it so that it's integrated and more meaningful and relates  
**[0:05:41-0:05:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:05:41):**  to all the people who eat what we call food. I was really happy this weekend that the various  workshops weren't only dealing with a particular rather rationalistic right brained kind of  way of approaching what the soil is and what it means to us but made attempts to look at  it in various more kind of contrasts I suppose left brain, more old brain, imaginative historical  socio-economic ways of thinking about it and I certainly hope that soil hack continues  
**[0:06:22-0:06:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:06:22):**  in this vein and doesn't get overtaken by what we refer to as science which is just  one form of knowledge. Okay Abi so what's all that about then? Maybe you could explain  to us the workshop you were involved in when you met Mama D. So Mama D put on a workshop  which everyone involved kind of I was lichen and we had to enact and really experience  what it's like to be part of the woodland ecosystem. Hold on you were lichen to what?  
**[0:06:58-0:07:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:06:58):**  I was actually lichen so I spent a lot of my time at the bottom of a tree but there  was a beautiful point in the exercise workshop where for whatever reason everyone died all  the creatures and all the living things and we all returned to soil. It was quite an amazing  experience. The part to it that I found really interesting was actually that it kind of it  felt like practicing death and it had this kind of sore, it made you feel a little more  
**[0:07:27-0:07:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:07:27):**  relaxed about death because you realize that actually when we die we all become and return  to the soil. So it was a very kind of wild and interesting experience and it definitely  sort of changed my relationship to soil because I realized you know that's where we came from  and that's where we'll return to. I think it sounds great if it worked and made you  think about soil in a different way. What I'm fascinated is in because everybody got  
**[0:08:00-0:08:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:08:00):**  to choose what they were and why you chose lichen. It wasn't like that. There were just  little post-it notes of all different things in the woodland and you just kind of picked  one and I did sort of choose lichen because I really like lichen. It's a really beautiful  thing and you only find it in areas where there's not much pollution and also I like  its serenity and the peacefulness of lichen. I think what she says is very interesting  
**[0:08:29-0:08:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:08:29):**  about the soil sort of reflecting and caring for the different people who make up part  of the place that we're living in. I think it's really nice and understanding that these  new different cultures that make up this country can be also rooted in part of the same thing  and that's a combination of different plants and different people and different ways of  life all come from the soil. You know to really get in touch with the fact that we all all  
**[0:08:59-0:09:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:08:59):**  are part of the soil is actually quite empowering, quite powerful.  We were super excited to hear from the Tyene Project in Malawi who promote sustainable  farming methods there. Isaac Mondro Chivula and Albert Masuku sent us in some recordings  to share their experience of the Tyene Deep Bed Farming Method.  It aims to stop erosion and improve soil fertility by avoiding soil compaction and using deep  
**[0:09:45-0:09:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:09:45):**  wide beds, mulching, agroforestry and companion planting. The Tyene Charity which promotes  and teaches the method was set up by lifelong residents of Malawi. They were frustrated  by Malawi's reliance on short-sighted food aid. So instead they wanted to develop an  approach that's not only truly sustainable but also much cheaper than food aid drops.  Tyene by the way means let's go. The Tyene Deep Bed method of agriculture is  
**[0:10:17-0:10:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:10:17):**  the bringing together several well and tested methods into a simple and effective common  sense approach to agriculture. The steps are the compaction of soils, contouring, protective  planting, water containment, manoeuvring, mulching, weeding, companion planting and  crop protection. The Tyene method is now being used by some 3000 farmers across the  country. This is by 2017 which is treble or what was the case in 2016. Farmer to farmer  
**[0:10:50-0:10:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:10:50):**  training means that the technology is spreading far beyond the farmers that Tyene staff are  reaching. It has also been adopted by several NGOs and more are queuing for training in  this method. But why do we have to promote this deep bed method? There is great misunderstanding  in the agriculture world about compaction of soils. In Malawi and probably in many countries  throughout the world compaction is a hidden cause of famine. Repeated diggings with the  
**[0:11:19-0:11:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:11:19):**  wall and even the plough and constant walking on the soil very often resulted in compaction  being created to be hard-panned and underneath, it could be below 10, 15 or 20 centimetres.  Neither the roots or water can penetrate this hard-pan and as a result, a short dry spell  means that the crops fail. We still, the compacted layer in heavy rains provides a perfect sleep  layer for the tilled topsoil to be swept away, maybe down here through erosion. Just last  
**[0:11:56-0:12:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:11:56):**  year, an FAO report indicated that about 29 tonnes of topsoil is lost per hectare per  year in Malawi. The training method stops this completely. So the first step above is  probably the element that deep bed that is most essential. The other steps make sure  that the ground stays decompacted, improves soil fertility year on year and provides huge  increase in yields. Farmers have seen this and are queuing in their hundreds to be trained.  
**[0:12:33-0:12:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:12:33):**  That is why I am appealing to NGO community to support this deep bed method of farming  because by doing that, we can likely assist these farmers to get out of food and income  insecurity. The deep bed method once implemented across the country will alleviate this problem  of famine in Malawi and more especially make Malawi vibrant again in terms of our economy  because it is an agro-based economy. Industries depend on crop production and employment depends  
**[0:13:09-0:13:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:13:09):**  also on agriculture production. Now in Malawi, we have very poor food security like last  year, more than 6.5 million people were said to be food insecure. So if all farmers can  go the deep bed method, I am very sure that every household may have adequate food. This  deep bed method of farming, we encourage farmers to deep till to break the hard barn. So they  have to till to about 30 centimetre depth and that happens in one year. The rest of  
**[0:13:45-0:13:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:13:45):**  the years, it depends on how much manure you feed the soils and how you have to avoid as  much as possible to step on the deep beds because we must have no compaction of soils.  So it is because of that hard labour in first year, farmers tend to say, oh no, this method  is labour intensive. While we are saying, as long as you nurture your beds, you can  cultivate on the beds eternally as long as the soils remain rich and supportive to crop  
**[0:14:18-0:14:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:14:18):**  production. So this challenge has to be broken because it is just the attitude of the farmers.  My name is Albert Mpsuku. I am an Extension worker here at Mzimba. How I came to know  about 10 beds is 2015 when Rob called me from Holland that I should go and attend training  for lead farmers in Mzuzu. I went there, I attended for one week. When I came back, I  was very interested in what the Tieni people are doing. So when I came back, I tried to  
**[0:14:53-0:14:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:14:53):**  ask some farmers who are interested to do that. So we started with just two plots for  demonstration. But this year, you see with this climate change, it started very badly,  but our Tieni beds still strived and they did very well. Most of the farmers now are  interested to do Tieni beds. I am very sure these people now are at least food secure.  To find out more about Tieni, visit tieini.org. Thanks also to Bex Kelly who organised and  
**[0:15:27-0:15:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:15:27):**  sent us all these recordings.  Farmerama is happy to be supported by Abbey's company, VidaCycle Tech, who have created  some really great tools especially made for independent and small scale farms, just like  her families. They have two apps. Sector Mentor allows you to easily keep track of what's  going on with your crop. And Work Mentor helps you to manage your workers. Farmers around  
**[0:15:55-0:16:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:15:55):**  the world are using the apps to care for their olives, vines, blueberries, almonds, agroforestry  projects, apples and onions. If you're interested in using the apps, you can find out more on  tech.vidacycle.com.  Striving to make his low-lying coastal farm economically and environmentally viable, Essex  farmer David Eagle has turned to an unusual crop, sea buckthorn. This spiny shrub with  
**[0:16:28-0:16:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:16:28):**  bright orange berries is popular in other parts of the world but still fairly unknown  in the UK. That's despite a wide range of health benefits and versatility. Its bark  and berries can be used in food, drinks, cosmetics and natural remedies. Here, David and his  son Ben explain why they decided to take a step into the unknown, relatively speaking,  and started cultivating sea buckthorn.  
**[0:16:52-0:16:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:16:52):**  David Eagle, we've been farming as a family, farming here since about the 1880s. I was  in the Middle East and basically I got the call to say, are you interested? It's a very  classic dairy farm. The milk board then went, quotas came in, milk price collapsed. We tried  to go full pedigree, we went high-level American Holstein cows, still didn't make any sense.  Finally, the cows went in 2002. At the same sort of time, there was a document issued  
**[0:17:24-0:17:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:17:24):**  by Defra regarding the withdrawal of maintenance from uneconomic sea walls, which to anybody  that doesn't live on the coast sounds completely, you know, what is all this about? But if you  live by the sea and you watch the sea going up and down, that sea wall is your life. And  because this farm is effectively a low-level farm under the sea wall, if the sea walls  go, we lose 50% of our land. The arable side had become contract farmed, so we didn't have  
**[0:17:56-0:18:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:17:56):**  any guys, we didn't have any machinery. In fact, we got two units, 600 acres, and interestingly  we got 350 acres outside the sea wall. Grandfather used to graze it, but sheep can't swim very  well so it's not really something you want to do. But the whole concept of sitting in  an era of climate change with sea level rise, with more and more surge tides, with very  much the weather is changing into extremes, meant that we had to start thinking about  
**[0:18:26-0:18:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:18:26):**  where we were going. There's also the economic factor that, as a family, we can't see how  arable farming pays. As purely commodity farming, I think if you're more specialist, if you're  organic, that's a different matter. We therefore started to look around at alternative crops.  There was a chap called Dr John French who was then at the World Crop Centre at Rital  College and he bought down a book of alternative crops. Seabuckthorn came in under the berry  
**[0:18:53-0:19:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:18:53):**  crops and its principal interest for me at the time was the fact that it's used in food,  drink, pharmaceuticals and natural cosmetics, and veterinary products as well, so it's got  a wide range of market. Its principal crop is the berry, but it's also the leaf, and  even the bark has got some really interesting chemicals in it for pharmaceuticals. So as  a whole plant, it's got a lot of interest. The fact that also it was farmed in 40 different  
**[0:19:23-0:19:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:19:23):**  countries meant that there was knowledge about it. The fact that there isn't a market, actually  at that time I thought, well, you create a market. The model I was looking at was thinking  actually hemp was a crop which has been developed in East Anglia, has done really, really well,  it was effectively driven by a farmer for 20 years. It took him 20 years to bring that  crop to market. And that's how I probably see Seabuckthorn being. It just so happened  
**[0:19:50-0:19:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:19:50):**  that at that year, 2009, the International Seabuckthorn Conference was in Siberia at  Barnow. It was a week-long conference and it was being run by the Lisovenko Research  Institute for Water Culture for Siberia. And it was stunning. I was sold. I was completely  head over heels in love with Seabuckthorn. We went through a very steep learning curve.  40% of the plants were lost in inverted commas in 2014 from disease. Seabuckthorn has a huge  
**[0:20:22-0:20:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:20:22):**  capacity to recover. So basically I cut the plants down to about a metre high and virtually  all of them have come back. I suppose we probably lost about 10% of the stock that went in.  We got over the disease issue, which is a fungal issue, by using compost tea. Using  it through 2015 was a slightly tentative process and gradually came to the conclusion that  the plants need to be sprayed every month. So now they are sprayed from February, which  
**[0:20:53-0:20:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:20:53):**  is when the plants start to come into bud or break bud, right the way through to harvest.  Our harvest is in July and then we'll start spraying again probably a month after harvest.  So we're organic. In the winter the plants get green waste compost and the combination  of the compost with our soil over a period of years hopefully will start to lighten it  up. One of the issues about living on the coast is effectively your soil is clay. The  
**[0:21:22-0:21:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:21:22):**  exact opposite of what Seabuckthorn wants. But part of the issue about Seabuckthorn is  that it seems to have a capacity to adapt to almost any situation. It grows in sand,  it grows in the deep Siberian black soils and it's growing in clay here. And I suppose  one of the weirdest things that came out of one of the conferences was the Chinese spread  Seabuckthorn seed by helicopter over sandstone in order to get the Seabuckthorn to start  
**[0:21:51-0:21:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:21:51):**  to rejuvenate soils in those sort of environments. So it is the most amazing plant. The principal  problem we've had was with Corvids, which is around here for some reason on the coast  Jackdaws have bred phenomenally. Rooks are another problem. They are a highly intelligent  bird. They were stealing them dawn and dusk. Traditionally with cherries and that sort  of thing you put a net over the top. It has been a real trial getting those poles in and  
**[0:22:20-0:22:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:22:20):**  the wires up. And as you can see the nets aren't up yet. Back in February this year  I was at a show and the people that actually make our compost tea brewer also market an  audio bird scaring system. It ran for a week and it drove every Corvid from this farm.  This machine can speak 10 different bird languages and it broadcasts distress calls. And after  three or four days of this we switched the machine off and they haven't come back. From  
**[0:22:52-0:22:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:22:52):**  my perspective this year which is our first crop we are looking at getting it into the  London market really just as a trial. Getting people to just try the taste, play with it,  see what they feel they can do with it. I see Seabuckthorn as I said before as a 20  year project. Ten years to get the agronomy right, ten years to build the market. I feel  the UK is up for grabs. We are living in a population which is ageing. Seabuckthorn is  
**[0:23:18-0:23:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:23:18):**  associated with anti-ageing, it's associated with skin diseases, it's associated with gastric  ulcers. I think it does things for stamina. As a health product it's got great things  going for it. I'm Ben Eagle. I've recently come back to help Dad on the farm here in  Essex. I was previously working in the conservation sector in the West of England which is a role  I miss but it's a very exciting time to be coming back to the business as well in terms  
**[0:23:46-0:23:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:23:46):**  of helping to shape what's happening moving forward. The North Sea is very much at the  forefront of our thinking and it's a matter of rather than working against it which is  possibly the tie that we've taken for the past 50 or so years. We're now moving towards  a system of trying to think of ways that we can work with it and use it as an asset. About  50% of the farm is at long term risk from flooding from the sea and so we have to come  
**[0:24:15-0:24:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:24:15):**  up with a system where we can work around that. We could maintain all of our sea walls,  we could build up our sea walls or we could breach the line. So on a small area of the  farm we've breached a 25 metre section of the wall and that is flooded into a 3 hectare  marshland which was a very poor grazing marsh before. That is managed in a partnership agreement  with Natural England on a 20 year basis so we're getting payments for that 20 year period  
**[0:24:46-0:24:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:24:46):**  and it has completely transformed the landscape more than we could ever have imagined in terms  of the bird life that is coming in. It is returning to that old Essex coastal landscape.  It's been enlightening for us and it's been an opportunity that came along that we embraced  but critically it has a more serious purpose which is to reduce the pressure on our other  walls, reduce that pressure so it enables us to then strengthen other parts of the wall.  
**[0:25:14-0:25:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:25:14):**  So we're managing our wall in context. 20 years in farming isn't a very long time and  when you're doing something completely new you need to accept that it's probably a 2,  3 generation project. We have the benefit that there are other sides of the business.  It means that we can experiment. We've moved from a base of absolutely nothing at all with  very very little knowledge of this plant to a stage where we now have a viable crop. We're  
**[0:25:48-0:25:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:25:48):**  looking at a harvest for this year with a growing market. I think certainly that over  the next few years we are going to see great changes both from a policy point of view and  from a technology point of view and from a manpower point of view as well. From a small  coastal farm perspective those farms that really embrace the opportunities that we can  grasp in terms of direct marketing, in terms of innovative diversification schemes, in  
**[0:26:20-0:26:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:26:20):**  terms of innovative crops, in terms of new technologies, it's about moving forward and  I think the fact that everything is moving so quickly now seems a bit daunting but farmers  are really resilient. Of any group of people, of any sector, there isn't one that is more  up to the challenges that we face and we will do it. We need to stick up for ourselves,  we need to make sure that we create a framework that we can survive and work in for the future.  
**[0:26:49-0:26:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:26:49):**  For more on the plant's fascinating history and properties you can check out the bonus  audio on our SoundCloud. We call these shorts so if you want to hear a bit more about a  story we featured on here then shorts are the place to look.  It's lovely to have two generations of the same farming family on the show and this got  me thinking this is not the first time that we've had two generations on the same show.  
**[0:27:15-0:27:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:27:15):**  Abby first off we've had your dad and Nigel obviously we've had Nigel's mum has been  on a few times. In fact Nigel's whole family were on the show.  And then we also had Teddy and Freddie Brunn talking about the sustainable forest management  they do over in Norfolk. I don't know if we have anyone else.  But I think it's pretty good going and it's a really nice thing to see isn't it?  
**[0:27:41-0:27:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:27:41):**  Yeah really nice and I guess in a way it's one of the issues that's very present in the  farming world is how is the next generation going to take on farming here on out.  That's really a lot of what we're doing isn't it? We're talking to lots of people who are  picking up the tractor. Yeah people who are part of that transition.  Inspired by Farmerama six months ago Ben Eagle also started making a podcast called Meet  
**[0:28:17-0:28:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:28:17):**  the Farmers. This is a series looking at the day to day realities of running a farm in  the UK. So far so Farmerama but it's not exactly the same. Ben takes one farm per episode and  really gets into the detail about what makes the business and people tick. We are keen  to support what he's doing and as an introduction he's let us share a short edit from a recent  episode. As this is Farmerama we've chosen Ben talking  
**[0:28:44-0:28:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:28:44):**  to his guests about several things close to our hearts. Here David Lord tells Ben about  how he's ended up an avid advocate for no-till methods and what he does in the way of experimentation  to work out whether he's on the right path. Hello and welcome to this episode of Meet  the Farmers and I am at Earlswall Farm near Claxton-on-Sea with David Lord who is an arable  farmer and contractor. So David thank you for speaking to me today.  
**[0:29:21-0:29:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:29:21):**  You're very welcome. Can you start by describing the farm and your business?  We're a bit of a mixed group of soils. We've got some light land that we grow some potatoes  and onions on but the majority of our land is quite heavy and we're finding as time went  on it was just getting increasingly hard to work the land and achieve what we wanted to  do in a sustainable way. When we looked at it we're actually losing organic matter from  
**[0:29:44-0:29:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:29:44):**  our soils which was the major problem which was making them so hard to work. That highlighted  to me that we needed to change our system which kind of brings us up to the point we're  at now. When did you start thinking in terms of no-till?  You could call it a perfect storm I suppose. Typical for an Essex farm on heavy land we  were getting quite a bad blackgrass problem. It's a weed that's been around for a long  
**[0:30:05-0:30:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:30:05):**  time but as time has gone on nature can get round most things that you tend to throw at  it. The weed itself was becoming resistant to many of the chemicals we're trying to use  to control it to the point now that the only chemical we can really rely on truly is glyphosate  and obviously you can't put glyphosate on a crop that's growing so you need to integrate  that into your cropping system. The only way you can really do that is by having spring  
**[0:30:27-0:30:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:30:27):**  cropping and the only way you can really have spring cropping on heavy land is to have something  growing on the land in the autumn and through the winter to keep the land structured and  growing keep the soil biology going. So the whole thing that the blackgrass and having  spring cropping that was sort of our main driver and then along with that is that actually  it's a lower cost, lower input way of farming. What soil tests and testing are you carrying  
**[0:30:53-0:30:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:30:53):**  out? Are you for example looking at how biological activity is being enhanced? I'm quite keen  on quantifying what we're doing and seeing the changes as we go along. So we've done  soil organic matter tests, done a cation exchange capacity which basically is just the nutrient  holding capacity of the soil and we've also done some micronutrient levels as well and  then we can monitor that as we go along and see the changes. A lot of our land here at  
**[0:31:20-0:31:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:31:20):**  home we're about 4.5-5% organic matter which is nationally quite high anyway. Again I was  saying earlier that's down to a history of muck and livestock but on the other farm we've  got organic matters down to 1.5% so it will be really interesting to see how that changes  and how quickly it changes. How many harvests have to go past before you can make a definitive  choice of whether you're doing the right thing? Well with the harvest we've just had we had  
**[0:31:47-0:31:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:31:47):**  one field of wheat which was after rape and we conventionally drilled half of it which  involved a disc tine cultivator and then a disc drill and the other half we put a cover  crop in and then drilled it with a cross slot. Drilled the same day, same seed rape and when  we came to harvest there were our two best bits of wheat on the whole farm. The direct  drill bit was ever so slightly higher yielding than the other one but really statistically  
**[0:32:14-0:32:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:32:14):**  there was no difference and the only other interesting point was the protein was higher  on the direct drilled one but it wasn't a proper trial so you can't really draw a definitive  conclusion from that but to me if we can maintain yields and reduce our reliance on inputs and  at the same time improve soil health then I think that's a win. Is the no-till community  quite close? It is, yeah. I've met a lot of really good interesting people, learned an  
**[0:32:40-0:32:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:32:40):**  awful lot and made a few friends. We all have different ideas about what's right and what's  wrong. We have a lot of different discussions. Technology keeps us together, we're quite  a close community on Twitter and we have a few WhatsApp groups and things where all the  drill owners get together and discuss different things that we're doing and then there's the  global side of that drill as well. They do a two-yearly conference which goes around  
**[0:33:04-0:33:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:33:04):**  the world and they came to this country in the summer last year and I met some farmers  from America and New Zealand and Australia and yeah all over the place and really interesting  seeing the challenges they have compared to what we have. What would you say to sceptics?  Come and have a look. Yeah, I mean we're pretty open about what we're doing. You know it's  really interesting getting down and learning about your soils and seeing how they change  
**[0:33:27-0:33:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:33:27):**  and seeing the life that's there and because I believe it's right and it feels right you  know it's quite a nice experience sharing that with people. That was Ben Eagle talking  to farmer David Lord for the Meet the Farmers podcast. You can find the rest of that episode  on iTunes and maybe that's the same place you listen to Farmerama? On that note, if  you do listen to us on iTunes we would really really appreciate if you could write us a  
**[0:33:51-0:33:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:33:51):**  review. It really makes it all worth it when we hear from you. Or email us, send us a message  on Facebook, give us a call. Farmerama is always a group effort. For this episode as  well as Abby and I we've had the support of Katie Revel who for the last few months has  been absolutely indispensable. She's essentially produced this show with us but she's in Glasgow  so she's not able to join us in the studio. Also thanks to Ben for being happy to share  
**[0:34:27-0:34:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:34:27):**  his show and to Richard who's been helping us with social media and of course all of  our guests and every one of you for listening. And finally a special thanks to Gala, Tom  and Johnny who all emailed us or got in touch some way with feedback and kind thoughts.  We're looking forward to being back again next month for what will be our two year anniversary.  Woo! So exciting! And we'll have some special things in the pipeline so do listen in. Not  
**[0:34:57-0:35:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-23#t=0:34:57):**  to be revealed yet Joe. Okay, see ya. Toodle-oo!  