### Farmerama  (2017-49-26)
**[0:00:00-0:00:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:00:00):**  My vision for the future is to see fields of flowers.  Wherever I drive through agricultural land in the pastures I want to see, you know, meadows,  how they used to be just full of flowers, and also in the crops.  If you're looking at it from a perspective of grazing animals, it's far healthier for livestock  to have a big range of plants to choose from, and it's healthier for our soils.  
**[0:00:26-0:00:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:00:26):**  The microbes in the soil respond to diversity in the same way that the animals respond to diversity.  And so it's going to be an absolute win-win situation,  and aesthetically pleasing for anyone driving through the countryside.  That was Dr Christine Jones painting a diverse and vital vision for the future of farming.  You'll be hearing more from her later in the show.  
**[0:00:52-0:00:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:00:52):**  Welcome back to Farmerama.  This month we hear from across the pond how close connections between farmers and cooks  are giving birth to new dishes and revenue streams.  We get to the bottom of carbon cycles and learn what it really takes to build humus.  Bees buzz happily as they're allowed to express their characteristics in alternative beekeeping methods.  
**[0:01:15-0:01:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:01:15):**  And finally, you're invited to get involved in a citizen science project  that celebrates allotments and home-grown veg.  We also welcome Katie Revel as our co-host on the show today.  She's been helping to produce Farmerama with us for a good few months now,  so we're excited to have her on the show.  
**[0:01:33-0:01:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:01:33):**  It's a pleasure to be here.  Earlier this year, Abbey Glencross caught up with Adam Kay,  Head of Culinary Affairs at Blue Hill in New York City.  She was in the area visiting its sister restaurant and farm, Stone Barns.  Adam tells us how he ended up at Blue Hill.  
**[0:01:51-0:01:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:01:51):**  I was cooking at a restaurant down in Tribeca, in Manhattan,  and I had been there for a while and told the chef I was interested in moving on.  He was very supportive and I told him a bunch of places I was interested in trailing at,  and he said, oh, you've got to go and try this new place.  This is in 2000.  
**[0:02:09-0:02:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:02:09):**  You've got to go and try this new place that's just opened up in the West Village.  It's called Blue Hill.  It's this young chef, Dan Barber, he opened it up with his brother and sister-in-law.  You know, Blue Hill had just opened a few months before,  so I'd never heard of Blue Hill.  
**[0:02:23-0:02:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:02:23):**  I called up Dan, I got his name, called him up, asked him if I could come and trail,  and the rest is history.  I was hired as the meat cook at Blue Hill New York,  and then worked my way through the kitchen there,  and then helped open Stone Barns, and then have been based up here since then.  
**[0:02:38-0:02:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:02:38):**  It is so much more than a restaurant.  I think what is so unique about what we do here is sort of this,  obviously is the collaboration between us and the farms,  both Stone Barns, but Blue Hill Farm up in Massachusetts,  the namesake of the restaurant, and so many other farms that we work with,  
**[0:02:54-0:02:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:02:54):**  a sort of sense of adventure and experimentation.  Yeah, we're just up for anything,  and there's sort of nothing beyond the pale for us in terms of ingredients.  And, you know, when we find a farmer or a breeder or whoever it is that we're working with  who sort of wants to go down the road with us,  
**[0:03:12-0:03:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:03:12):**  like that to us is just so exciting.  And then for us to be able to have the freedom through not having a menu here,  and sort of the style of service that we do to be able to sort of tell those stories.  You know, we really ask a lot of our cooks, and we ask them, you know, they do farm chores,  they sit in on long meetings with farmers,  
**[0:03:32-0:03:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:03:32):**  they sit in with long meetings with seed breeders,  we give them readings to do, I guess most restaurants don't expect that of a cook.  And I think we're sort of known for that now,  so we're attracting great young people who are into that.  And there are a lot of restaurants around the world that I think are showing this,  
**[0:03:52-0:03:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:03:52):**  that this idea of what a cook is is a lot more than the vocation of simply cooking food  and feeding people that cooks as thinkers and cooks as activists.  And you're getting a lot more than just a culinary education,  or it's a redefining what a culinary education is.  And it's also just walking out in the field and seeing things which are just like mind-blowingly beautiful.  
**[0:04:14-0:04:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:04:14):**  I don't know the name of it, I forget because there's a lot of varieties.  You look out here at the window, there's the rose of lettuce.  There's a, I think it's the second row, and it's a red leaf lettuce.  It looks like a starfish, sea anemone.  It's the most beautiful, you look at it and it's like,  
**[0:04:33-0:04:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:04:33):**  and I grow lettuce in my home, and it's very nice lettuce,  but this is like, I mean you just realize what great farming is.  And it is truly one of the most stunning things I've ever seen.  And this is coming out of nature. It is so beautiful.  And I've been working here since the day we opened Stone Barns,  
**[0:04:53-0:04:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:04:53):**  and I still walk into the field, and they just keep on upping the ante.  You may remember back in episode 21, we chatted to Root to Fruit chef, Tom Hunt,  about his clover dish for the Blue Hill Wasted pop-up in London.  Well, Adam was there as well.  He told us about some of the rather exciting learnings from that short stint,  
**[0:05:16-0:05:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:05:16):**  probing how farmers and chefs can work together to reap more from the farm here in the UK.  The genesis of these ideas really have been a part of Blue Hill's cooking for a while now.  In a lot of ways, it's kind of very much a part of like, you could sort of say,  like an extension of Dan's theories that he writes about in the third plate.  And they're things we'd sort of be messing around with and exploring,  
**[0:05:42-0:05:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:05:42):**  especially here on the farm, and looking at the farm as sort of a more,  in a more holistic kind of a way, and seeing, you know, what are we not tapping into  that we could be in terms of finding interesting stuff to work with in the menu  in terms of creating additional revenue for the farm, etc., etc.  So it's like being this thing that we just keep building on.  
**[0:06:00-0:06:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:06:00):**  And I think London was a great opportunity to sort of take what we'd learned  and bring it to a new context with new suppliers.  I mean, that was the big challenge in London, you know.  In New York, we had 15 years' worth of relationships that we could fall back on.  We didn't have that in London.  
**[0:06:17-0:06:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:06:17):**  It wasn't even reinventing the wheel. We had to invent the wheel.  We could have very easily just wholesale bought over the wasted New York menu,  and probably would have done quite well.  But we wanted to do something that spoke to the British food scene,  that spoke to the British agricultural scene.  
**[0:06:33-0:06:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:06:33):**  And then we certainly learned things.  I mean, you know, certain agricultural things that we don't,  certainly not here in Hudson Valley,  things that we wouldn't get access to that we got access to there  that has certainly piqued our interest that we would probably want to try and seek out here.  
**[0:06:46-0:06:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:06:46):**  I was thinking of a guy, he's a rapeseed oil producer,  and we were working with his, with the rape greens,  which we'd never worked with before.  So I don't know how many hundreds and thousands of acres of rape is planted in the UK.  It's pretty huge.  
**[0:07:04-0:07:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:07:04):**  You can actually get two harvests out of that plant.  You can get two revenue streams out of that.  You can get the seeds for the oil,  but you can actually do a first cutting of the plant.  It's a mustard. It looks like broccoli rot.  
**[0:07:17-0:07:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:07:17):**  You know, it's unbelievably delicious.  I remember this guy, look at his name, what's his name?  Oscar, Oscar Harling from Dutchess Rapeseed Oil.  This guy was unbelievable.  Firstly, his rapeseed oil was incredible.  
**[0:07:30-0:07:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:07:30):**  He was introduced to us by one of our cooks in London who had actually been a star here.  I remember Oscar speaking to the staff one day before service,  and he was explaining that actually it's beneficial to the plant to do that first harvest  because it actually stimulates root growth and sort of a more vibrant plant.  And then you still, if you do it early enough in the spring,  
**[0:07:50-0:07:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:07:50):**  you still get a great seed harvest to do your oil pressing.  So stuff like that was certainly, that was a great thing that I know we,  you know, for spring of next year, winter into spring of next year.  They grow a lot of rapeseed in Canada.  Maybe we could find a supplier closer.  
**[0:08:07-0:08:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:08:07):**  Anyway, that was a cool thing.  Ben McKinnon at E5.  I felt like from the minute I met Ben, like we were like E5 and Blue Hill,  or, you know, brothers from another mother kind of a thing,  like very much kindred spirits and the stuff that they came up with,  
**[0:08:21-0:08:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:08:21):**  they really just sort of took the ball and ran with it in a very inspiring way.  And they seem to be really inspired by what we did.  And I guess they're sort of now have started to incorporate a lot of the things  that they developed for the pop-up into their production in their retail store.  Thank you to Adam and thanks to E5 Bakehouse.  
**[0:08:40-0:08:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:08:40):**  We're really grateful to be supported by E5.  They've just harvested their lisp-run heritage wheat,  which was grown over at Duchess Farms in Hertfordshire.  So if you've been waiting to try a loaf, then make sure you drop by soon.  In the next month or two, after the grain has rested a bit,  
**[0:08:55-0:09:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:08:55):**  they'll be freshly milling this heritage grain for their Hackney Wild and Wholemeal Loaves.  Back at the end of June, we headed to Groundswell Conference  at John Cherry's farm in Hertfordshire.  We got to chat internationally renowned and highly respected  ground cover and soils ecologist, Dr Christine Jones.  
**[0:09:12-0:09:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:09:12):**  Her years of experience mean that she has a crystal clear understanding  of the way carbon cycles through our soils  and the best way to nurture healthy plants and ecosystems.  She starts by telling us how she's been working with the soil  and how she's been working with the soil.  
**[0:09:27-0:09:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:09:27):**  Soil, as we know it, like fertile topsoil,  the kind of soil that we want to use to grow crops and vegetables and pastures,  is weathered rock materials like sand, silt and clay.  It's going to depend on what the parent material was  as to what the texture of the resulting soil is.  
**[0:09:44-0:09:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:09:44):**  But that material has to have been in contact with plant roots  in order for fertile topsoil to form.  Plants are the only things that can form topsoil.  If you go to the soil, you can see that the topsoil is very, very, very,  very well formed topsoil.  
**[0:09:58-0:10:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:09:58):**  If you go to somewhere in the world where there are no plants,  if it's too hot, too cold, too dry, too high, too whatever,  go to the top of a mountain where there's no plants growing,  go out into the desert where there's no plants growing,  there won't be any soil there.  
**[0:10:09-0:10:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:10:09):**  You'll find rocks and you'll find sand and other things like that,  but you'll never find fertile topsoil.  So we need to think about why are plant roots important?  Well, plant roots are important because they're connected to the other half  of the plant, which is the top bit that we see  
**[0:10:24-0:10:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:10:24):**  across fields that's got green leaves and it's photosynthesizing and it's a  conduit for energy it's transferring sunlight energy into the soil through  the plant roots. So we have photosynthesis taking place in the leaves  which is converting light energy into biochemical energy in the form of  sugars and those sugars are dissolved in the sap of the plant so I call that  
**[0:10:45-0:10:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:10:45):**  liquid carbon that's how the plant moves that energy around is just as dissolved  carbon in the sap. Some of its used to build the plant to make the leaves to  make the roots but sometimes you know anything from 20% to 50 or sometimes  even 80% in harsh conditions will be exuded from the roots out into the soil  to feed the microbes that actually support the plant. So in harsher  
**[0:11:09-0:11:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:11:09):**  environments we find that there's far more carbon exuded from the roots  because the plant depends more on the microbes under those conditions to keep  it alive and in turn the microbes that are receiving their carbon their energy  from the plant they want to keep the host plant alive as well because if the  plant dies then they die because their only source of energy is carbon coming  
**[0:11:31-0:11:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:11:31):**  out of the roots of the plant so it's a mutually symbiotic relationship of the  plants and the microbes in the soil working together feeding each other  basically the plants feeding the microbes with it providing energy in the  form of carbon compounds and in return the microbes are providing minerals and  trisomates to the plant that it's not able to obtain itself. One thing I  
**[0:11:51-0:11:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:11:51):**  certainly hadn't understood before we talked to Christine was the two methods  of carbon transfer through the soil. Christine explained that both the  decomposition pathway and the liquid carbon pathway are important means for  carbon to be transferred through plants and soils but Christine pointed out that  we pay very little attention to the liquid carbon pathway despite the fact  
**[0:12:12-0:12:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:12:12):**  that it's crucial to building soil structure. It's also the only way we can  store carbon in our soils long term by building up humus. So we have two forms  of carbon in the soil one is organic matter which is just decomposing you  know plant materials roots and manures and things like that and the other one  is carbon that's been formed through the liquid carbon pathway which has been  
**[0:12:34-0:12:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:12:34):**  polymerized by microbes in the soil to form this really stable complex  molecules that we call humus and this there's a big difference between humus  and organic matter but unfortunately those two terms tend to be used  interchangeably. So organic carbon or organic matter is as I said a moment ago  it's just plant materials or animal manures or something that are  
**[0:12:56-0:13:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:12:56):**  decomposing in the soil there's a lot of microbes involved in that decomposition  processes invertebrates as well and earthworms and all of the things that we  tend to just call collectively the soil food web but the end point of that  process is carbon dioxide. Organic matter breaks down to carbon dioxide and then  it's not there anymore it's no longer in the soil you can keep on adding it which  
**[0:13:21-0:13:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:13:21):**  is great and you keep feeding the soil food web but all of the processes that  are associated with the decomposition of organic matter happen near the surface  of the soil. We need to have organic matter on the surface of the soil but  it's not really doing anything for improving the function of the soil at  depth so we want to increase soil carbon for all of the reasons that you know it  
**[0:13:42-0:13:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:13:42):**  improves the nutritional status of plants that improves soil structure it  improves the way water moves through the soil profile we don't want to have that  just confined to the top couple of inches or the top couple of centimeters  of soil we want that you know 30 centimeters down and 60 centimeters down  and a meter down so that we really have water penetrating deeply into the soil  
**[0:14:03-0:14:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:14:03):**  profile. So the decomposition pathway the end point of that is carbon dioxide and  the end point of the liquid carbon pathway is the formation of humus which  has a high it's a colloid and has a very high cation exchange capacity so it's  great for holding nutrients in the soil and they can all be released for plants  to plants through ion exchange and it's got very high water holding capacity it  
**[0:14:26-0:14:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:14:26):**  improves soil structure and you know basically that that is the substance  that's the Holy Grail for soil and the more humus you have in soil the more  productive the land is going to be and the more profitable it's going to be for  the farmer as well because when you have a lot of humus in the soil and you have  the microbes that form that are also the ones that are important for transporting  
**[0:14:46-0:14:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:14:46):**  trace elements to plants. Plants will be brixing at a higher level they'll have  more sugar in their leaves they'll have more minerals and trace elements in  their leaves they're going to be immune to insect attack and immune to diseases  you won't need to use fungicides or insecticides I mean I can understand why  farmers use them when they need to we need to get to a situation where it's  
**[0:15:06-0:15:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:15:06):**  not even an issue anymore there is no insect attack there are no fungal  pathogens really the plants need to be stronger and the great thing about it is  that the humification process is all part and parcel of the same process that  transfers trace elements and minerals into plants because it's that exchange  of carbon when you have sugars coming out of plant roots that's used for  
**[0:15:28-0:15:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:15:28):**  making humus you also have the trace elements and the minerals going in the  other direction it's an exchange process. The decomposition pathway is really well  known but the liquid carbon pathway is less well known and we need to sort of  maybe put a bit more emphasis on that and understand not only how to manage  plants so that they have deep roots but also how to incorporate a lot of  
**[0:15:51-0:15:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:15:51):**  diversity into our crops and pastures so that we have lots of different kinds of  roots in the soil that will support the great diversity of functional groups of  microbes all of which work together the more diversity we get in there the more  synergism and the mutualism and it really it's like one and one equals four  when you get when you get a lot of diversity in there and that's important  
**[0:16:12-0:16:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:16:12):**  for the liquid carbon pathway as well.  One of the interesting things that the research into cover crops is showing  that and no one's really sure why but when you have more than eight different  species mixed in together and particularly if you have like four  functional groups in there it just seems to be like some kind of synergism kicks  
**[0:16:39-0:16:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:16:39):**  in and it starts to restore soil far more quickly than you can do with just a  two-way mix or a three-way mix or something like that. I don't know why  that number is important but I mean anything over eight you know can be eight  ten twelve twenty in terms of our cover crops I don't know what it is about eight  that's magical but it just seems to be like there's been English research on  
**[0:17:03-0:17:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:17:03):**  that it's been German research on that and Canadian research on that and that  number keeps coming up and then what they're finding is that if you do have  more than eight in a mix it's better than having 200 kilos per hectare of  nitrogen so where there's been multi-factorial experiments with like  zero one hundred and two hundred kilos per hectare of nitrogen and then one two  
**[0:17:27-0:17:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:17:27):**  four eight and sixteen species in a mix they've found that eight or sixteen  species with zero nitrogen is more productive than one or two species with  200 kilos per hectare of nitrogen so diversity definitely replaces fertilizer  and they don't have to even be legumes as long as they're different plant  families so you don't want to have eight species of grass for example as long as  
**[0:17:53-0:17:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:17:53):**  you've got diversity you don't need to use fertilizer and then when you stop  using fertilizer that's just the magical thing because it's the fertilizer often  that causes the issues with the fungi and the insect attacks because if plants  are high in nitrates their tissues aren't strong their cells aren't strong  they haven't got complex carbohydrates and proteins and things in them and  
**[0:18:14-0:18:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:18:14):**  they're just absolute heaven as far as insects are concerned so insect attack  of itself is an indicator that the soil is not healthy and the plants aren't  healthy so if we all plant at least eight species in our cover crop or  companion plantings then our soils will build good structure much more quickly  leading to healthier plants and less need for inputs we're big fans of Dr.  
**[0:18:39-0:18:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:18:39):**  Christine Jones and so we will have more from her next month as she tells us some  of the theory behind building soil structure we'll give you a hint it all  comes down to a whole lot of fungi love  now from soils and plants to the wild world of insects that live in harmony  with them Mariana Lanzettl explores an alternative view of beekeeping with  
**[0:19:02-0:19:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:19:02):**  molecular biologist and beekeeping fanatic Johannes Wirtz he's currently  investigating methods that do not use chemical attacks against the Varroa  mite which is proving so devastating to honeybees all over the world but first a  bit of jargon busting we weren't familiar with the intricacies of  beekeeping so we thought you might want some help too a swarm swarming is the  
**[0:19:26-0:19:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:19:26):**  process by which a new honeybee colony is formed when the queen bee leaves the  colony with a large group of worker bees a brood this is basically the little  honeybee larvae foul brood this is a bacterial disease that affects the  little honeybees the brood  My name is Johannes Wirtz I am member of the board of Melifera and responsible  
**[0:20:01-0:20:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:20:01):**  for research in our apiary the most fundamental difference is that we try to  approach our colonies and hives with respect and I dare say with love beside  of that we have a number of principles that make us quite a strong distinction  with respect to conventional beekeeping the first one is we do colony  reproduction only when the colony wants to swarm second our combs are made  
**[0:20:36-0:20:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:20:36):**  naturally that means bees do them themselves and third we design to  artificial queen breeding and now in conventional beekeeping you know you  have colony production without swarming process you do make let's make the combs  with foundations and artificial queen breeding is the methods of choice why do  you think that's a good approach why would any anybody keeping bees choose  
**[0:21:11-0:21:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:21:11):**  that method over the conventional beekeeping interestingly enough we have  a number of studies that show that one of the most important ways for bee  health is no brood for a certain period and colony production in the swarming  process means all the unit is that you form have for a longer or shorter time a  brood less period second it is known that sweating wax is another method to  
**[0:21:46-0:21:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:21:46):**  get rid of diseases like American foul brood or European foul brood the third  no artificial queen breeding today we have ample evidence that locally  adapted colonies cope better with diseases bring in more honey build fast  combs and have a stronger immune system so I believe with all these methods we  use have been using for decades it is very clear that they are essential for  
**[0:22:21-0:22:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:22:21):**  bee health when you as a natural beekeeper approach a hive look into a  hive what is it that you see an experience for me the very important  aspect is that I try to grasp the colony as a whole and in this attempt all the  bees be it worker bee be it Queen or be it drone is kind of an organ of the  hive second thing is I would like to fulfill or satisfy the demands of the  
**[0:22:58-0:23:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:22:58):**  colony and so in this way I try really to make it possible that they can  express basic behaviors basic activities and swarming conformation and natural  mating of the Queen belongs to these basic facts or basic elements what you  see the future basically in at least some of the beekeepers or a certain  percentage of the beekeepers going into the natural beekeeping direction in a  
**[0:23:29-0:23:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:23:29):**  short term I think no and the reason for this is that beside beekeeping practice  we have also a difficult situation with respect to flower abundance and  diversity and we also have difficulties and problems with respect to pesticides  but for sure somebody who starts to work with being a respectful and I should say  responsible way will realize that these two other aspects also belong to be  
**[0:24:00-0:24:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:24:00):**  else and I have to impression in a certain way that these are the trend  beekeepers can become the trendsetter for a healthy environment more flowers  less pesticide in this respect I would say in middle terms they really  contribute to a better health and to a better situation for honeybee and all  the pollinators if you do not want to produce maximal yields of honey this is  
**[0:24:26-0:24:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:24:26):**  the way to go and it is an easy method and it is a simple method and it is an  inexpensive method I would like that many people would be able to see this  warming process it's a moment of joy it's an amazing impression this dancing  cloud in the sky there is warmth and beside movement there is a scent and  whenever this swarm comes in a cluster it is the least aggressive condition or  
**[0:24:59-0:25:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:24:59):**  in the life of a colony you can touch it you can put your hands through nothing  happens so I don't see where the danger of a swarm could be expect we think that  it must be dangerous so it basically is the birth of a new colony yes exactly  it's a death of the old one the birth of the new one we've seen that chefs are  working closer with farmers well it seems beekeepers are doing the same  
**[0:25:29-0:25:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:25:29):**  we've seen bee boxes on a few farms we visited recently in a way it would make  sense to have bee boxes on all farms that's another form of diversification  part of a multi-layered farm and a very clear business opportunity for a local  entrepreneur  and now for a few words from Rosco Blevins we met him at soil hack he's  
**[0:25:54-0:25:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:25:54):**  spreading the word about the my harvest project if you're growing food to feed  yourself your family your neighbors you can get involved Rosco started by  telling us about what he grows I've got a back garden which I share with some of  my housemates and we've got a greenhouse there which we mostly fill with salads  and leafy stuff and herbs of a house and also got an allotment around the corner  
**[0:26:15-0:26:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:26:15):**  where we get some of the bigger yields from I work on my harvest project at the  University of Sheffield and I'm very enthusiastic about soil and what people  can grow in their back gardens so my harvest is a citizen science project  which is encouraging members of the public who grow food in their allotments  or back gardens or in a window boxes or in schools to submit data about what  
**[0:26:37-0:26:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:26:37):**  they're harvesting so you can get an idea of how much food is being produced  around the country by individual members of the public the aim is to get an  estimate of how much food is being produced nationally by non-commercial  growers just members of the public like you and me to get an idea of how that  contributes to our national food security and then from that we should be  
**[0:26:57-0:27:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:26:57):**  able to work out how much we could be growing if we had more space for  allotments and growing food currently a lot of our estimates about how much food  is being produced and how much food is available are just based on large-scale  commercial agriculture and actually there's a huge amount of food is being  produced by members of the public in your back garden in allotments and this isn't  
**[0:27:16-0:27:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:27:16):**  normally taken into account so you saw this project is going to be drawing a  line like to show you how important that contribution is to the health of a  population and how much food is being produced from that historically it's  very common to grow a lot of your own food in your back garden and say in allotments  historically the movement was much bigger and that's sort of waxed and  
**[0:27:36-0:27:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:27:36):**  waned over the last couple of centuries but the last time there's an actual  estimate of food production in the UK was after World War two when there's the  Dig for Victory campaign and I estimate that 10% of the country's fruits and  veg came from allotments which was 1% of the land which is pretty impressive but  since then there's been no estimate or no idea of how much people are producing  
**[0:27:58-0:28:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:27:58):**  so we're hoping to be the next study to assess that. Any farmers who grow  commercially if you have a veg patch in your back garden if you have a small  plot which you grow food for your house in as well we'd love to hear about that  data and all of this is also linked to linking it to location and looking at  soil type and soil quality so Mike from this be able to get an idea of what grows  
**[0:28:16-0:28:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:28:16):**  best in different places. What we're doing here feels important for everyone  whether you're an allotment holder you grow in your back garden or whether you're a  commercial farmer of arable crops or multicultural livestock whatever it feels  like this is actually it's all part of the same thing of looking into how much  we're producing as a country and how we can be sustained when doing that in the  
**[0:28:34-0:28:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:28:34):**  future and also just generating more attention to it so members of the public  and everyone has more of an idea where their food comes from be it from  themselves or be it from farmers down the road or someone on the other side of  the world is getting people aware of where their food comes from, getting more  attention to that area and why it's so important. We're especially interested in  
**[0:28:55-0:28:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:28:55):**  this project because it highlights an aspect of our food sovereignty that as  Roscoe pointed out is often overlooked when it comes to academic research and  government policy and until there's more data it's likely to stay that way so  it's really exciting that Roscoe and the rest of the My Harvest team are  increasing our knowledge of the contribution made by veg patches, window  
**[0:29:16-0:29:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:29:16):**  boxes and allotments all over the country. If you have any of those things  check out My Harvest.  So thank you for listening. We hope we've left you with some helpful tips, some  inspiration or a new perspective. We'll be back next month. This show was  produced by myself, Katie Reville and Jo Barrett. Thanks to Marianne Lanzetto and  
**[0:29:42-0:29:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/25-farmerama#t=0:29:42):**  Abby Glencross for sending in recordings. See you next month. Toodle-oo!  