### Farmerama  (2017-59-26)
**[0:00:00-0:00:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:00:00):**  Welcome to another episode of Farmerama, with more voices from smaller scale farmers in  the UK and beyond.  We'll be hearing from two projects which are using film to share stories from the front  lines of farming.  We meet a sociologist who's been studying the relationship between urban and rural communities  
**[0:00:23-0:00:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:00:23):**  in Greece.  And we indulge in more Fungi Love, as we learn how they can contribute to the health of the  soil, and dramatically lower the amount of input it needs.  Sabina Helmann is a filmmaker with a longstanding interest in food.  Her first documentary explored the introduction of GM crops in northeast Germany.  
**[0:01:02-0:01:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:01:02):**  Since then, she's been involved with several other food and farming related projects, both  as a filmmaker and as a trainer, helping others to use film as a tool for communication, debate  and advocacy.  She told us about her work with small scale farmers in Malawi.  I'm coming from a background as a filmmaker, and I've been to different places where I've  
**[0:01:23-0:01:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:01:23):**  dived into community and tried to capture everyone.  So that was my approach always, and I really enjoyed it.  I also really thought a lot about the ethics of it.  And I was always a bit uncomfortable.  I always felt I'm taking something from people without giving enough back or really making  
**[0:01:40-0:01:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:01:40):**  sure they know the magnitude of giving me all their information, their emotions and  so on.  In 2013, two former colleagues approached me and asked me, Sabine, we're doing another  project in Malawi.  Would you like to come along?  
**[0:01:54-0:01:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:01:54):**  But not as a filmmaker, but actually training people to make their own films.  And I was like, oh, I have no idea how to do that.  But my one colleague said, well, there's this really great tool process called Participatory  Video and maybe you can do it.  There's a course actually coming up in Oxford, an amazing course.  
**[0:02:15-0:02:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:02:15):**  So went to the course.  Two weeks later, off to Malawi.  The project itself was an agricultural project, which was for me really interesting.  It was basically trying to adapt permaculture principles and figuring out how this can be  done in the Malawian context, in a peasant farming context where people are absolutely  
**[0:02:35-0:02:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:02:35):**  dependent on soil quality, water rainfall patterns, which are disastrous in the last  years, like super changing climate.  And people are basically dependent on a good crop.  If the crops fail, people are suffering from hunger.  Partly the issue is that many years ago, clever white people came and told them to grow maize,  
**[0:02:58-0:03:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:02:58):**  which is a water dependent crop, does well when the rain pattern is doing its job right,  but in recent years has caused a lot of trouble.  Partly also because the soils have eroded.  People grow the maize and rows that often means that the water just runs off and then  it's getting hot again and the maize dries up.  
**[0:03:18-0:03:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:03:18):**  Permaculture principles also means people were not just told, oh, this is how you do  it.  They had field workers to come to Kusamala, which is a really nice permaculture center  based in Lilongwe.  And they were trained up by local staff and were shown the techniques and they had to  
**[0:03:36-0:03:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:03:36):**  do them.  They had to dig up soil and looked at the soil and what's it composed of.  They learned about the chemistry and what makes good soil and whatnot.  They learned how to make a compost pile.  They had to do one.  
**[0:03:48-0:03:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:03:48):**  They saw the different demonstrations that were there and they had to go through the  steps so that they really understand, they can go back to the community and really show.  So that was part of the whole project where the video comes in is that we wanted to look  at once we give people the tools to film themselves, first we wanted to find out what's the general  situation on the ground.  
**[0:04:10-0:04:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:04:10):**  So we made different workshops and just wanted to make films about what they felt was important  to them.  So the second phase is the monitoring evaluation phase where we really wanted to see has it  worked, what didn't work, what issues came up and through doing it by giving people the  tools to express themselves and discuss in a group and you know not really just sending  
**[0:04:33-0:04:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:04:33):**  them a questionnaire out where they just have to tick boxes whether how many grams of rice  they harvested or maize.  But actually making a story you actually find out and it was amazing to see.  Already the first phase we called it baseline phase was really incredible because lots of  stories were done about something that we never anticipated.  
**[0:04:55-0:05:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:04:55):**  For example when we started to train farmers to use mulching, so using the old maize stalks,  old crop residues to cover the fields, they got into trouble because it is a cultural  habit often by the kids in town that go off burn the field to hunt maize.  So obviously when your field is burned and you did all this work to try to do something  slightly innovative and new you kind of lose hope.  
**[0:05:21-0:05:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:05:21):**  So one of the stories was about that and we never knew that this was actually something  we would encounter as a problem.  Another issue was with the cheeky vendors that come in and try to sell, buy the maize  from families to a really shorty price.  So basically ripping them off.  
**[0:05:40-0:05:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:05:40):**  So they made a film about it and how you can avoid these cheeky vendors coming in and you  know in the end the family could go hungry because they sold too much maize for too little  money.  All these things that we never really knew about and anticipated came through and we  had to deal with them right there and then and figure out solutions while the project  
**[0:05:59-0:06:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:05:59):**  was still ongoing.  And that's new because often times you go into a country and think, yeah it's a great  idea, this is a great solution to your problem, do it.  People do it for two or three years, funding runs out, they leave and no one does it ever  again.  
**[0:06:14-0:06:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:06:14):**  Often because it sometimes doesn't work or because cultural habits, like the burning  of the crop residue, make people stop.  So that was why we also chose the video because partly what was really great with the video,  people were so happy and themselves surprised how easy it is to make their own compost for  example.  
**[0:06:35-0:06:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:06:35):**  Oh my god, Malawian fertilizer prices with seed price and everything is such a lot of  input that a family has to put into their field and then often it doesn't work.  Actually it doesn't work if the rain stops because then the fertilizer burns the crops,  and so on.  So they ended up making films that actually showed others how to do it.  
**[0:06:54-0:07:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:06:54):**  For us it was an amazing side effect of this whole project that they decided we want to  make a film how to make proper manure from your own crops, animal manure, and how you  turn it into something that helps your plants grow.  We had a screening tour where we chose about 10 short films that the farmers found that  best showed what they want to get across.  
**[0:07:20-0:07:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:07:20):**  And we showed them to about six different communities, packed school room, packed churches.  We had a bicycle powered projector and people were glued to the screen.  They really sucked in all this information and it was for a lot of people it was like  oh my god that's my neighbor.  It wasn't some outsider telling them something, it was someone from their community showing  
**[0:07:43-0:07:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:07:43):**  this is how I make my manure and you can do it too and this is so great because.  So that was fantastic having this experience of after the screening everyone was talking  and oh can we do it.  It was absolutely great to see how a little bit of this technology, you give it into the  room and they take it up and take it out and go off and do something and use it.  
**[0:08:06-0:08:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:08:06):**  PV is so adaptable to many situations.  You use it to engage disadvantaged communities or communities that have a really powerful  message but is not heard, is not shared somewhere and it really needs to be shared.  YPV is also really powerful for types of projects where you want to reach an audience like decision  makers that might not really understand the situation on the ground.  
**[0:08:32-0:08:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:08:32):**  As people get to understand from communities what's going on they're actually much more  able to relate.  You see a person talk and do things, you really realize what their struggle is.  If your Ch'ichewa is better than mine then you'll know that these farmers are singing  about the Kusamala Permaculture Project in Doha District, Malawi and specifically about  
**[0:09:30-0:09:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:09:30):**  making compost.  Sabina was trained by Insight Share where she's now an associate.  They use participatory video with communities around the world.  If you're curious about their work check out InsightShare.org.  As someone who's done a bit of filmmaking myself something that I find really interesting  
**[0:09:48-0:09:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:09:48):**  about participatory video is that the end product, the film, it's often just a small  part of the project.  Something Sabina didn't talk about is the games and exercises she uses to bring participants  together, draw out their experiences, encourage debate and consensus building and to support  everyone to share their stories.  
**[0:10:09-0:10:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:10:09):**  PV has been used in the aftermath of conflict situations to bring opposing sides together  and even on a smaller scale like in a farming community it can be a really effective way  of highlighting and maybe even resolving stubborn long-running problems.  I think the idea of participatory podcasting is really exciting too and I think FarmRama  goes some way towards that.  
**[0:10:32-0:11:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:10:32):**  As always though we'd love your ideas about how to make it more accessible and more relevant.  Grow Observatory is an EU-wide project helping people grow food and care for their soils  using regenerative practices.  Grow Observatory also uses people's observations of soils to improve environmental monitoring  by satellites.  
**[0:11:27-0:11:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:11:27):**  In doing so, the project helps with climate change adaption.  Oliver Moore and Pavlos Georgiadis from the Grow Observatory team sent us a series of  recordings made on the road in Greece this summer.  Rural sociologist Dr Maria Partolidou spoke to them about the changing relationships between  rural and urban communities in Greece.  
**[0:11:49-0:11:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:11:49):**  What we have been observing in Greece the past years, I mean those years that we are  in the year of crisis, that new links have emerged between the rural and the urban.  Due to the stresses that the economic crisis has provoked, we've seen that farmers are  looking to connect in different ways to urban dwellers and urban customers.  On the other way, urban dwellers need to reconnect with farmers, especially small farmers and  
**[0:12:28-0:12:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:12:28):**  farmers in the peri-urban.  So new connections are emerging and these connections have to do also with food, okay,  how we find food, what kind of food do we find, is it fresh, is it local, etc., etc.,  a number of questions.  But also these new connections have to do also with the rural ideal and our way of thinking  
**[0:12:55-0:13:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:12:55):**  of the rural because we've seen that many urban people have this idealized view of the  rural.  So in their way to reconnect with nature and reconnect with their roots or even their rural  past, they also seek new ways to make this distance smaller.  So we observe a lot of initiatives in Greece, a lot of movements, civic movements that have  
**[0:13:26-0:13:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:13:26):**  to do with food but have to do also with other values such as ethical prices, such as solidarity.  We have alternative economies and alternative activities.  So we want to reconnect with food and stop seeing food the way we have seen it the past  years as just a commercial good that we spend in any way we like.  There are a lot of emerging models that seek to address this new relation between the rural  
**[0:14:03-0:14:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:14:03):**  and the urban.  I mean, okay, farmers markets, we know we have seen this work that has been working  in other cases in other countries.  But also there's another attempt to rebuild this trustworthy connection between the rural  and the urban with community supported agriculture which has several forms in other countries  
**[0:14:29-0:14:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:14:29):**  and has a long story but it's not yet expanded as an idea in Greece.  So I think that this might work because within this new model of community supported agriculture,  you have to have trust.  You have to have trust towards this farmer that provides you with your everyday vegetables  or other produce.  
**[0:14:58-0:15:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:14:58):**  And I think that once you build this trust between you and the farmer, between you and  other member groups, I think you can actually establish the model and actually reply to  this crisis with a good alternative.  At least for the Greek case study, these new forms and these new relationships that we  don't have a former experience have their historical background because in Greece, we  
**[0:15:36-0:15:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:15:36):**  didn't have this heavy industrialization that other countries had in Europe.  So that means that we had for a long time strong connections with the rural, someone  from our extended family had a small piece of land that has been providing us with fresh  produce with vegetables, with olive oil, olives, etc.  So the new generations of urban dwellers that are losing this form of connection with the  
**[0:16:10-0:16:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:16:10):**  rural are those that are most in need to create and recreate new forms of cooperation and  new links with the rural.  What is missing between the urban and the rural?  I think that it is trust.  The urban is not trusting the rural.  
**[0:16:35-0:16:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:16:35):**  I mean, we do not trust where our food comes from.  We do not trust farmers due to all these food scandals and all this discussion about how  our food system has changed.  So for me, there's a trust gap that we have to build again and we have to recreate trust  amongst each other between the rural and the urban.  
**[0:17:00-0:17:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:17:00):**  So an ecosystem based on trust, it's the most crucial first step that we have to make.  You can hear more of this interview with Maria on our Soundcloud page or farmerama.co where  she talks us through some of the successes of city gardens in Greece.  As a young teen in Australia, healthy soils advocate and educator Joel Williams had the  weekly chore of mowing the lawn.  
**[0:17:43-0:17:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:17:43):**  He spent days driving up and down and up and down and up and down.  It focused his attention on the ground beneath his feet and he became fascinated.  What started as a love of grass soon became a love of vegetables and then grew into a  love of soil itself.  He actually spoke to us about golf courses but as you will hear, what he has to say is  
**[0:18:07-0:18:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:18:07):**  of great relevance to farmers as well.  He told us how it's possible to manage weeds simply by working with microbial balance in  the soil.  So we have done a bit of work in golf courses whereby golf groundskeepers, obviously they're  growing grass and they like to grow certain species of grass that are best for creating  
**[0:18:32-0:18:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:18:32):**  a smooth and fine playing surface for putting on those greens.  And there of course there are many different species of grass that they can use for that  purpose.  And they much prefer to use more perennial which means grasses that live year after year  after year, not an annual grass that just grows and dies once in one year.  
**[0:18:54-0:18:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:18:54):**  It lives through the winter and just starts to regrow again in the spring.  So they prefer growing more of these perennial grasses because they are better quality, they  have finer leaves and they create a better playing surface.  But they do have some problems with weeds, other grasses that come into those golf greens,  particularly some of these annual grasses which don't create as a good finer playing  
**[0:19:19-0:19:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:19:19):**  surface.  So there's a particular grass weed that they struggle with, one called Poa annua, it's  an annual grass often called winter grass or meadow grass, annual meadow grass.  And this grass can start to grow in the greens and it's not as favourable.  And it's quite difficult for golf groundskeepers to manage because they can't use herbicides  
**[0:19:42-0:19:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:19:42):**  to spray it out like they maybe other farmers or other situations where you can use herbicides  which are very specific in their mode of action, very selective in their mode of action.  They're both grasses so they're both very similar, one's just perennial, one's annual.  So you can't, if the groundskeeper did use a herbicide in that instance it would also  affect the health of his perennial one that he wants.  
**[0:20:07-0:20:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:20:07):**  So it's a real problem for them and what we've found that we can do is actually apply fungal  inoculants, so apply some beneficial microorganisms to the soil, a particular group called fungi,  and also apply some fungal foods, some food sources to feed that organism.  And simply by inoculating or applying this particular microorganism into these golf greens  we make the soil, we make those golf greens more fungal dominated, they have a dominance  
**[0:20:36-0:20:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:20:36):**  of fungi.  And what that actually does is change the soil, as I mentioned those examples of biology  changing the soil properties, well those fungi start to change the soil cycling of nutrients,  the particular nutrients they cycle, they're improving the structure of the soil, those  physical aspects.  
**[0:20:54-0:21:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:20:54):**  And they make the soil more favourable for those later, those perennial grasses that  they're trying to encourage.  And actually that annual grass doesn't like that environment anymore, it struggles, it  adapted in an environment that didn't have so much fungi, it adapted, it thrives in a  more bacterial dominated soil, another microorganism that exists in soils.  
**[0:21:17-0:21:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:21:17):**  It thrives in a bacterial dominated soil and the, because it's annual and the perennial  grass thrives in a more fungal dominated soil.  So as we shift that succession and shift the fungal dominance of the soil we simply create  the conditions that's favourable for one grass and it then grows with more vigour and it  can now compete with the annual grass better.  
**[0:21:38-0:21:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:21:38):**  And so within the course of a season or two the annual grass, the poor annual becomes  stressed, it goes a little bit yellow, it's not getting the nutrients that it likes that  it thrives in and it starts to stress and at the same time the perennial grass gets  stronger and stronger and more and more vigorous and so it totally outcompetes the annual grass.  So through this means, through this mechanism we can actually manage this weed, this annual  
**[0:22:05-0:22:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:22:05):**  grass weed completely in a chemical free way, simply just by increasing, shifting, changing  the microbial balance in the soil into a more fungal direction, simply changing the environment  into an environment in which that annual grass no longer thrives.  When viewing soils I think one of my messages is that soils are very complex ecosystems  actually and we need to, we've had a tendency to kind of simplify that.  
**[0:22:33-0:22:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:22:33):**  We try to, which is important, it's important to make things simple, that makes life easy  and helps everybody but it's been also at our detriment when we view things in a very  narrow blinkered, with a very narrow view and we have to acknowledge that soils actually  are vast and big and complex ecosystems and they're not so simple to manage and therefore  when trying to manage soils, when trying to work with soils, improve soil health, improve  
**[0:23:01-0:23:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:23:01):**  crop production, we have to take a step back and look at the bigger picture of soil and  we can't just narrow down, we can't just box ourselves in and think we can just look at  one or two parameters, look at a couple of nutrients and think that we can make assessments  on the health of the entire system based on just measuring one or two little things in  that little box.  
**[0:23:23-0:23:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:23:23):**  So we need to take a step back and widen the view of soil health, take a bigger picture,  look at soil health and part of that is acknowledging yes soil chemistry is important, let's look  at that, let's look at all of the minerals that are essential for plant growth, yes soil  physics is important, let's look at that, look at the structural properties, the aeration  and the moisture moving in those soils and yes, soil biology is important, let's also  
**[0:23:45-0:23:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:23:45):**  look at all these activities and diversity of all of these microorganisms and the key  then is to say take a step back and look at soil from an integrated holistic kind of view  but then also put the plant into that picture, so living plants, living plant roots, plants  that are photosynthesizing, capturing sunlight, breathing in carbon dioxide and also playing  a role in that picture of soil health, they are pumping carbon down into the soil and  
**[0:24:12-0:24:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:24:12):**  they are feeding those organisms which then help with the nutrient cycling and help with  the structural properties.  So soil and plants are actually one, there is no soil without plants, there is no plants  without soil and so we actually need to again put plants into that integrated picture, measure  the bigger picture and consider that soil and plants are one and manage them accordingly  
**[0:24:36-0:24:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:24:36):**  in that way.  We hope you enjoyed listening to Farmerama as much as we enjoyed making it.  We are always looking for supporters of the show, so if you are interested or you know  someone who might be, then please get in touch with us through our website, Farmerama.co.  Farmworkers Alliance have teamed up with Blackbark Films to create In Our Hands.  
**[0:25:11-0:25:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:25:11):**  We like how they describe the film on their website.  At the heart of all change lies a story and In Our Hands is the story of a new kind of  farm, a new kind of food and a new kind of society.  The film's makers explain that it's conceived as an open source tool to debunk the myth  of the industrial food system.  
**[0:25:31-0:25:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:25:31):**  They want the film to be a resource for farmers and activists engaged in building a better  world.  Hannah Steenburgen got the lowdown for Farmerama from Humphrey Lloyd, grower at Edible Futures  and co-producer of In Our Hands.  So the inspiration behind the film I suppose comes from the feeling that agriculture is  
**[0:25:52-0:25:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:25:52):**  very badly understood and that we really needed a easily to understand movement building tool  that explains to people the real way forward for sustainable agriculture in this country  and to debunk the myth of the industrial food system, at least to an extent.  Because the kind of pervasive narrative that we need to scale up agriculture, we need to  scale up the petrochemical inputs and that an export driven mode of agriculture is the  
**[0:26:19-0:26:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:26:19):**  only one that's going to take us into the future really does not stand up to any kind  of systematic analysis.  And so this film is there to explore those concepts, give them a human face and make  them interesting and engaging to the British public and the agricultural sector.  We spoke to this guy called Josh Healey who's a microdairy farmer in Oxfordshire.  
**[0:26:44-0:26:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:26:44):**  And I already knew before we got to his farm that he was running a herd of just 18 cattle.  Okay, so super small scale.  And when I got there, we were talking to Josh and then two other people rocked up and you  know, who were obviously there to work.  And what I assumed was, well, this guy's doing well out of volunteers, because, you know,  
**[0:27:02-0:27:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:27:02):**  of this many cows, there's no way he's paying various members of staff.  And one of these people who just rocked up, who I was assuming was a volunteer, then said,  I know, you know, we're like, one of them was a full time and one of them was a part  time employee.  So they had two and a half, 20 grand incomes pro rata off these 18 cows.  
**[0:27:24-0:27:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:27:24):**  Here's a short clip of small scale dairy farmer Josh Healey talking in the film.  We're able to survive when farms that are seven, eight, nine times as big are failing  and going out of business all the time.  Purely the fact that we're able to take all of the retail value for the dairy produce  that we're selling.  
**[0:27:47-0:27:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:27:47):**  It's quite amazing, I guess, for a lot of people to hear when, you know, particularly  those people that are just working themselves to the bone.  The biggest political impact that I can have really is to make what I'm doing here and  what we're doing here is a success and replicable.  A Eurostat report that came out, I think it was 2014, showed that in 21 of the 28 member  
**[0:28:15-0:28:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:28:15):**  states of the EU, small scale farms are more productive than big farms.  In this country, in the UK, small scale farms are twice as productive as big farms.  And it kind of goes without saying that they're better for the environment, employing more  people per unit area.  So on any way you want to measure it, productivity, environmental, social, economic.  
**[0:28:39-0:28:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:28:39):**  So if we're looking for how we move agriculture forward in terms of like dealing with climate  change, dealing with growing populations, dealing with food security, dealing with Brexit,  really small scale farms under any logical analysis is really where we want to be going.  However, small scale farmers are chronically underrepresented in our politics.  We have a national farmers union that is not really a union.  
**[0:29:07-0:29:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:29:07):**  It's more like an agribusiness lobby group that if you look at any of the key agricultural  issues over the past 15, 20 years, they've not been representing small scale farmers.  They've been representing agrochemical companies and supermarkets more than small scale farmers.  And so that's why not just this film in our hands, but the Land Workers Alliance in general  has come along to say, to try and create a platform for the interests of small scale  
**[0:29:30-0:29:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:29:30):**  farmers, try and debunk the myths that say that small scale farmers are anachronistic,  are unproductive because those aren't true.  Give these people a political voice so that we end up being represented in the media,  in government policy and in kind of public perception in general as an important part  of our agricultural sector going forwards.  
**[0:29:53-0:29:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:29:53):**  And that's something that in our hands is trying to do more at the level of public perception  really.  It's not there to be a policy document for ministers to explain, to advocate for small  scale farmers.  It's more there so that we, the people of Britain in general, begin to develop an understanding  
**[0:30:11-0:30:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:30:11):**  that big farms, the farm with 300 cattle that is employing one overworked farmer is out  of date.  That is anachronistic.  And the farmer, the dairy farmer who's managing to make a living off 18 cows because they're  directly selling their milk rather than selling it to supermarkets, the reason we've ended  
**[0:30:34-0:30:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:30:34):**  up thinking that large farms are productive is because the way we measure productivity  in this country is the amount of food you produce divided by the number of people working  on the given area.  So that gives you the impression that a large farm with one guy on a large tractor is more  productive than a smaller farm with two people working on it, even if they turn out more  
**[0:30:57-0:30:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:30:57):**  food.  OK, so a subsidy system that takes that into account and is more interested in producing  large amounts of food, licking off the soil and the land and employing more people is  essentially valued more than the larger industrial model.  It's very important for us to see specific support for young new entrant farmers along  
**[0:31:22-0:31:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:31:22):**  the lines of the Scottish and the Welsh models.  If you're in Scotland, a new entrant farmer can get up to 70 grand to set up a new farm.  Why don't we have something like that here in England?  That's crazy.  Thank you Hannah and Humphrey.  
**[0:31:34-0:31:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:31:34):**  And if you'd like to see the film yourself, there are a number of screenings up and down  the UK over the next few weeks.  There's one at the Depot Cinema in Lewes on the 6th of December and one at the Castle  Cinema in Hackney, East London on the 8th.  We'll post links to all of the information on our Facebook page.  
**[0:31:55-0:31:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:31:55):**  This month's episode was produced by Jo, Katie and myself.  I'm Abi Rose.  Special thanks to Pavlos Georgiadis and the Grow Observatory team for the interview from  Greece.  And thanks to Hema Steenbergen for her interview with Humphrey.  
**[0:32:12-0:32:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/28-films-for-the-farming-movement-rural-urban-connections-in-greece-and-fungi-to-manage-weeds#t=0:32:12):**  If you have something you'd like to share, please get in touch.  We're farmerama radio at gmail.com and you can find us easily on Twitter, Instagram and  Facebook.  We'll be back in December for one more episode before we launch into a new year.  