---
title: 30: Gove, agri-culture, Human Ecology, Sanfoin and Pollarding
---

### Farmerama  (2018-01-27)  
### Author(s): Farmerama  

**[0:00:00-0:00:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to episode 30 of Farmerama. This month we bring you stories from the 9th  annual Oxford Real Farming Conference, the ORFC. We embrace agriculture with new poetry  written at the front lines of farming. There's a brief introduction to human ecology and  
**[0:00:36-0:00:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:00:36):**  some exciting innovations in urban food systems from a group in Glasgow. Out in the field  we celebrate the wonders of a little known crop, sandfoyne, and we hear a passionate  case for letting livestock browse on their favourite fodder.  
**[0:01:08-0:01:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:01:08):**  The conference always brings together a great mix of people, young and old, urban and rural,  from near and far, all connected in their commitment to an agroecological future. This  year was a bit different, as politics took centre stage with a whole series of talks  
**[0:01:26-0:01:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:01:26):**  discussing how Brexit will affect the food and farming industry. And, of course, a visit  from Michael Gove, Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. Here's  a little snippet as Zach Goldsmith kicked off the conversation with him.  
**[0:01:42-0:01:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:01:42):**  So my first question to you is, can you outline for us the vision that will underpin your  decisions as you rewrite the rules around CAP?  First of all, thank you very much for inviting me here. And as Zach indicated, the venerable  
**[0:01:56-0:02:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:01:56):**  conference down the road is more than 80 years old and you're just nine years old. To have  a nine-year-old that is bigger than an 80-year-old is quite something. The challenge of leading  a department like Defra at this time is, as Zach says, huge. And the opportunities are  
**[0:02:18-0:02:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:02:18):**  significant, the challenges are quite big as well. We have a bunch of money, we've got  £3 billion at the moment that we currently use to support agriculture. And I think that  that money is poorly spent. In essence, we give, as everyone here knows, broadly 80%  
**[0:02:34-0:02:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:02:34):**  of that money through the BPS scheme to people purely on the basis of the size of the productive  agricultural landholder. And that means that public money often goes to those who have  the largest and deepest pockets in – and the largest and – thank you. Yes, thank  
**[0:02:54-0:03:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:02:54):**  you. Worse than that, the amount and the way in which the BPS system operates rewards inefficiency  and unsustainable agriculture. In essence, it says the most important thing to do is  just to drive yield come what may. And it also means that any part of your farm or your  
**[0:03:14-0:03:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:03:14):**  landholding which is not turned over to productive agriculture doesn't really count in terms  of the amount of money you get. There are permanently ineligible features and those  permanently ineligible features are what most of us would call the countryside, beauty,  
**[0:03:31-0:03:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:03:31):**  nature but they're not rewarded in the system of subsidy that we have at the moment. And  I think that needs to change. I think that what we should be doing is using that public  money in order to achieve public goods. The heart of farming is always going to be food  
**[0:03:48-0:03:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:03:48):**  production. I know we'll see more about some of what's wrong with how we produce  food at the moment. But ultimately, public money should go towards people who are thinking  hard and working hard in order to ensure that our environment is enhanced. So public money  
**[0:04:02-0:04:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:04:02):**  should reward people who look after their soil rather than those who concentrate on  trying in any given year to maximize yield knowing that over time the health and fertility  of our soils will be damaged. And critically, we also want to encourage people to farm in  
**[0:04:19-0:04:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:04:19):**  a way which is respectful of the fact that unless we put back in to the soil, to nature,  to our planet the care and cultivation and responsibility that has been missing in recent  years, what we risk doing is finding that our current method of subsidy isn't just  
**[0:04:39-0:04:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:04:39):**  unsustainable financially and politically, it's driving unsustainable outcomes. It's  driving soil erosion, the depletion of natural resource, the destruction of habitats on which  wildlife depends. And we've got to get back a sense of balance. And one of the ways in  
**[0:04:54-0:04:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:04:54):**  which we can do that is by using the lever of financial support in a much more thoughtful  way.  Thank you very much indeed.  
**[0:05:11-0:05:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:05:11):**  Gove talked about having a focus on healthy soils, planting more trees, encouraging mixed  farming and more. Generally the response to this was hopeful and positive, but there was  a definite air of caution. The proof will be in the pudding.  
**[0:05:29-0:05:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:05:29):**  One beautiful part of the conference was the launch of The Soil Never Sleeps. It's a book  of poetry commissioned by the PFLA, the Pasture Fed Livestock Association, and written by  their poet in residence, Adam Horowitz. Over the last year or two, he stayed on four different  
**[0:05:47-0:05:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:05:47):**  PFLA farms, soaking up the everyday details of farming life. One of the farmers featured  in the book is Fidelity Weston. She shared her side of the experience and read us one  of the poems Adam wrote on her farm.  
**[0:06:01-0:06:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:06:01):**  Rumshed Farm is in a village called Under River, near Severn Oaks in Kent. The farm  is a 70 hectare livestock farm which is certified with the Soil Association and the Pasture  Fed Livestock Association. We rear traditional Hereford cattle, clinews, a few pigs and some  
**[0:06:20-0:06:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:06:20):**  chickens and eggs.  I feel so deeply honoured to be involved in this project because for me this little book  is an absolute treasure of interest and enjoyment and I say that as somebody who doesn't normally  
**[0:06:32-0:06:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:06:32):**  read poetry, but I honestly feel I could keep dipping in and out of this book and getting  a real feel for farming from it. I just think he's a genius and he's portrayed in this  little volume what life really is like on the farm. It's not romantic at all, it's  
**[0:06:49-0:06:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:06:49):**  about the details of farming and some of the hard things that happen and the sad things  that happen and just the day to day sort of eventualities that actually as a farmer you  don't really think about. But Adam's noted them and he's written poems about them. I  
**[0:07:04-0:07:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:07:04):**  think it's just wonderful.  This is a poem called Worm Casts written by Adam Horovitch. Worm casts in the permanent  pasture a roiling of soil into exotic tiny castles built to guard busy life beneath the  
**[0:07:21-0:07:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:07:21):**  lid. None in the ploughed field where children do not stop to look. The sunken cityscapes  of insects, microbes, worms and roots dissected by relentless blades by light. I really clearly  remember the time when Adam was with us when he must have thought about this poem and because  
**[0:07:44-0:07:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:07:44):**  one of his visits we happened to have a class of 30, 11 year old boys having a free educational  visit to the farm and one of the things I love showing the children as we walk across  the pastures is for them to be looking at the worm casts and to tell them how these  
**[0:08:00-0:08:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:08:00):**  little creatures are the world's best recyclers and they're absolutely key to the crops that  we've got on top of the ground. So we always stop and look at the casts and Adam's completely  right to observe that we don't stop in the cereal fields to look at them and I suppose  
**[0:08:16-0:08:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:08:16):**  it's because maybe there are not many there but I hadn't actually noticed that. I just  know that the worm casts are brilliant in our permanent pastures. So for me this just  says everything about the messages I want children to get from the farm when they come  
**[0:08:28-0:08:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:08:28):**  to us. It's what's going on underneath the soil, underneath the grass rather that is  so important. There's this myriad of life going on under there. I really liked Peter  Kindersley last night at the poetry reading talking about the word agriculture. There  
**[0:08:44-0:08:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:08:44):**  is the culture in Agri and actually to be perfectly honest with you we're so busy leading  our lives I never for a single minute think that what I'm doing is anything other than  work and my business and I don't think of it as a culture at all. But of course actually  
**[0:08:57-0:09:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:08:57):**  there is a culture and maybe that's partly what unites us all at this conference that  we all have a deep sense and understanding of what each other's lives are like and that  is culture isn't it really. So that in itself is a very thought provoking thought that I'll  
**[0:09:11-0:09:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:09:11):**  be taking away from this conference actually and Adam's book of course is part of the whole  thing about bringing culture back to the Agri bit.  That was Fidelity Weston reading a poem from The Soil Never Sleeps by Adam Horowitz. You  
**[0:09:30-0:09:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:09:30):**  can get yourself a copy of the poems at any good bookshop or on Adam's website and you'll  be hearing more poems from the book later in the show.  One of the many talks at the ORFC focused on human ecology and holistic food systems  
**[0:09:46-0:09:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:09:46):**  in cities with Glasgow serving as a case study. Two organisations, Propagate and the Centre  for Human Ecology are working together on post-Brexit urban food solutions in the city.  Joy Rose spoke to Abby Morden about Propagate's work.  
**[0:10:05-0:10:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:10:05):**  Abby started with a very brief introduction to human ecology.  Human ecology is a multidisciplinary way of looking at the how, where and ultimately whether  humans live on the earth. So it looks at the systems of nature, ecosystems and how we can  
**[0:10:25-0:10:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:10:25):**  work in balance and in tune with the systems that nature already has, how we can emulate  those in human systems and human life. I work a lot into private communities. Glasgow's  got quite a high proportion of communities that are experiencing, and I hate the words,  
**[0:10:41-0:10:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:10:41):**  multiple deprivations. We've got a notoriously poor diet and poor health records in a myriad  of different ways. So when you're doing any kind of food work, I think you have to look  at the people that you're working with, the environment that they live in, why they live  
**[0:10:57-0:11:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:10:57):**  in that environment, how that environment has manifested itself, what the history is  behind that, whether they are empowered to make changes for themselves, which in many  cases people aren't, it's not that they don't want to, it's just that they're disempowered  
**[0:11:10-0:11:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:11:10):**  in that respect. So holding that framework in your head and trying to think of all the  different aspects and how they connect is challenging, but when you're doing community  food work, it's essential because you can't just look at the people that you're working  
**[0:11:27-0:11:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:11:27):**  with, the place that you're working in through one lens when everything is connected. I also  work a lot with, I'm not a permaculturalist, but I work a lot with people who would call  themselves permaculturalists, and that has a similar kind of framework, looking at things  
**[0:11:43-0:11:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:11:43):**  holistically. So it's got the 12 principles of permaculture, which kind of combine quite  well with human ecology as a kind of practical way to implement the academic thinking behind  human ecology, to kind of implement that through a permaculture perspective. Back in 2008,  
**[0:12:03-0:12:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:12:03):**  I think it was, we ran the first urban permaculture design course in Glasgow. It was funded, completely  fully funded, so we opened it up to people who wouldn't normally afford to access permaculture  design courses, normal people living in high-rise flats in Glasgow, and it was differently delivered  
**[0:12:20-0:12:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:12:20):**  to how a normal PGC might be delivered, just because of the client groups that we were  working with, and the place that we were working in, so obviously it's place-specific. It brought  that kind of way of thinking into the community that I was working with at that point. The  
**[0:12:34-0:12:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:12:34):**  course has run subsequently every year since then, and always has, not entirely funded,  but some funded places on it so that people from low-income areas can access it for free.  That in Glasgow, combined with the other work that we do, has helped build a movement in  
**[0:12:50-0:12:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:12:50):**  the city of people who are starting to look at things through a sort of holistic framework  and holistic lens.  That was Abby Morden speaking to Joy Rose.  
**[0:13:02-0:13:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:13:02):**  This year, for the first time, Oxford Real Farming Conference promoted a few joint events  with Oxford Farming Conference, which runs at the same time down the road. One of those  events was the Agricology Field Day on Lay's Livestock and Arable at Dalesford Farm. Dalesford  
**[0:13:19-0:13:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:13:19):**  are well known in the UK for supporting pioneering sustainable farming practices through their  own farm in the Cotswolds. Richard Smith, senior farms manager there, spoke to Annie  for us about one crop he's particularly excited about.  
**[0:13:34-0:13:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:13:34):**  I'd read about it a number of years ago, possibly ten years ago, and I was really waiting for  a part of the rotation to come round on the farm so that I could establish some sanfoin.  Having read quite a lot about it, I discovered that sanfoin actually covered 25% of the Cotswolds  
**[0:13:51-0:13:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:13:51):**  a hundred years ago. And it was because it took 25% of your land mass to grow the energy  to feed the horses to work your farm. So I didn't need any proof that the Cotswolds was  a great place to grow sanfoin. And I wanted to do it because it has all of these lovely  
**[0:14:06-0:14:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:14:06):**  properties. It's a natural anthelmendic for organic systems. It's legamous, it fixes a  huge amount of natural nitrogen into the system. And it's a bulky crop. So traditionally we  would grow red clover and rye grass and then sile it for feeding dairy cows and various  
**[0:14:23-0:14:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:14:23):**  ruminant stomachs on the farm. But sanfoin had the ability to give us a greater bulk  and be drought resistant because it's very deep tap rooted. So having read a little bit  further I then was extremely excited to read that actually sanfoin was grown for the first  
**[0:14:40-0:14:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:14:40):**  time ever in this country at Dalsford in 1752. So you can imagine that was quite exciting  that the first seeds were brought back to Dalsford. The original seat of Dalsford House  had been a guy called John Hastings who was the first Governor General of India I believe.  
**[0:14:58-0:15:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:14:58):**  And it was his son that travelled the world and brought back sanfoin seeds to Dalsford.  So that was really exciting. And then over the last few years we now started off with  a small piece as an experiment and now we would have several hundred acres of sanfoin  
**[0:15:14-0:15:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:15:14):**  here at Dalsford. And it is fantastic and it's here to stay. So not only was I interested  in the bulk of the crop which came to fruition and it'll yield about 50% more than rye grass  and red clover, it's also very nutrient rich. So there are proteins within sanfoin that'll  
**[0:15:34-0:15:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:15:34):**  break down within the ruminant stomach far better than any other sort of forage. So if  I talk about disadvantages, yes the seed is quite expensive but it can be harvested and  saved. It's a long term lay so looked after it can last for up to eight years. It's what  
**[0:15:50-0:15:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:15:50):**  I call a crown grown plant so it comes out of the ground and then sort of tillers into  a crown. If you chew that crown out you've lost the plant so you have to be careful when  grazing it but it is rocket fuel of the most natural type. So we would fatten an awful  
**[0:16:06-0:16:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:16:06):**  lot of lambs now on sanfoin after growth from silage crops in siling crops. And we can have  our lambs doing anything up to 350 grams a day live weight gain from this after growth  on the sanfoin. It's a great nectar crop, it flowers beautifully, we leave strips of  
**[0:16:25-0:16:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:16:25):**  it around fields for our bees and so on because we've got about 50 hives on the property here.  Sanfoin honey is well sought after and the bees love it. So why wouldn't you grow sanfoin  in a sustainable, environmentally friendly farming system. So it's a winner winner completely  
**[0:16:44-0:16:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:16:44):**  all the way around. We have a beautiful herd of Friesian cattle here and my great passion  is the breeding of animals fit for the environment in which we're farming them and sanfoin now  is being fed to our dairy cows and we're able to cut down huge amounts of protein that we're  
**[0:17:00-0:17:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:17:00):**  importing onto the farm. In fact their diet consists of protein just about 100% produced  on the farm here. Other advantages it will suppress weeds so sanfoin crops that are established  well will create a huge ground covering. What we do is we drill the sanfoin into a warm  
**[0:17:21-0:17:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:17:21):**  soil in mid May and then straight away we'll incorporate a little bit of native grass seed  on top of that, roll it in really tightly, the grass seed suppresses the weed whilst  the sanfoin establishes itself and then once it's away the sanfoin beats the grass and  
**[0:17:35-0:17:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:17:35):**  you get this hugely dense crop so it's also very pleasing to see a weed free forage crop  growing in an organic system. It would be quite understandable for your listeners to  say well actually if it's that good why is everybody growing it? It went out of fashion  
**[0:17:51-0:17:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:17:51):**  between the world wars with the onset of artificial nitrogens and agrochemicals because there's  no real cash crop in the year of establishment. We established them the year before last and  if you remember it was a very wet warm summer and it did actually establish very quickly  
**[0:18:06-0:18:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:18:06):**  but basically you drill it in the May, you don't really get a bulky crop until the following  season so it would be 12 months later but once it's in as I say it's in there for a  long time we actually harvest our own seed from it which is very easy so we'll pop in  
**[0:18:22-0:18:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:18:22):**  with a combine and just rip up and down the field, take about 150kg an acre seed from  it, that's been a huge saving and I really don't have anything negative to add about  our sanfoin, it's worked very very well in our system. I wouldn't be trying to grow sanfoin  
**[0:18:39-0:18:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:18:39):**  on acidic soils so you'd need quite a good pH in the soil, obviously a free draining  soil although I have had success in heavier soils as well because you're putting it into  warm soils in May so you can normally establish a nice seed bed and so on for it. I wouldn't  
**[0:18:58-0:19:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:18:58):**  put my entire farm down to sanfoin in the first year, what I'd do is I'd find some quite  nice soil, pop 5 or 10 acres in and then monitor that through the following year and you'll  see in year 2 and 3 the benefit and the bulk and the quality of the feed that you're producing.  
**[0:19:14-0:19:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:19:14):**  So advice for farmers, yep put it into warm soil mid May onwards to sort of mid June,  end of June, roll it in really tightly and definitely put a little sprinkling of native  grasses in on top of it and just scratch that in just to suppress the weeds whilst it's  
**[0:19:29-0:19:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:19:29):**  establishing. That was Annie Landless speaking to Richard Smith from Dalesford Organic. And  just as Richard was advocating for a sanfoin renaissance, Ted Green passionately made the  case for another neglected technique, pollarding. Even if you're not familiar with the word,  
**[0:19:51-0:19:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:19:51):**  you'll recognise pollarded trees, deciduous trees which have had their upper branches  removed to promote a dense burst of fresh shoots at the top. Pollarding is an ancient  practice and there are lots of reasons for doing it, to control the tree's size, to reduce  
**[0:20:07-0:20:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:20:07):**  the amount of shade it casts or to maintain a steady supply of wood for fuel and crafts.  But Ted's focus is on pollarding for fodder. He explained why.  Pollarding actually is one of the oldest professions known to man because man after he was a hunter  
**[0:20:31-0:20:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:20:31):**  gatherer he became a wandering herdsman and he must have watched his animals and he watched  his animals eat trees and bushes and things like that. So eventually he started to cut  trees. So that tradition has gone on and I don't know whether you heard me talk about  
**[0:20:46-0:20:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:20:46):**  holly because holly was an incredible important tree for animals as tree fodder in the winter.  And we've got some beautiful great big holly pollards at Windsor which obviously haven't  been done for years so they're massive. So why do you think we stopped using trees in  
**[0:21:03-0:21:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:21:03):**  management of livestock? I think labour. I think labour and in Britain we think we can  trace it back to the turnip. When the turnip came they didn't need it. And equally at the  same time as the turnip arriving, with holly especially, holly became a very, very prized  
**[0:21:21-0:21:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:21:21):**  tree for the cotton and weaving industry. The wood from the holly when it's used in machinery  is actually polishes, it gets more and more efficient and bobbins, they were in great  demand so you had holly pollarding disappearing but the wood became valuable. How important  
**[0:21:39-0:21:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:21:39):**  do you think it is that we bring trees back for grazing? First of all it's a cultural  practice. We know it's sustainable. I've showed pictures of 14,000 years ago when they  were cutting those trees and there are still parts of Europe where that system is still  
**[0:21:56-0:22:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:21:56):**  working and it's sustainable. So we're getting meat and whatever off that land under a system  which we've been taken from with no input, no input other than what the animals poo and  that's been going on for 14,000 years. So we know it's sustainable unless basically  
**[0:22:15-0:22:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:22:15):**  no other agricultural practice is basically sustainable because we just muck the soil  up. So yes I think it's very important and it's a cultural practice anyway so why not  use it? Why not? What do you think of the benefits specifically to cows like you said  
**[0:22:29-0:22:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:22:29):**  in your talk? Well first of all I don't think we know but you've only got to look at yourself  and think do you just want to eat rice and beans? Because that's what grass is, rice  and beans, rice and beans and we put a fence around it so they can't go and look for food.  
**[0:22:45-0:22:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:22:45):**  So if you gave them the options probably everyone would be an individual just like people when  they're selecting a meal. You have your likes and your dislikes and you've got to remember  that they have these great wet muzzles and that, we know now that that moisture is for  
**[0:23:03-0:23:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:23:03):**  sensing smell. They're smelling all sorts of things, they're smelling this herb rich  meadows which we want to keep them on or pasture and also trees give off a smell. So they're  thinking oh I'll try this today or I'll try that and often when we were feeding the animals  
**[0:23:20-0:23:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:23:20):**  the lead cow, they would watch the lead cow first and then her next offspring would start  and then they all pile in and some of them would like it and some of them don't. We put  them onto single foods which they can get fat on and then produce a lot of milk and  
**[0:23:35-0:23:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:23:35):**  all the rest of it but it's not what they want to eat any more than you do. You get  bored with the best food in the world eventually.  That was Ted Green talking to James Fryer.  
**[0:23:49-0:23:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:23:49):**  If you're wondering where the next update from market gardener Joel Rodker is then fear  not he will feature on this month's shorts so you can hear the latest from him by going  to Soundcloud or listening to the short in your feed later this month.  
**[0:24:07-0:24:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:24:07):**  This episode was produced by Abby, Jo and me Katie. Thank you to Joy, Annie and James  for helping us capture stories at the conference. Thank you also to the wonderful fiddler Becky  Delo whose music we featured at the start of the show. She was performing Between Adam's  
**[0:24:23-0:24:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:24:23):**  Poems at the launch of The Soil Never Sleeps. We'll end with another poem from The Soil  Never Sleeps. Chris Jones of the Cornish Beaver Project reads us a poem Adam wrote on his  farm as summer was drawing to a close.  
**[0:24:44-0:24:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:24:44):**  First mist, the glut of grass and herbs at summer's end is waxed into the cattle's  hides which shine like newly washed table tops. The sun's a blend of mist, leaf shadow,  a dust of rain fine as silk that turns pasture slick beneath hoof and foot. The grey closed  
**[0:25:02-0:25:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:25:02):**  cloud sucks at solar panels then consumes them, nothing is proof against its descent.  Monochrome stole, a march on morning with all its subtle fingers. Grey suffuses grey  until nothing's left, only the still and dew-fringed herd lingers, visible pushing at the fence  
**[0:25:19-0:25:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-30-gove-agri-culture-human-ecology-sanfoin-and-pollarding#t=0:25:19):**  like weft. Ready for the electric wires warp its purr, lake grass is still ripening as  the seasons slur.  