---
title: 31 Herbs Christian Perspectives On Farming And Aquaponics
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### Farmerama  (2018-02-25)  
### Author(s): Farmerama  

**[0:00:00-0:00:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to Farmerama. This month we hear from herb growers and suppliers about  the opportunities for growing herbs in the UK. We have the first in a series of reports  from Jubilee Farm in Northern Ireland, offering a Christian perspective on agriculture and  
**[0:00:20-0:00:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:00:20):**  the environment. We take a visit to Humble by Nature, a tenant farm in the Welsh Wye  Valley run by TV presenter Kate Humble. And finally, we hear from an artisan pasta producer  in Italy. One of the most exciting panels at last month's Oxford Veal Farming Conference  
**[0:00:54-0:01:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:00:54):**  was all about growing and selling herbs in the UK. It was exciting to learn that there's  a real demand for good quality UK grown herbs and that more growers are finding ways to  grow commercially here on a relatively small scale. We caught up with a few of the panellists.  
**[0:01:11-0:01:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:01:11):**  Helen Kearney is a herb producer and medical herbalist. She farms in Devon where she's  a tenant of the Ecological Land Co-operative and she makes a living from a range of activities  involving the herbs she grows, including seeing patients, bulk supply and selling over the  
**[0:01:27-0:01:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:01:27):**  counter products. She shared some tips and words of encouragement for new growers looking  to enter the market in the UK. So the reason that people aren't growing more herbs in the  UK, I think because it's mainly been focused on culinary herbs and the medicinal side of  
**[0:01:45-0:02:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:01:45):**  things. There are some herbalists that have access to land, but it's rare for a herbalist  to actually be living on a small holding. The skills to grow those herbs, the medicinal  herbs just haven't really been developed in the UK. I don't know why. It's much more common  
**[0:02:01-0:02:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:02:01):**  in the US and Australia, maybe because there's bigger land masses there so people have more  access to farms. The markets, it's cheaper for me to buy dandelion leaves from Eastern  Europe than it is to grow and pick and dry them myself, for example. So just the bulk  
**[0:02:18-0:02:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:02:18):**  herb side of things, that's more complex. Value adding is the way to make money from  plants and so bulk growing of herbs just hasn't really been developed in the UK. The quality  is really important. So you want to get herbs to produce really good growth so they've got  
**[0:02:38-0:02:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:02:38):**  the active constituents in them and they're not degraded in any way. So the real challenge  is when you come to process them, you need to pick them on a dry day, preferably before  midday because once the sun's gone onto the herbs, then if you brush up, for example,  
**[0:02:53-0:03:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:02:53):**  against the bush of lavender and you get that lovely aroma, that's the volatile oils being  released and you want them to be trapped in the plant as much as possible. So you're picking  the cool and dry and then once you've picked them, obviously that plant starts to degrade  
**[0:03:06-0:03:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:03:06):**  so you need to very quickly process them or start to dry them because you're trying to  capture the maximum amount of the active constituents within that plant. The herbs that I produce  are the best quality possible because I'm picking them when they're absolutely ready  
**[0:03:21-0:03:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:03:21):**  to be picked. I don't use any mechanical harvesting tools so everything's hand picked, hand processed  and that means I can buy an organic dandelion leaf from Eastern Europe but it just won't  be the same quality as something that I can grow and produce. And when I'm drying things,  
**[0:03:40-0:03:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:03:40):**  I'm drying things in small batches. We haven't got the sun and solar dryers in this country  so in other countries, for example, calendula or marigold, the petals end up very pale yellow  and the petals that I'm growing and producing are bright vivid orange because I'm small  
**[0:03:57-0:04:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:03:57):**  batch growing and I'm not using a solar dryer so the heat that the flowers are getting to  isn't the same and they're not getting bleached out in the same way. So the viability of what  we're doing is we have a planning condition that we have to show that we're financially  
**[0:04:09-0:04:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:04:09):**  viable because we apply for permanent permission to live on our land this year so we have to  pass the two tests, the financial test, the functional need test and the financial test  we have to meet our household needs through profit of the business and that's a challenge  
**[0:04:26-0:04:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:04:26):**  but I'm a medical herbalist so I've got different income streams that I'm using to achieve that  and that's selling medicines to patients, selling the over-the-counter products as well  as selling the bulk herbs.  
**[0:04:37-0:04:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:04:37):**  Jim Twine is Managing Director of the Organic Herb Trading Company that sources and supplies  500 different types of herbs and botanicals for a variety of different uses. They've got  a couple of acres of their own land but for the most part they source from suppliers around  
**[0:04:53-0:05:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:04:53):**  the world. Jim thinks there are definitely opportunities out there for UK growers.  There's opportunities for a significant number of products that are either problem ingredients  for us like marigolds where there may be a history even in the organic sector of a background  
**[0:05:11-0:05:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:05:11):**  level of pesticides or where there's ingredients that brands want a story behind them and particularly  like the idea of those being grown in the UK so there's a number of different categories  that those would fall into. What is also probably true to say is that products that we've sourced  
**[0:05:30-0:05:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:05:30):**  quite often that have been fair wild from or wild harvested from southern Europe also  represent an area where growers could produce those in the UK or harvest them and supply  them to us in volume so elderflower, field mint, dandelion leaf, nettle leaf, some of  
**[0:05:49-0:06:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:05:49):**  these would also be wild harvested, dandelion root and red clover. And then the last category  is really herbs or botanicals that are grown either in Europe or America where our guesses,  the cost of production are relatively similar to the UK and as a result again it represents  
**[0:06:08-0:06:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:06:08):**  an opportunity where growers in the UK can compete so oat flowering tops, cornflower,  lemon balm, echinacea, skullcup, catnip, valerian root and lavender. The reason that their problem  herbs is that despite the fact that we know our growers are not in any way trying to break  
**[0:06:29-0:06:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:06:29):**  the organic standards the issue is nearly always with a background low level of pesticide  residue contamination and very often that's as a result of spray drift or it may be a  legacy pesticide that's in the water course or it may simply be as a result of contamination  
**[0:06:49-0:07:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:06:49):**  caused by unusual circumstances, for example a flood that then as a result of the run off  causes issues on the organic growers land. And those problem herb spices and botanicals  where there has been that background level of pesticides or herbicides is almost exclusively  
**[0:07:09-0:07:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:07:09):**  outside the UK rather than any of the production that we've got based in the UK or our experience  of dealing with other UK growers. So there's probably two kind of fundamental challenges  to the growth of the organic herb market in the UK. The first is people being able to  
**[0:07:26-0:07:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:07:26):**  have enough drying capacity to do a really good job of drying and then processing the  herbs that they may want to supply us or other businesses within the value chain. And then  the other issue alongside that is that if there is a problem, so for example a low level  
**[0:07:44-0:08:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:07:44):**  background level of salmonella contamination, how do you fix that? And at the moment the  way in which that would be dealt with is through steam sterilisation and there aren't as far  as we know any steam sterilisation units that are willing to take small quantities of product  
**[0:08:02-0:08:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:08:02):**  and steam sterilise them to reduce that background level of microbial problems. And what there  certainly isn't is anywhere that's organically certified as far as we're aware. So as things  stand at the moment our solution is to get things steamed in transit on the way to organic  
**[0:08:18-0:08:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:08:18):**  herb trading if we identify a problem. One of the things that would be brilliant and  would be great from a sustainability perspective would be if we could link up someone with  a massive cold storage unit where the hot air is basically being wasted and build a  
**[0:08:34-0:08:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:08:34):**  dryer alongside that because that would be a really environmentally sound way of harnessing  that energy and putting it to really good use. I don't, I mean we've got our own small  scale dryer and I suspect that the vast majority of the growers that are involved in the session  
**[0:08:49-0:09:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:08:49):**  have got some kind of drying facility on site. Making it commercially viable and making  it stack up, again you really want to be able to do that on scale and we're not aware of  anybody doing that, certainly within the organic sector at the moment in the UK.  
**[0:09:08-0:09:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:09:08):**  We have one more interview from a speaker on the same herbs panel for you but you'll  need to head over to our Soundcloud page to listen. There you can hear Alice Bettany talking  about her beautiful herb gardens and introducing a completely different approach to selling  
**[0:09:21-0:09:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:09:21):**  herbs, a CSA herbal box scheme model. As well as the interview with Alice, this month we've  also posted a diary from Joel Rodker, updating us on his progress setting up Harvest Barn  Market Garden. Johnny Hansen is an environmentalist who's  
**[0:09:55-0:10:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:09:55):**  involved in setting up Northern Ireland's first community supported agriculture scheme  at Jubilee Farm. Johnny reports from Jubilee Farm's first community  volunteer day and provides a perspective on farming that I think is the first for us on  
**[0:10:09-0:10:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:10:09):**  Farmrama. I'm here in the classroom at Jubilee Farm  where we're having our first community volunteer day and as part of that we've had a short  service of dedication as we begin breaking ground in clearing this overgrown wall garden.  
**[0:10:24-0:10:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:10:24):**  I'm here with the Reverend Gabrielle Farquhar who, before she was a Presbyterian minister,  ran a community horticulture project in Dublin. Gabrielle, I just wanted to ask you about  what you felt Christianity has to offer in terms of an agricultural and environmental  
**[0:10:42-0:11:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:10:42):**  ethic for the 21st century. Thank you, Johnny. Well, first of all, what  Christianity has to offer goes way, way back to the beginning of time. God, when he created  the world, he made humankind last and then gave us the responsibility of caring for the  
**[0:11:01-0:11:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:11:01):**  earth. And so it isn't a choice, it is our responsibility to do so. So as Christians,  if we forget that and concentrate on all sorts of theological issues and think that they  only are important, we're forgetting what God has asked us to do as we live in this  
**[0:11:20-0:11:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:11:20):**  world and through this life. Also, the whole idea of rest, rest not just for ourselves  but for the land, caring for the land, it was all part of his creation. And even on  top of that, and I just love this part in the Old Testament where they talk about leaving  
**[0:11:39-0:11:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:11:39):**  the crop around the edge of the field, as it were, for the stranger, for the widow,  for the orphan. So thinking of everybody, caring for everybody. So that's the Old Testament  part of it all and the New Testament the same. Gabriel, churches are often quite large landowners.  
**[0:11:58-0:12:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:11:58):**  They often have land immediately around their site or sometimes they own quite large estates  and the like. In terms of putting that ethic into practice, what contribution do you think  churches have given, for example, that here we are at Jubilee Farm, which is itself in  
**[0:12:14-0:12:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:12:14):**  the grounds of an estate owned by the Sisters of the Cross and Passion? I think first of  all, it's great that this project is now able to happen here and to bring this walled  garden to life, just like the walled garden that we worked in Old Hallows in Dublin. And  
**[0:12:34-0:12:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:12:34):**  it just gives such pleasure to people, such well-being and better for health. The churches,  if they're sitting on land, are being totally irresponsible to what God wants them to do.  Sometimes they forget. They think, oh, we can let it out for profit. And yes, they can.  
**[0:12:53-0:13:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:12:53):**  And I suppose if they let it out, at least somebody is going to work the land, which  is good. But to be a little bit more creative and to use it for allowing others, a bit like  me, to use the land and to guide the people who maybe don't have the resources, don't  
**[0:13:13-0:13:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:13:13):**  have access to work in a garden, to touch a plant, to touch the soil. There are all  sorts of creative ways. Or in turn, to let it be a place where animals can stay. And  again, children can be brought from towns or in a town sometimes. Again, plenty of land  
**[0:13:33-0:13:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:13:33):**  around churches. Open it up and let people enjoy it as it should have been. We have a  project in Ballycarrie where we brought our young people to Malawi. And the following  year we brought a group back from Malawi. And we all worked together, our young people  
**[0:13:52-0:14:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:13:52):**  in the village from the different churches in Ballycarrie and the young people from Malawi.  And we made what is now known as the Malawi Garden. And that was back in 2001. And it's  still going and the churches are responsible each for two beds and they maintain it. And  
**[0:14:09-0:14:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:14:09):**  if one isn't able to, they then look after the other person. So working together and  it's beautiful.  Thanks, Gabriel, for that inspiring example. And just as we end our report from Jubilee  
**[0:14:20-0:14:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:14:20):**  Farm, here we work with Christians of all denominations, which in Northern Ireland in  a post-conflict context we feel is really important. But crucially, we also welcome  people of all backgrounds and belief to this place so that we can create space for people  
**[0:14:37-0:15:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:14:37):**  and for nature to flourish together.  And now we meet Andrea Cavaliere, whose family have been producing pasta in Italy for generations  by what he calls the delicate method. We met him at We Feed the Planet, a slow food event  
**[0:15:01-0:15:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:15:01):**  in Milan celebrating young farmers, which was the setting for episode three. This was  two and a half years ago now, a long time ago. But I can honestly still taste that pasta.  When I was a little child, I used to go to our factory. I was five years old. And my  
**[0:15:22-0:15:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:15:22):**  game was to go in the warehouse where we have the raw material and to try the different  variety. So for me to not cook, just semolina, and was so fun to understand the difference  in terms of taste, of chewiness. So it's the raw material that remember me when I was a  
**[0:15:43-0:16:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:15:43):**  child. My family, I mean, continue to produce, but it's not sufficient for our... So that's  why we try to convince new farmers to grow not the commercial variety, but that special  variety for us to continue, I mean, this tradition. It's very important for us not to buy the  
**[0:16:07-0:16:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:16:07):**  commercial wheat, but to visit it, to decide with our farmers which variety to grow in  which soil, I mean, and in which area, because every area has a special vocation for that  variety. It's like the wine, the grape. If you produce like a Chardonnay in the south  
**[0:16:31-0:16:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:16:31):**  of Italy, you won't see that bouquet, that fruit taste that the Chardonnay can have in  the north of Italy, in Veneto, for example. So the wheat is the same. You can find the  right soil for the right variety. So we really are very connected. So we don't buy just the  
**[0:16:54-0:17:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:16:54):**  commercial wheat, but we are connected with our farmers. Well, really, I don't have just  one favorite shape. I really love to change, and it depends from the seasonal raw material  we have. For example, when we have fresh vegetable in June, for example, I prefer like an organic  
**[0:17:17-0:17:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:17:17):**  fusilli, organic whole wheat, in order to feel the taste of the organic pasta, but also  the fresh vegetable with extra virgin olive oil. During the autumn, for example, that  we begin to have a ragu, for example, the wheel, our Cresci wheel is perfect with meat  
**[0:17:33-0:18:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:17:33):**  ragu, for example. And when it's the time of zucchini, for example, I like the linguine  zucchini and prawns. It's perfect. So I don't have just a favorite shape, but I love to  change, and it depends from the recipe.  
**[0:18:06-0:18:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:18:06):**  We hope you enjoy listening to Farmerama as much as we enjoy making it. A lot of work  goes into each episode, and we're always hugely grateful for support. If you're interested  in becoming a supporter, or if you know of someone who you think might be, please do  
**[0:18:21-0:19:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:18:21):**  get in touch. And you can do that through our website, Farmerama.co.  Humble by Nature is a tenant farm in the Wye Valley in Wales, run by the TV presenter  Kate Humble. And they're diversifying to explore aquaponics. I certainly find it difficult  
**[0:19:12-0:19:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:19:12):**  to remember the difference between hydroponics and aquaponics. Aquaponics is the one with  the fish. We spoke to Beko on the farm to hear about the work she's been doing there.  Aquaponics is basically using the waste from fish to feed plants. So fish are kept in tanks.  
**[0:19:33-0:19:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:19:33):**  We've got three large tanks and fish obviously eat and poo in the water. And the dirty water  is sucked from the bottom of the tanks and pumped to each grow bed. So we have 12 grow  beds. And within the grow beds is a media we call leka, which is an expanded clay. It's  
**[0:19:53-0:20:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:19:53):**  basically like a light gravel, a bit like pumice, but it's made of clay. And it's got  a very high surface area. So beneficial bacteria live on that surface area and consume the  ammonia in the fish way. So as we know, animal waste begins to smell very quickly and produces  
**[0:20:13-0:20:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:20:13):**  ammonia. And that ammonia is consumed by the beneficial bacteria and converted into nitrates,  which as we all know, is what is used, chemical or manmade, to produce lots of lush green  growth in plants. So that nitrate is taken up by the plants. And this means you can grow  
**[0:20:37-0:21:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:20:37):**  lots of herbs, salads, things like that mainly in our greenhouse very fast because it's a  nutrient rich water. And nutrient rich water that's being pumped into grow beds and it's  always available. The plants don't need to send out a huge root area. All the nutrients  
**[0:21:00-0:21:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:21:00):**  are there for their taking. They can take as much as they want. So they grow very fast.  And in turn, the plant's roots clean the solids and the ammonia or nitrates from the  water and the water is returned clean to the fish. So it's a closed loop. This means there's  
**[0:21:17-0:21:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:21:17):**  no danger of any nutrient leaching or runoff into our environment, into the rivers. So  it's a totally closed system. Aquaponics isn't going to replace traditional farming. It's  not going to replace livestock farming. Our farm is exposed. It's on top of a hill on  
**[0:21:38-0:21:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:21:38):**  a kind of basin plateau. So we get waterlogged. And when it rains a lot, all the tables are  like, nymphs under the ground. I think it's clay. It's really, really not the ideal place  to grow crops. It's great for sheep and cats. But to grow vegetables, it's not an easy place  
**[0:21:57-0:22:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:21:57):**  to grow. Aquaponics ideally is suited to urban growing and to be combined with industrial  growing. So having worked there for three years now and discovered and made lots of  mistakes and learned lots of things, I think is ideally suited to if we could start designing  
**[0:22:19-0:22:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:22:19):**  systems to fit in within either domestic or agricultural or industrial setups. So we can  utilize the waste heat from humans, from livestock, to heat greenhouses. So you could have aquaponics  systems on the sides of buildings, inside lots of flats or cities with lots of office  
**[0:22:46-0:23:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:22:46):**  blocks, or if they were combined in conjunction with cattle barns, so they could use the heat  in the winter from the cattle. That type of thing. It would increase the sustainability  of the systems hugely. And then you're utilizing the waste streams, be it waste heat or some  
**[0:23:07-0:23:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:23:07):**  systems can use maybe the manure in their system to increase the nutrition of the water.  So I mentioned there's no danger of runoff from the system because it's a closed loop.  It also enables you to maximize what you can grow in a single area. So our system is, I've  
**[0:23:29-0:23:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:23:29):**  forgotten how many square meters it is, but we're growing fish, protein, food and vegetables  in a small area. And because there's so much concern about the future of food and soil,  it's a way of producing food on a small scale and a lot of food. And you can, the more you  
**[0:23:52-0:24:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:23:52):**  feed the fish, obviously, the more they produce, the more nutrients the food, so the faster  the plants grow. So it's kind of everything you do in the system affects everything else.  And I mentioned it's not going to replace traditional farming. We can't grow potatoes  
**[0:24:04-0:24:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:24:04):**  in the system or carrots. We can't grow root crops because A, it's too damp. Our system  floods and drains every half an hour, which is just a bit too wet for those root crops.  And because we're growing in the lecker, which is like a gravelly type thing, roots can get  
**[0:24:22-0:24:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:24:22):**  a bit deformed. Some people have experimented and had some success with the root crops.  I've had success, huge success this summer with ginger, actually. So because that grows  on kind of just the top few inches, it's managing to push out the gravel out of the way so it's  
**[0:24:42-0:25:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:24:42):**  not being too deformed. And because our system is so warm, so full of nutrients and water,  it's just growing like crazy. So it's more of this special, what's seen as exotic or  what's normally imported to us. We can grow these generally imported high carbon foods  
**[0:25:04-0:25:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:25:04):**  quite simply on kind of 20 miles away. The system with very minimal input really. Our  main input is electricity. And we're working with Swansea University and another company  to develop more sustainable fish food that doesn't use fish caught from the sea, which  
**[0:25:29-0:25:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:25:29):**  is then grown up, ground up and used to feed fish. Because there is, I think someone worked  out that we're actually using more fish from the sea to feed the fish we eat. And we're  actually, yeah, the amount of fish from the sea is more than we're actually growing. So  
**[0:25:48-0:26:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:25:48):**  it just doesn't make sense to continue that system. There's all sorts of different ways  of doing aquaponics. Our system, we got funding from the community gardens who got a plot  here and from the Welsh government. So we've got a lot of technology. So it's almost like  
**[0:26:13-0:26:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:26:13):**  a showcase of what you can do. But you can make an aquaponics out of an old plastic barrel,  cut off the top, turn it over, drill some holes in and just have a little pump and have  just a direct small cycle. So it doesn't have to be high tech and it doesn't have to be  
**[0:26:31-0:26:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:26:31):**  complicated. You just have to know about plants and a little bit about fish helps and just  about systems and ecosystems and how it all works really.  Something all of you can do to help Farmerama is to write a review on iTunes. It really  
**[0:26:51-0:27:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:26:51):**  does make it easier for other people to find us. And please do share the podcast with your  farmer friends. We're always delighted to gain new listeners. We're also keen to hear  what you like, what you don't like and what we can do to make Farmerama both useful and  
**[0:27:07-0:27:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:27:07):**  enjoyable for you.  Farmerama is produced by me, Joe, Katie, who's presenting with me. Abbie's currently in Chile  for her yearly visit to the family farm, but has still somehow managed to find the time  
**[0:27:22-0:27:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:27:22):**  to help us get this episode together. Also thanks this month to Johnny from Jubilee Farm  for his report. We're very much looking forward to hearing more from the farm in the coming  months.  
**[0:27:33-0:27:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/31-herbs-christian-perspectives-on-farming-and-aquaponics#t=0:27:33):**  Thanks for listening. See you next month.  