### Farmerama  (2018-16-29)
**[0:00:00-0:00:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to Farmerama.  This month we listen in to a kitchen table talk as people have their say on the future  of food in Scotland.  And then we hop over to Jersey to hear how one family farm is using nature's efficient  seeds to transform their production methods.  
**[0:00:29-0:00:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:00:29):**  We investigate what Brexit means for food supply chains and future food trade.  There's an update from Northern Ireland as we hear about pig clubs.  And finally, we'll leave you with a buzzing song to keep us all BEE-leaving.  We begin in Glasgow at Katie's Kitchen Table.  Here in Scotland, the public consultation on the Good Food Nation Bill is expected to  
**[0:00:55-0:00:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:00:55):**  start very soon.  The idea is to create a wide-ranging piece of legislation that touches on several aspects  of Scotland's relationship with food, from production to distribution to education and  food culture.  Nourish is a food NGO and a founding member of the Scottish Food Coalition.  
**[0:01:13-0:01:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:01:13):**  To capture as many views as possible before the official consultation starts, they've  been encouraging people to hold kitchen table talks.  The idea is that friends, neighbours or colleagues get together and talk about the past, present  and possible future of food in Scotland.  Then they feed back their top fives, their concerns about food in Scotland and the government  
**[0:01:35-0:01:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:01:35):**  actions they'd like to see.  So I had some friends over for a talk.  Here are just a few snippets.  We started by sharing some of our childhood memories of food.  Just eating sweets.  
**[0:01:46-0:01:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:01:46):**  Just loads of sweets.  It's amazing what a big part of my life as well it was.  My life revolved around it in a sense.  You'd get your pocket money and that would be, well I can buy this sweet.  When new sweets came out it was really exciting in the playground.  
**[0:02:01-0:02:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:02:01):**  It would be a shame to take that away from them in some sense.  Obviously we want better nutrition and better health.  Having grown up in socialist Poland we actually didn't have any sweets.  So my parents had a garden.  We would be eating fruits from the tree until the Tommy burst.  
**[0:02:22-0:02:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:02:22):**  Sometimes my parents couldn't cook, they just brought stuff from canteen and that also wasn't  very unhealthy or anything.  It wasn't hardly ever fried.  So thinking about it actually my diet was better.  I had way better food growing up in 80s in Poland than I have in 2018 in Scotland.  
**[0:02:43-0:02:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:02:43):**  By far, by far.  When I was growing up what we ate was very limited in some ways and it was usually very  seasonal, even though I grew up in a council estate, everyone had a garden.  All the gardens were open.  We used to kind of sneak into the garden across and steal the strawberries.  
**[0:03:02-0:03:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:03:02):**  But we used to grow things like potatoes, carrots, rhubarb, but I didn't eat a pepper  until I was an adult.  I personally wouldn't mind going back to those times and certainly you might have to give  up certain foods but I would be fine with that.  When I was growing up in Dunbar a lot of my time I was like I guess I'll get a fish cake  
**[0:03:27-0:03:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:03:27):**  and a roll because that's what I can afford to eat right now.  And that's what you eat.  And it's crap.  You're growing up and it's not good for your mental health and ethical concerns is not  a concern.  
**[0:03:38-0:03:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:03:38):**  No, no, going to Greggs and having a fried product.  Yeah for sure.  Or something carby and heavy and hot and that's what you want.  These are all good concerns but also if you're going to talk on a national policy level for  Scotland keep the gunpowder dry maybe.  
**[0:03:57-0:04:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:03:57):**  I think that is very relevant and I think it is obviously important to remind ourselves  that a lot of what we're talking about is just so far removed from most people's concerns  and most people's context when it comes to food.  And I guess my question would be how can we create a situation in which living affordably  does not mean eating badly and the double burden as Bella from Nourish pointed out of  
**[0:04:30-0:04:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:04:30):**  living in poverty and not being able to afford food that is actually going to nourish you  and having to then deal with the health consequences and rely on a national health service that  is underfunded.  So how do we get away from that?  A big part of that is cooking.  
**[0:04:46-0:04:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:04:46):**  I haven't done the maths but I don't think it is that expensive if you are buying the  fruit and vegetables and cooking from scratch.  But if you want to go out and eat then it tends to be the unhealthy stuff that's cheaper.  But it does I guess take a bit more effort.  I think we're in a really privileged situation where we've had the time, the resources to  
**[0:05:09-0:05:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:05:09):**  learn how to do that as well.  A lot of people I think will be like I've got bigger things to think about than sit  down and learn how to cook and stuff where I can survive if I do this quickly and get  on and I've got other things to do.  I think it's changing the culture around food of learning and encouraging cooking and encouraging  
**[0:05:29-0:05:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:05:29):**  it and showing the benefits of that through education.  Showing them this is how much money you can save and getting that in.  When people are young, I don't know, we do home-eck in school but all we made was baked  apples and a big scone.  But even simple things like imagine this big soup that we can make and who can make it  
**[0:05:48-0:05:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:05:48):**  the most locally or the cheapest way and who can bring in something new to it and that's  a really nice thing you could do as a class.  I think in parts of Japan the way food is served at school is that the students have  a rota and they serve it.  So it's students serving students and it's freshly cooked and they talk about what they're  
**[0:06:11-0:06:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:06:11):**  eating that day as part of the curriculum, as part of their class and they go through  the menu.  I mean it would logistically be a big shift but I think it could have huge ramifications.  I was thinking as well about how do you educate people or whatever to know how to cook stuff  well.  
**[0:06:31-0:06:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:06:31):**  I think I don't want to be told how to live and the notion of somebody educating me about  foods makes me a bit aggressive or something.  I don't want to go and be told how to live.  I think the only way that I learn about food and eating is by people cooking for me.  That's so true though.  
**[0:06:52-0:06:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:06:52):**  If you're cooking with someone or you go to somebody's house for dinner and it's comfortable  and you're part of it, that's the prime time for learning about food and how to eat it.  But I guess given that what we're talking about here is what can the government do,  I think what you were saying about actually bringing that sort of experience into school  is a really important point and that can maybe be one of our top five.  
**[0:07:18-0:07:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:07:18):**  We talk about healthy nutritious food needing to be available at very low prices so that  everybody can afford them but there are a lot of people who can easily afford their  food who are still eating non-nutritious food and having health issues because of that or  not making what would be classed as the right sort of health choices.  So a big part of it is economic but I think the cultural shift is really important.  
**[0:07:42-0:07:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:07:42):**  Related to the question of cultural shift which seems so huge, there are so many institutions,  schools, hospitals, even the museums around here, anything that is government run, the  food tends to be shit.  That's a big one.  Probably because they're trying to sell it at the cheapest and it's best value judged  
**[0:08:04-0:08:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:08:04):**  in very, very narrow terms.  That can be a really huge positive influence if institutions that are government, state  funded, it's our money ultimately, if they're state funded or if they receive any kind of  funding from the state that actually it's not just about the bottom line and about cost  but actually it's where does this food come from, is it nutritious, is it produced ethically,  
**[0:08:30-0:08:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:08:30):**  etc.  For people in hospitals.  Yeah.  I agree but it's like how do they monitor that, how do they measure that?  There needs to be an established system of measuring ethical nurse or local nurse or  
**[0:08:42-0:08:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:08:42):**  value or health given properties or impacts on the NHS.  Maybe needs to be a standardised system of measuring that so that there could be some  sort of rating.  And then if there was some sort of rating then it could be applied wider than just public  bodies if other people wanted to use that then they'd have, well this is what good food  
**[0:09:04-0:09:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:09:04):**  looks like.  On a budget for an organisation.  Although it's also defining Jo what you just mentioned which is what do we define as good,  I think especially in Scotland or maybe especially in the UK, it's a loaded question because  you start, because of class.  
**[0:09:22-0:09:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:09:22):**  And why, why, why, discuss.  I don't know if there are reasons sometimes where I have not chosen the healthy thing  slash maybe the thing that I actually want.  What you choose to eat is like a symbolic thing, it's like an identity thing.  People would judge you if you start thinking that you're above yourself or whatever.  
**[0:09:43-0:09:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:09:43):**  This is why it's such an interesting cultural question and you have to be really delicate  about it and probably do it in schools with kids in a non-patronising, very careful way.  To throw it slightly more open, for me part of the problem is that food is a commodity  and food is something that is traded and invested in.  I think land ownership might have something to, like most of the land in Scotland is owned  
**[0:10:09-0:10:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:10:09):**  by very few people and it's very expensive, land is very expensive.  That whole system of land ownership reform needs to maybe be looked at to help other  more smaller businesses get into farming maybe and just to support farmers who are trying  to do the right thing.  And I think off the back of that, thinking more about longevity and resilience, and that's  
**[0:10:38-0:10:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:10:38):**  why more kind of conducive conditions for things like community supported agriculture  or models where maybe you have more people on the land and maybe the profit margin isn't  as great but you know that this is a model that is actually going to survive for the  next 5, 10, 20, 30, however many years.  And shifting the focus away from, again, away from food as industry and food as commodity  
**[0:11:08-0:11:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:11:08):**  to food as fundamental.  Yeah, and right, I mean that's something nourish are really keen to push, is the right to food.  Which I hadn't really thought about in those terms before was how bizarre it is that we  accept that there should be a universal right to education and there should be a universal  right to healthcare.  
**[0:11:27-0:11:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:11:27):**  But we don't have that kind of concept of universal right to food or good food.  It's brilliant to hear people with different experiences come together and discuss what  they want for the future of food in Scotland.  Katie, what were the final five recommendations you came up with?  They're all very much intertwined of course but number one was education.  
**[0:11:53-0:11:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:11:53):**  This is what we kept coming back to.  Serving food an integral part of the curriculum from an early age and teaching cooking as  a normal, easy, cheap thing to do.  Number two, reframing what we see as good value when it comes to serving food in state  run or state funded institutions.  
**[0:12:14-0:12:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:12:14):**  Focusing not just on the upfront cost but accounting for the food's nutritional value  and its environmental impact and ethics as well.  Number three, land.  Democratising land ownership in Scotland, making it easier for smaller scale, mixed,  resilient farming models to gain a foothold.  
**[0:12:35-0:12:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:12:35):**  Four, creating more incentives, maybe tax incentives, to produce nutritious food, shifting  the emphasis away from high value exports and tourist draws to feeding people here.  And number five, placing access to good food on the same footing as access to education  or healthcare, turning it from a money and class related privilege into a basic right.  If you'd like to know more then you should listen to our latest short.  
**[0:13:05-0:13:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:13:05):**  It's an interview with Bella Crow from Nourish about the Good Food Nation Bill and the work  they are doing to ensure the bill is as strong and effective as possible.  Everyone loves a Jersey Royal potato.  The island is famed for them and they dominate Jersey's agricultural sector.  But some farmers are realising that high input potato production is diminishing their resources.  
**[0:13:37-0:13:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:13:37):**  We spoke to young farmer Justin Legraeli at Anvil Farm about their first attempt to produce  potatoes and vegetables with zero external inputs and importantly how they're using  microscopes and compost extracts to guide bacterial and fungal populations.  My name is Justin Legraeli, I'm from Jersey.  We're based on the east side of the island at Anvil Farm.  
**[0:14:06-0:14:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:14:06):**  We've been running at Anvil Farm since about 1958 and I guess now ultimately we're market  gardeners but we have exported to the UK, a little bit to Europe but now what we'd really  like to do is basically focus on getting the best possible produce out to those that live  on the island.  I studied architecture and so obviously was away from the island, moved back to Jersey  
**[0:14:33-0:14:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:14:33):**  and a lot had changed on our family farm.  It was just my dad and my mum and staffing becomes to be quite a big issue on the island  and so we were sort of looking at how we could reduce our inputs but also how we could be  more efficient and effective with our time by sort of working with nature rather than  against it.  
**[0:14:57-0:15:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:14:57):**  We'd been doing a lot for export, for supermarkets and so the ground to be honest with you is  quite tired.  You know Jersey Royals are early season so the soil was sort of working for us from February  to well sometimes all the way through because we'd be doing broccoli and stuff with very  little rest.  
**[0:15:17-0:15:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:15:17):**  So it definitely needed some rejuvenation which is when I think we got in touch with  Promessa Soils and Glyn Mitchell and I started doing some other bits of research as well,  looking to the states for inspiration, looking at cover crops and that sort of thing and  it's still early days for us I'll be honest but yeah it's been a fun journey so far.  So we built a really large new tunnel and we thought you know what that'd be a perfect  
**[0:15:49-0:15:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:15:49):**  place to trial sort of compost teas, compost extracts, keeping living roots in the soil,  mulching, no till that sort of thing so this new tunnel site we called Glyn up and we basically  did a huge trial for us anyway in that space and then sort of looked at what happened so  obviously we started that season with Jersey Royals, no chemical input whatsoever not even  fertiliser just planted vetch alongside the Royals to get a bit of nitrogen in there just  
**[0:16:26-0:16:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:16:26):**  before that we'd actually put some compost extract to sort of boost microbe numbers and  to get the soil sort of working for us.  Had a perfectly normal harvest from it without any input so great, fantastic and then we  sort of moved on to our normal sort of summer crops so really mixed variety of salads and  pak choi and spring onion and all sorts of stuff just to see what happened and yeah some  
**[0:16:57-0:17:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:16:57):**  interesting results you know walking up to the pak choi and finding it wasn't shredded,  turning over lettuce leaves and seeing some dead bugs like green fly and stuff after a  folio feed of compost tea you know the whole thing being that if your plants are fit and  healthy like us if we're fit and healthy we can repel viruses and things that's sort of  how the theory goes yeah it's sort of just continued from there.  
**[0:17:26-0:17:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:17:26):**  We make thermo composts so I have to hold that compost between 55 and 65 degrees I think  for 15 days but within that you can change sort of the characteristics and the properties  of the compost by putting different things in whether you have a higher ratio of green  or brown material to make it either bacterial or fungal but then equally you know I'm always  on the hunt for mushrooms to try and boost the levels of fungi or looking for bits of  
**[0:17:57-0:18:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:17:57):**  moss ultimately the more diversity the better because we're trying to just improve our soil  and build it back to what it was and what it should be.  I don't understand this fully yet but you know the majority of our fields are quite  bacterial which for things like brassicas is not a bad thing brassicas don't do particularly  well in a fungal dominated soil apparently but ultimately a 50-50 fungi to bacteria is  
**[0:18:30-0:18:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:18:30):**  ideal for growing the majority of veg.  I've just finished the microscope course and it basically allows us to look at the microbes  that we have in our soil it will also let you look at the microbes that you might be  putting into the soil through either compost extracts or compost teas because you can analyze  your current soil state you can analyze your composts you can analyze your compost extracts  
**[0:18:55-0:19:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:18:55):**  and compost teas and then obviously you can analyze it all after a dose of compost extract.  Obviously it's not a standalone the whole compost tea thing you know so we're looking  at really diverse cover crops sort of 10 or more and using into cropping or even using  cover crops amongst crops that we're selling and I think the thing for us as well is actually  how do you work the compost tea into your agricultural system.  
**[0:19:26-0:19:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:19:26):**  We're all different scales we all have different equipment I welded rods on the back onto the  back of our subsoiler so that we can put the microbes underground that works for us might  not for someone else other people have more capital and they can go and buy something  that fits much better you can get it to work for you but it can be a really beneficial  add-on to the system that you already have.  
**[0:19:49-0:19:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:19:49):**  We're really going going home with it you know we have our own compost tea brewer and  so we're just going to put it out as much as we can across the whole of our farm we're  in sort of a I guess an unusual situation for Jersey in that we only farm our own land  which is about 48 acres but should be considered quite small but when it's only me and my dad  and my mum it's quite a lot to do and so we're just yeah we're just going to slowly implement  
**[0:20:19-0:20:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:20:19):**  that across the whole of our farm and just keep sort of monitoring how how things change.  If you can make your own sort of fertility on site and you can have things that are going  to help your crops to grow healthily without really spending any money you know that's  that's great and also I think you know this year it's been really encouraging for us we've  had chefs who've called us up just to say thanks for the veg it's the best we've had  
**[0:20:47-0:20:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:20:47):**  or you know I never used to like beetroot you know this is a chef who's traveled around  the world tried yours it's amazing you know just those little things like surely this  is working more of that would be fantastic.  That's amazing to hear that chefs have called them up to say they've produced some of the  best vegetables they've ever tasted it really does remind me that healthy soils means healthy  
**[0:21:19-0:21:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:21:19):**  plants means tasty veg and then healthy and happy people.  There's been lots of excitement here in the UK as farming ministers seem to be pushing  for more environmentally sound farming methods as we move away from EU regulations and that  reminds us if you do live in the UK then there's only one week left to respond to the draft  version of the agricultural bill health and harmony the future of food farming and the  
**[0:21:52-0:21:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:21:52):**  environment in a green brexit which sets out the government's ambitions for farming in  England and seeks the views of all readers on its proposals.  This will dictate government policy in farming for many years to come and now is the time  to get your voice heard please do visit the gov.uk site and have your say it's not just  farmers who need to respond but anyone who cares about the environment or eats food so  
**[0:22:19-0:22:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:22:19):**  that's everyone you can find the link on all our social media channels.  Another outcome of leaving the EU is potential new trade deals.  Tim Lang is professor of food policy at City University London's Centre for Food Policy.  He's well versed on what a hard or soft brexit could mean for British farmers.  He spoke to Marianne Lanzettel for Farmerama.  
**[0:22:45-0:22:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:22:45):**  Now at the moment we still don't know what kind of a brexit it will be.  Could you draw these two pictures of what a hard brexit would mean for farming and what  staying in the single market and aligned with the European market would also be meaning  for farmers?  A so-called hard brexit would mean basically leaving the European Union, the single market,  
**[0:23:06-0:23:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:23:06):**  the customs union and forging our own new trade deals.  Almost certainly that would mean turning to other parts of the world to feed the British  with the cheap food to which they become accustomed and almost certainly that will send not all  but heavy proportions of British farming into decline because they won't be able to compete  with the West Coast of Africa, with the United States on beef or Brazil or Australia and  
**[0:23:36-0:23:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:23:36):**  or even China on onions.  I mean if we really go that way, some of the private estimates that have been talked about  in farming think tanks of 50%, sometimes I've seen one estimate of 75% of farms go in Britain.  How are British farmers going to survive economically?  Because the subsidies are going to go.  
**[0:23:58-0:24:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:23:58):**  That's why the Secretary of State for England today announced extending the subsidies until  2024 because he knows and the DEFRA now knows what I'm talking about.  In which case they don't want that crisis to happen on their watch.  How much better in inverted commas would it be if we stayed more aligned to the European  Union?  
**[0:24:24-0:24:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:24:24):**  Would that really save British farmers or would it still show up considerable problems?  British farmers have been declining slowly at numbers within the European Union.  The point is this is maybe a disruption which will accelerate that trend.  I'm not necessarily arguing in favour of Nirvana being in the EU.  It clearly isn't.  
**[0:24:45-0:24:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:24:45):**  But I'm merely saying that the disruption, the speed of the disruption is itself now  a factor.  Most of us who have been in the EU have been highly critical of the form it takes and have  been arguing to build up the sustainability direction over if you like the industrialised  food direction.  
**[0:25:06-0:25:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:25:06):**  If we go a hard Brexit that disruption takes away the sustainability element.  Whatever the Secretary of State says he cannot deliver higher food standards except for a  very elite minority for mass food.  It just can't happen.  Economics will determine the driving down of prices and going for sources which are  
**[0:25:27-0:25:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:25:27):**  not available, which means going abroad.  Britain gets 31% of its food from within the European Union.  If that immediately is behind a tariff wall where is he going to come from?  The Secretary of State also said that he only wants to give money to those who deliver benefits  for the environment and for the popular good.  
**[0:25:49-0:25:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:25:49):**  Now that also can be seen as a real hinderness for trade.  So he said any trade policy would be decided within Parliament.  How do you see the chances that if push comes to shove British Parliament would say no to  a trade deal because people in Britain want to look after the environment and want to  keep the countryside?  
**[0:26:12-0:26:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:26:12):**  I think the politics of all of this is completely up in the air frankly.  The British public voted rightly or wrongly on a very stark in-out question.  Now the complexity is coming through.  What I don't see is the political leadership giving voice to that.  There's a bit of it but that's mainly because the politics of Britain has split.  
**[0:26:34-0:26:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:26:34):**  The Conservative Party has split itself, even the Cabinet has split, the Labour Party has  split, has been doing a very gentle, gradually getting more pro, staying in some sort of  contact with the European Union.  But it hasn't come out clean about that.  So we basically don't know.  
**[0:26:50-0:26:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:26:50):**  Meanwhile the clock is ticking.  We now have one year contracts in the food system that are going to be given by March  which are going to determine food prices for March 2019.  The British public is just in never never land at the moment.  It doesn't know what it's about to hit.  
**[0:27:11-0:27:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:27:11):**  Brexit is another reminder that smaller scale, more ecologically minded farmers around the  world need to stick together.  Of course government policies and international trade deals have a huge impact on us.  But ultimately it's the spirit of the people and their connection to the land that keeps  us all going.  
**[0:27:30-0:27:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:27:30):**  The more we relocalise our food systems and focus on the smaller scale, the less vulnerable  will be to the impacts of these policies.  So as ever a big shout out and thank you to all you smaller scale producers out there.  You are key to all of our futures.  We hope you enjoy listening to Farmerama as much as we enjoy making it.  
**[0:27:54-0:28:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:27:54):**  A lot of work goes into each episode so we're always really grateful for support.  If you're interested in becoming a supporter or if you know someone you think might be,  please do get in touch with us through our website, farmerama.co.  A few months ago we heard from Jonny Hanson at Jubilee Farm, Northern Ireland's first  community supported agriculture scheme.  
**[0:28:19-0:28:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:28:19):**  Last month they officially launched their Pig Club.  Jonny chatted to Dr Jude Stevens, a smallholder turned lecturer at Queen's University Belfast,  about the promise of Pig Clubs.  We're back at Jubilee Farm this month for the launch of our Pig Club where 24 families  have each booked in advance and paid for a quarter pig and recently arrived are seven  
**[0:28:48-0:28:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:28:48):**  finishers at 16 weeks old, a cross between large black and glossed roll spots.  And they're with us at the moment tucking into a hearty dinner this evening.  This month I'm with Dr Jude Stevens who before her current job as lecturer in leadership  for sustainable development at Queen's University Belfast was a smallholder and kept, among  other things, poultry and goats and pigs.  
**[0:29:18-0:29:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:29:18):**  Jude, I just wanted to ask you about how you felt Pig Clubs like this, as well as other  examples of community supported agriculture, how they help to reconnect people with food  production and also with food producers.  I think increasingly nowadays people are starting to ask questions about where their food comes  from and they want to know not only that the food is wholesome and has been produced perhaps  
**[0:29:45-0:29:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:29:45):**  organically but certainly in a way that isn't detrimental to the environment.  But another issue is animal welfare.  Being able to be part of the process whereby your pig or whatever other animal it happens  to be is raised, to be able to make contact with it actually gives your food a face again,  if you'll excuse the expression, because it's not just a packet of bacon on a shelf, it's  
**[0:30:10-0:30:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:30:10):**  a living creature and you've had that opportunity to see where it sits in the overall scheme  of farming.  Jude, in your day job you teach a master's course at Queen's in leadership for sustainable  development and also leadership for sustainable rural development.  How do you feel that food schemes like this, CSA schemes like Pig Clubs that share the  
**[0:30:31-0:30:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:30:31):**  risks as well as the rewards between producer and consumer, how does that help to promote  leadership for sustainable agriculture?  Anybody who's interested in sustainable agriculture will have an understanding of the environment  but also of things like the social economy and where our food sits within a local economy.  People are more aware of their carbon footprint, how their food is being raised and transported,  
**[0:31:03-0:31:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:31:03):**  animal welfare issues and just a generally wider understanding of why we need to connect  with our food more broadly.  And doing that by example is one of the best possible ways to help other people understand  why it is necessary.  We're amongst seven wonderful porkers at the moment that just illustrates so nicely how  
**[0:31:24-0:31:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:31:24):**  this can be done through community supported agriculture.  So there we have it this month from Jubilee Farm from Happy Pigs and Happy People.  And finally, since we're in a bit of a political mood this month, we had to share this song  from the Bee Leavers.  It's a catchy tune with a very serious message.  
**[0:31:46-0:31:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:31:46):**  A plea to Michael Gove, UK Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs to  keep his word and support a ban on neonicotinoid insecticides.  And I'm delighted to say that we're featuring the song in celebration.  On the 27th of April, EU member states, including the UK, voted for a near complete ban.  Cheers to that.  
**[0:32:20-0:32:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:32:20):**  That was time for.  The carpet lobby is so powerful we know  Takes a real man to stand up to the feds  But sooner see us pollinators dead  But then you know as well as me  
**[0:32:53-0:32:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:32:53):**  There ain't no birds without the bees  So keep your head  Honey, just you stick to what you said  Mr. Go, oh Mr. Go, oh Mr. Oh, Mr. Oh, Mr. Oh, Mr. Go, oh, oh, oh  There are no birds without bees  
**[0:33:16-0:33:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:33:16):**  They are your holiday treat  Treasure trove  Oh, Mr. Go, you sure look straight, please  But we know you're rockin' low  You're safe, babe, you better understand  
**[0:33:32-0:33:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:33:32):**  You're gonna have to rise to our demand  Cause I can tell you could free  This thing that's a lot to read  So here's a plan  There isn't war on the bees  
**[0:33:45-0:33:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:33:45):**  We won't let the sides bleed throughout this land  You are in viral, Secretary  We're beggin' you, please  Please, Mr. Go, please  Please, Mr. Go, Mr. Go  
**[0:33:58-0:34:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:33:58):**  Don't leave the band  It's goin', it's goin'  Oh, Mr. Oh, Mr. Oh, Mr. Oh, Mr. Oh, Mr. Go  Please, Mr. Go, say something  Thank you for listening.  
**[0:34:14-0:34:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:34:14):**  Farmerama is produced by Abbey Rose, me, Katie Revel, and the ace behind the scenes, Joe Barrett.  Thank you today to our reporters, Jonny Hansen and Marianne Landsettel, and of course to all of our guests.  Special thanks for me to the Kitchen Tabletop participants,  Joe, Jamie, Christopher, Julie, Charlotte, Anne and Marcin.  Our music is by Owen Barrett and Annie Landless keeps you all up to date on social media.  
**[0:34:42-0:34:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/33-kitchen-table-talks-jersey-soils-trade-deals-pig-clubs-and-bee-lieving#t=0:34:42):**  Thank you both.  See you next month.  