### Farmerama  (2018-09-27)
**[0:00:00-0:00:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to episode 34 of Farmerama.  This month we first hear from a self-confessed non-environmentalist about an ocean-based  farming solution that might inadvertently be saving the environment, as well as providing  a simple, new and sensible option for people wanting to make a living from the sea.  In Northern Ireland we get stuck into the very important issue of mental health in farming.  
**[0:00:29-0:00:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:00:29):**  We get the lowdown on plants activating genes and how this relates to seed saving.  And we end with a farmer in the remote south of Chile telling us about the importance of  community and how we can contribute to what he calls circle agriculture.  Bren Smith is Executive Director and Co-Founder of Greenwave, a fisherman-run organisation  focused on 3D ocean farming of kelp.  
**[0:01:04-0:01:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:01:04):**  Their polyculture vertical farming system grows a mix of seaweeds and shellfish that  requires zero inputs while sequestering carbon and rebuilding reef ecosystems.  So my name is Bren Smith, I'm owner of Thimble Island Ocean Farm and I'm a 3D ocean farmer.  So think of polyculture out to sea.  You know I was born and raised up in Newfoundland, Canada and dropped out of high school when  
**[0:01:38-0:01:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:01:38):**  I was 14 and headed out to become a commercial fisherman.  I fished you know Gloucester, Graham Banks, George's Banks, Tuna, Lobster and then I headed  to the Bering Sea where I fished cod and crab.  You know that was the height of industrialised fishing, it's what we know, it was ecologically  unsustainable and it was doomed in terms of creating a good living for those of us that  
**[0:02:04-0:02:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:02:04):**  want to spend our lives on the ocean.  So then I went to the aquaculture farms, the salmon farms to try that because that was  supposed to be the answer to overfishing but instead it was still an industrial model  of polluting, of not protecting and caretaking for our oceans and creating a really new vibrant  food supply.  
**[0:02:28-0:02:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:02:28):**  So I left sort of disillusioned from the aquaculture sector and then I headed and remade myself  as at the beginning an oyster farmer down in Long Island Sound and that was about 15  years ago and that was the start of all this.  You know I'm not really an environmentalist, I grew up supporting the seal hunts as a kid,  this was a way of life and I really think of the ocean as a place that I can die on  
**[0:02:56-0:03:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:02:56):**  my boat one day, I can have a self-directed life, I can have the pride of helping feed  my country, I can have something to pass on to my kids.  The interesting thing is that we're in a time where the choice between jobs and economic  development and ecological restoration, it's not a choice, it's a false choice that we  have to pick one or the other.  
**[0:03:22-0:03:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:03:22):**  Like I need to help restore the seas in order to make a living.  Even though I'm not a foodie, you know I eat at gas stations and McDonald's and stuff like  that, I'm just a working class kid and I still love the fish switch sandwich and I don't  comment this from an environmental perspective, it's now a tent, this food farming sector  sort of takes all types and I think we're gathering around this common vision of restoration,  
**[0:03:48-0:03:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:03:48):**  of feeding local communities and really trying to figure out what would a new sort of climate  farming and climate cuisine look like in the next 50 years.  You know why are we growing around a wild industrial palette?  Like we're trying to grow salmons and tunas, things that people want to eat based on originally  a wild fishery and why aren't we asking the oceans, what does it make sense to grow?  
**[0:04:13-0:04:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:04:13):**  You know imagine an underwater garden and what we have is hurricane proof anchors on  the sort of edges of the farm and then just some simple rope scaffolding down below and  from there we grow all sorts of different species.  We grow seaweeds and shellfish, so we have kelps, we've got gracilarias, we have oysters,  scallops, mussels, clams, we even harvest salt from those grounds and the way we pick  
**[0:04:42-0:04:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:04:42):**  the species is we only do zero input species because the brilliant thing about the ocean  is two things.  One is we don't really have to fight gravity, so we're able to build these very simple architectures  under the ocean and they're all these creatures we don't have to feed, so no freshwater, no  feed, no fertilizer and of course no land making it the most sustainable food on the  
**[0:05:03-0:05:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:05:03):**  planet.  That's one of the unique things about the farming system we've all come up with is that  it's highly replicable and it takes minimal capital costs.  Think of it as sort of the nail salon model of the ocean.  If you have 20 acres and a boat and $20,000 you can start up your own farm and that's  
**[0:05:20-0:05:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:05:20):**  been the key to replication, kind of these simple affordable designs so everyday regular  people like me can do this.  What's interesting on the commercial side is we've started with shellfish and then particularly  a sugar kelp and it's because it's one of the fastest growing plants on earth, it goes  in post hurricane season, we're able to just grow huge quantities in short periods of time  
**[0:05:49-0:05:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:05:49):**  and it's a winter crop so it's off season for a lot of fishermen which is good.  But I see that just as the beginning.  There are thousands of edible plants in the ocean, hundreds of kinds of shellfish.  There is something we can grow all over the globe.  So kelp is sort of for us the gateway drug in the beginning of this whole new polyculture  
**[0:06:13-0:06:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:06:13):**  regime that we can go out and imagine being a chef and finding out there are corns, arugulas,  tomatoes, kales that you've never seen before, you've never tasted before.  What we have is Green Wave which is a non-profit and that's meant to really train the new generation  of ocean farmers.  And we have requests to start farms in every coastal state in North America and 20 countries  
**[0:06:35-0:06:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:06:35):**  around the world.  I think we have over 100 farmers in England alone that want to start their own farms.  The demand is just huge.  A lot of actually young land-based farmers, men and women who can't afford land out in  the water, for us it's only $50 an acre a year.  
**[0:06:54-0:06:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:06:54):**  So they're able to come in and reimagine themselves as ocean farmers.  So there's something we can grow everywhere.  Some places it'll take some initial research in order to figure out what's economically  viable and what's delicious.  It basically you put up $20,000 of initial startup costs.  
**[0:07:16-0:07:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:07:16):**  So about $35,000 of fixed costs year to year to keep the farm going.  Because you can do anywhere from 10 to 20 tons of seaweed per acre, we're actually able  to make it profitable.  Generally it's two full-time jobs, five to seven part-time jobs during intense seasonal  work and it's a net for the farmer between $100,000 and $150,000.  
**[0:07:45-0:07:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:07:45):**  It's just the crops because we don't have to feed them.  It's cheap.  It's just rope, some anchors and picking the right crops, it really shifts the economics  of it.  Now another check-in with Jonny Hansen at Jubilee Farm in Northern Ireland.  
**[0:08:04-0:08:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:08:04):**  Here Jonny is speaking to his wife Paula, a fellow Jubilee director.  She is a trainee counsellor and the two of them discuss the intersection of mental health,  well-being and farming.  There is a bit of wind noise in this recording so we apologize for that.  One of the things that we're seeking to set up at Jubilee Farm is a care farming program  
**[0:08:25-0:08:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:08:25):**  and care farming works on the premise that time spent on a farm working with people,  animals, plants and the soil is good for us, good for body, good for mind and good for  souls.  But if care farming uses farming to take care of vulnerable groups in society, including  those with mental health problems, what about taking care of farmers themselves, particularly  
**[0:08:49-0:08:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:08:49):**  with regards to their mental health and well-being?  Well to answer that question this month I'm joined by Paula Hansen who is my fellow Jubilee  co-founder, director and better half but she's also a trainee counsellor.  And Paula and I are no stranger to mental health problems.  Paula has had ME for 15 years and both of us have faced the challenges, the mental health  
**[0:09:15-0:09:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:09:15):**  challenges in particular, of dealing and coping with long-term chronic illness.  So Paula, what are some of the challenges facing mental health amongst farmers but also  in farming communities and families?  Hi, thanks Jonny.  Yes I think as a society we're beginning to become more aware of the importance of our  
**[0:09:40-0:09:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:09:40):**  mental health and how that impacts our lives but there seems to be a lag in the agricultural  sector.  In a recent study the Office for National Statistics found that more than one agricultural  worker a week in the UK dies by suicide and the levels of depression seem to be increasing  in the sector also.  
**[0:10:01-0:10:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:10:01):**  In fact they went on to say that figures show that the risk to suicide among agricultural  roles such as harvesting crops and rearing animals are almost twice the national average  in the UK and I just feel that this is just unacceptable and we really need to start having  more dialogue about what's going on.  So I think one of the, some of the problems around this are that there seems to still  
**[0:10:24-0:10:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:10:24):**  be a stigma around mental health and talking about it within our agricultural communities  which further increases our isolation.  And even by the nature of the work, working anti-social hours, often working alone and  it's hard arduous physical work often also which we also recognise that our physical  well-being impacts our mental health also.  
**[0:10:47-0:10:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:10:47):**  But there are also very real financial stresses and pressures on farming communities whether  it be the increase in feed or fuel prices or supermarket prices affecting it or the  weather.  So what can you add to the overwhelming feeling of stress that our farmers and farming families  are under at the moment?  
**[0:11:10-0:11:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:11:10):**  Finding farming stressful is something we've had experience of recently, setting up Jubilee  Farm and particularly in the last few months the lease we were seeking on our first choice  site that we've been working towards for a number of years has fallen through unexpectedly  and we've been scrambling to find an alternative site at short notice and that has proved to  be phenomenally stressful at times.  
**[0:11:33-0:11:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:11:33):**  So Paula based on that recent lived experience in the Hanson household but also your practice  as a counsellor, what are some of the solutions then to the mental health crisis in farming?  Since I've mentioned suicide I think it's really important that I just highlight that  if you are in that very low point that there are organisations like Lifeline and the Smartens  that you can contact with their helplines on a 24-7 basis and it's really important  
**[0:12:02-0:12:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:12:02):**  to do that but equally just finding someone and tell them how you're feeling and being  open about where you're at.  You can also visit your GP because your mental health really and truly matters but simple  things that we can all do to improve our wellbeing and lower our levels of depression can be  just taking time, even 30 minutes a day of self-care and that can be simple like going  
**[0:12:27-0:12:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:12:27):**  for a walk or doing something that makes you feel good about yourself but there are also  other organisations and charities like in the UK we have Farming Community Network and  in Northern Ireland we have the Rural Support Initiative that help support farmers and farming  communities whether it be through financial advice or support or linking them in with  places where they can help their mental health.  
**[0:12:50-0:12:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:12:50):**  So yes, it's all about being real and talking more about how you're feeling.  There's lots of food for thought Paula there for all of us as we seek to improve mental  health in farming communities and just on a personal note from Jubilee Farm we've found  that if life gives you lemons then make lemonade and as a result of having to move from our  site this summer we hope to rent and then buy via Community Shares the first community  
**[0:13:15-0:13:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:13:15):**  owned farm in Northern Ireland so do stay tuned to Farmerama in future episodes for  more news on that.  And so finally from Paula and myself at Jubilee Farm this month we're wishing you good mental  health or as we say in Irish, sláinte.  This is a subject we've wanted to cover for a long time so thank you to Paula and Johnny  
**[0:13:39-0:13:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:13:39):**  for what I think is a quite important report.  We hope you enjoy listening to Farmerama as much as we enjoy making it.  A lot of work goes into each episode so we're always really grateful for support.  If you're interested in becoming a supporter or if you know someone you think might be  interested please do get in touch with us through our website Farmerama.co.  
**[0:14:25-0:14:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:14:25):**  Marco Bencien farms with his family at Fundo Laguna Blanca in the 8th region in Chile.  He lives under the watch of two volcanoes, one still active.  The landscape is incredibly lush, a real feast for the eyes.  Marco is a regenerative farmer working with permaculture, fostering the native forests  and building soils with animals.  
**[0:14:49-0:14:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:14:49):**  This sanctuary is something Marco wants to share and here he tells us about the importance  of community and opportunities to get involved.  My name is Marco Bencien, 33 years old, farmer from Germany Cologne and now we stay here  in Fundo Laguna Blanca in the south of Chile in the 9th region, Araucania.  We are on 1000 meters above sea level and from 106 kilometers from the next town, Timuco.  
**[0:15:21-0:15:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:15:21):**  For me farming here is a lifestyle and so for me it's a big big life quality to have  trees in front of my window, cows grazing and to see what I did in the last 10 years  here because it's not the same to come into some place and have a lot of money perhaps  and do everything with machines or other companies or people.  If you turn around every stone and you know what you did, there is some kind of peace  
**[0:15:54-0:16:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:15:54):**  in you because you made where you are living now.  For me it's very important that every morning when I stand up I don't think in earning money  or going forward so fast or have so much success is a part of life too but I'm thinking also  I love what I do every day and there are some days, bad days or some holds or downs, I don't  know how we can call it but in the most situations I love what I do and I want to do it and I  
**[0:16:30-0:16:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:16:30):**  have some kind of identification with it and I hope so there are much more people to have  this situation because I know a lot of people working in these places only for their salary  and to get forward with what they are doing with their family.  Today we don't see so much because we are in the clouds but we are situated here in  our lodge where we have about 25 beds or about 10 or 12 rooms.  
**[0:17:01-0:17:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:17:01):**  I came here 10 years ago with my family with a tent, with some work tools, a generator  and built the first house to have a base and then with years we built a water system, a  road system, some houses, some barns to have some base for the developing of this sustainable  project.  For me it was very important because in Germany we are connected with the civilisation and  
**[0:17:33-0:17:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:17:33):**  infrastructure with light and water and everything and today I know what it means to have one  liter of water or to have power in the house to have light and it was for me personally  a very very good experience to learn about our resources.  What we also do in this moment is the next step is to build some soils between our native  forests where we want to make some future forests.  
**[0:18:06-0:18:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:18:06):**  So we don't plant like it's normally in Chile, Eucalyptus and Pinot, we only plant native  trees.  And so we think in 10 or 15 years we can have more water here like it was 100 years before  there will come back the animals and between these forests we clear some fields where we  have some deadwood and bamboo and stones to have some fields for our animals and our agriculture  
**[0:18:41-0:18:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:18:41):**  in the same way as they are helping us like fire cuts.  The farmers from organic or traditional, I don't want to make there a difference, all  what we are working with the soil and we are working with animals and we are working for  this food system in this world, we have to build a bigger community.  My opinion is organic farming but I can understand also people who can change so fast so I think  
**[0:19:17-0:19:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:19:17):**  it's very important that we have more communication and see what are our results and what is my  wish in it, there are much more connection between the people and not only frustration  because there is a big industry or there is a client who don't want to buy or everything,  my wish is much more communication, much more community between the farmers and so I think  we have a good way for the future.  
**[0:19:46-0:19:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:19:46):**  Circle agriculture for me is a little bit like the old way but in a modern way too and  so I mean to have everything what normally a farm had 50 years ago, 100 years ago like  we have horses, pigs, sheep, goats, cows, we seed oats, we have a project with quinoa,  we have birds with eggs, we have a sale shop and we have fruits, vegetables and so what  I mean with circle agriculture is that we can have everything but in every area we have  
**[0:20:30-0:20:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:20:30):**  another person to concentrate on it.  What we need or what I want to do is like community farming so the idea is we have some  model in Germany called Change Campo, it's a cooperative, what the idea is that we have  some people working together, have their own spaces like with the animals or with the fields  or the forest or everything, in the same moment they are owner of the thing because they can  
**[0:21:01-0:21:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:21:01):**  be part of it and in another way they work in their area where they want to work.  So we can do some circle agriculture, we can do a lot of things but we have in every work  space another person who is a specialist what I can say and then we can concentrate us on  these different things and can something great together.  So everybody who is interested to speak about these options can contact me.  
**[0:21:46-0:21:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:21:46):**  We first heard from Joel Williams of Integrated Soils back in episode 28 where he told us  how he fell in love with soil.  We caught up with Joel again at last month's Future of UK Farming conference put on by  the Sustainable Food Trust.  Here's Joel to fill us in on how plants turn on certain genes, how this relates to seed  
**[0:22:06-0:22:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:22:06):**  saving and just how important mycorrhizae are as a plant's communication channel.  My name is Joel Williams from Integrated Soils and I am an educator particularly around soil  health and I do some consulting and advisory work for farmers but I'm mostly involved in  extension and sharing of information and knowledge.  Plants are an expression of their environment, the soil's chemical, physical and biological  
**[0:22:32-0:22:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:22:32):**  characteristics and the other climatic and weather factors.  All of those factors are triggers that stimulate the expression of certain genes that up or  down regulate certain genes.  Therefore the plant is a product of its environment and the more that plant or as that plant grows  through that season it's turning on the certain genes that it requires to survive that environment  
**[0:22:58-0:23:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:22:58):**  based on maybe the pathogen loads, insects, other temperature triggers, etc.  And so therefore the plant turns on all of those genes that it requires during that growing  season and when the plant then moves into reproduction and starts to produce seed it  is sending those, it is carrying on those genes into the seed in a more up-regulated  state you could say so that when the future progeny of that plant, when that seed germinates  
**[0:23:27-0:23:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:23:27):**  that plant will have those genes in a more activated state which then means that that  future child of the plant is in a way more adapt to that environment because it's already  been told what genes you need to activate straight away and therefore that future plant,  the future child is very adapt to that environment.  And therefore this is one of the reasons that farmers definitely should be saving seed a  
**[0:23:51-0:23:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:23:51):**  lot more because as we're now discovering as we open up this vast world of the soil  microbiome and link that to the plant genome and then all of these gene to gene conversations  that are happening between plants and microbes we are understanding that these triggers and  these nuances are actually extremely infinite and they are unique to each and every different  soil type.  
**[0:24:18-0:24:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:24:18):**  So by growing your plants, by saving your seeds grown in your soils you are selecting  and carrying on the genes that those plants require specifically in relation to your very  ultra-local soil type and that's the reason that farmers should be saving more and more  seed and doing that year after year and actually strengthening and selecting for the genes  that are required in their future varieties and breeds etc.  
**[0:24:43-0:24:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:24:43):**  We now are uncovering that plants absolutely communicate, not only do they share resources  through mycorrhizal fungi, they absolutely also communicate to each other and there's  quite a well-known study that was done with tomatoes and it would grow some tomatoes side  by side in the same soil but the tomato plants were enclosed in a bubble, in a barrier that  therefore meant that the tomatoes were not sharing airspace but however under the soil  
**[0:25:10-0:25:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:25:10):**  their roots were indeed in contact with each other.  And we know that plants release all sorts of volatile stress compounds, signaling molecules  that they can communicate through the air through those volatile compounds but the point  of putting that barrier, that little glass, the bubble over the tomatoes meant that we  restricted that sharing of airspace.  
**[0:25:31-0:25:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:25:31):**  And then what we did, what the researchers did to the half of the treatment was infected  with blight, with tomato blight and they found that the neighbouring tomato plant was then  it turned on its immune system, it activated specifically six genes that are associated  with the defence systems of the plant and they determined that actually it was the stressed  and infected plant that was sending a signaling molecule down to the root system, giving that  
**[0:25:59-0:26:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:25:59):**  to the mycorrhizal fungi, the mycorrhizal fungi was carrying that through the soil and  then passing that on to the other tomato plant to then which turned on its immune system.  So plants we now know absolutely can not only communicate through the air but also communicate  through the mycorrhizal fungal bridge and it emphasises therefore how important that  mycorrhizal bridge is when it's not there, if we didn't have mycorrhizal fungi there  
**[0:26:25-0:26:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:26:25):**  of course those tomatoes would not have been able to carry that message across.  One of the other interesting things we also have identified is that plants can pass on  immunity to their progeny through that seed when they are exposed to and challenged by,  particularly by pathogens, so if a plant is exposed to a pathogen it receives that signal,  that trigger that the pathogen is there, the plant will turn on its immune system to fight  
**[0:26:52-0:26:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:26:52):**  off that pathogen and in doing that it can also then transfer immunity into the seed  for the future progeny that actually then has an inherent and inbuilt immunity already  in it.  The research has shown that that is only passed on for one generation, it's not that then  that child can pass it on to its next one, so that next child would have to then be exposed  
**[0:27:17-0:27:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:27:17):**  to that pathogen again to then carry that across but nonetheless it does add to that  point we were discussing earlier about seeds transferring, plants transferring the right  genes required for their environments into their seeds and so even on that point from  disease pressure and disease management it's a really important reason why farmers should  be saving their seed.  
**[0:27:44-0:27:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:27:44):**  Thanks Joel, you can also tune into our short this month to hear from Pasture for Life farmer  Rob Hevard who is also at the Future of UK Farming conference.  He tells us some clever tips on how to harvest your own seeds for planting herbal lais and  how he has been experimenting with terminating herbal lais working solely with his animals.  This show was produced by me, I'm Joe Barrett, Abbey Rose and Katie Revel.  
**[0:28:13-0:28:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-episode-34#t=0:28:13):**  Additional reporting from Jonny Hansen at Jubilee Farm.  Thank you to Annie Landeless for doing a sterling job of keeping everyone informed on social  media.  Plick for Farmer Mama is made by Owen Barrett.  