### Farmerama  (2018-55-24)
**[0:00:00-0:00:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to Farmerama, episode 35.  This month we begin in California, where they're paying farmers to sequester carbon using practices  proven to increase soil health.  We head to the home of democracy to hear how Greek citizens are bringing seed saving back  to the people.  
**[0:00:29-0:00:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:00:29):**  In Somerset, we get some tips on starting a market garden, and we end up back in the  USA, this time deep in Indiana, to hear how one college is using the power of education  to transform the landscape of the Midwest.  Charles Shembrey is a long-time grower, farm manager, and soil conservationist.  Nowadays, his main role is vineyard conservation coordinator at Napa County Resource Conservation  
**[0:00:59-0:01:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:00:59):**  District.  His work sees him leading the implementation of California's Healthy Soils Program, a scheme  which compensates farmers for increasing their soil health with the goal of sequestering  carbon and increasing water retention.  The quantities sequestered are estimated using CARB-GHG quantification methodology and tools.  
**[0:01:21-0:01:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:01:21):**  For example, one farm in Merced, California is being paid $50,000 to sequester 345.6 tons  of greenhouse gases per year.  They'll do this by moving to minimum tillage on farm, planting multi-species leguminous  cover crops, and spreading compost annually, all on their 70 acres.  We were keen to share about this as an example of a Healthy Soils farming initiative already  
**[0:01:53-0:01:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:01:53):**  in place.  It's very relevant as the UK government rethinks our farming subsidy system here.  Charles told us a bit of the history, how this project is the first of its kind, and  how the initiative is evolving as it goes.  By the way, CDFA is the California Department for Food and Agriculture.  
**[0:02:16-0:02:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:02:16):**  The Healthy Soils initiative is one of a kind.  I think right now, off the top of my head, I can't even explain how it came about.  I know that there was something passed in 2015 by the state of California.  It was in 2016.  We have the soil, there's some soil action plan of California.  
**[0:02:35-0:02:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:02:35):**  This is where the soil, through the Soil Health Initiative was birthed, the Healthy Soils Program  to fund growers, landowners around the state.  I think it's a great program and it's just evolving.  There's been some things about it that some of us have disagreed with in the actual language  of the grant and the requirements behind it.  
**[0:02:57-0:03:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:02:57):**  CDFA has been pretty responsive to these comments and they're starting to shift some of the  requirements.  The first round of funding, the compost application requirements were not consistent with or practical.  You had to apply compost at a certain rate for three years in a row every year.  We generally recommend compost applications at a much larger application and with a much  
**[0:03:23-0:03:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:03:23):**  larger interval.  Maybe once every five years, maybe even once every ten years, depending on the size of  the application.  Some of the soil monitoring that they were requesting to prove that there was carbon  sequestration was kind of unrealistic, they wanted it to happen every year.  
**[0:03:42-0:03:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:03:42):**  And again, it's dynamic so it might take three, four, five years to see a small response.  It's just interesting how the conversation shifts.  We used to talk about right before Trump was hired that we could sequester carbon and mitigate  climate change through soil management and now the USDA isn't allowed to use that kind  of terminology because climate change doesn't exist or something like that.  
**[0:04:10-0:04:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:04:10):**  That's the interesting thing.  But it is, it is kind of the first time that it's been recognized at a state level that  this is a real tool for mitigating climate change.  That's pretty profound.  We don't do justice to this kind of work when we try to look at it just through one lens.  
**[0:04:33-0:04:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:04:33):**  We've understood for decades sustainable regenerative soil management practices and what it does  to the whole ecological function of the land, from storing water to reducing erosion to  enhancing crop productivity to providing habitat and clean water to animals and people.  That's really the lens that I'm going to continue walking down.  It doesn't need to be a climate lens or a carbon lens, but it's about the whole system.  
**[0:05:02-0:05:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:05:02):**  And I think the Healthy Soils Initiative is looking through multiple lenses.  I don't think it's just about carbon, but sometimes we seem to get caught up in talking  about that.  But the Healthy Soils Initiative does state that climate solutions can occur through soil  management.  
**[0:05:18-0:05:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:05:18):**  That is known.  So that is certainly a focus.  And maybe it's the driving focus that I'm maybe a little reluctant to have that focus.  What I believe is that we're in a paradigm that we need to break out of.  And even some of us who feel like we have broken out of that paradigm, we still have  
**[0:05:40-0:05:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:05:40):**  to step back and recognize that sometimes we're still looking through a lens of traditional  farming since World War II.  What seems to be the way it should look in particular, we tend to use our eyes to look  at the land, like on the farm and things being clean, cookie-cutted.  We have to step back sometimes and think about what is the end result and what does that  
**[0:06:08-0:06:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:06:08):**  mean and how do we shift our conditioning away from that.  You go out there and you're just trying to get things done.  It's like a day to day.  Sometimes you just got to stop and you think, oh, I got to mow this and I got to do that  and I got to do that.  
**[0:06:25-0:06:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:06:25):**  And sometimes I stop and go, but why?  Why do I have to mow that area over there?  And I start thinking about it and I'm like, I don't need to mow that area.  I can let that just be.  It's just this estate.  
**[0:06:36-0:06:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:06:36):**  We want to keep things mowed and keep things clean.  So biologically, if you're looking through the carbon lens, you want to be able to sequester  as much carbon as you can.  You need chlorophyll to do that.  So if you mow something down, especially in California, where by the way, it doesn't rain  
**[0:06:52-0:06:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:06:52):**  for like five to six months out of the year, as soon as you mow something, it is pretty  much dead.  And just another quick example is that we've noticed that when you let grasses and other  things grow quite tall, the dew is captured.  And this is just anecdotally.  
**[0:07:12-0:07:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:07:12):**  Everybody wants things measured and researched, but we see out on these properties where we  let covers grow real tall, that atmospheric moisture is condensing and that we find that  the topsoil stays more moist in these no-till environments and you have more biological  activity as you get deeper into the season as warming up and you still have a lot of  moisture that's actually being grabbed from the air.  
**[0:07:39-0:07:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:07:39):**  So just like redwoods do that, they've found that redwoods have the fog drip and we can  get that off of different covers.  So that's what I mean of opening that lens.  If you want to capture carbon, you've got to think like carbon.  And so I guess that's my long message there.  
**[0:08:02-0:08:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:08:02):**  Charles also helped create the first ever carbon farm plans for four vineyards in Napa  County working with their partners, the Carbon Cycle Institute.  You can hear more about these carbon farm plans and details of how they monitor soil  health and carbon sequestration in this month's short.  Peliti is a voluntary non-profit organization based near Drama in Greece.  
**[0:08:45-0:08:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:08:45):**  It works to preserve agricultural biodiversity through the collection and exchange of traditional  seeds.  Its annual Seed Exchange Festival has inspired similar events across Europe, but it all started  with one young man and a startling realization.  Peliti's seed came as an idea to Panagiotis Ainetoudis who is the founder and the coordinator  
**[0:09:08-0:09:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:09:08):**  of the community about 20 or 25 years ago when he realized that he wasn't able to find  all the varieties of, let's say, corn that he used to eat as a child.  Suddenly he's 20, 30 years old and then he realizes that there's only one type of corn  variety left.  And he started wondering what happened, what are all the other varieties.  
**[0:09:32-0:09:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:09:32):**  On his own, he started traveling around Greece, meeting people in villages, searching and  gathering all seed varieties in order to save them somehow.  This has gradually led into the creation of a huge seed archive which needs a lot of resources  to be maintained, although the purpose is not at all creating a seed archive or a seed  bank because seeds are meant to be grown and cultivated and able to evolve.  
**[0:10:01-0:10:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:10:01):**  And this is one aspect that maybe we should shed some light on that seed banks, although  people use it as an argument or politicians use it as an argument against the necessity  of seed saving, are not a solution on their own because of what I said before.  Seeds are not meant to be kept in a refrigerator, dug under the earth.  They should be able to evolve, develop together with us and together with climate, together  
**[0:10:30-0:10:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:10:30):**  with the soil and the earth because they can do it, whereas the industrial varieties cannot  do it.  So right now, Pellidi is consisted of 20 local groups all over Europe and also there is a  group in Sofia, Bulgaria.  We are all volunteers right now.  
**[0:10:48-0:10:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:10:48):**  During the past years, Pellidi is actively involved and networked with other groups of  seed savers around the world.  Do you think that organizations like Pellidi also do some sort of politics as well?  Traditional varieties is the reason why our food was based on until very recently, solely,  exclusively on traditional seed varieties until 60-70 years ago when the big industry  
**[0:11:17-0:11:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:11:17):**  came and provided farmers with high yield varieties, but they go hand in hand with agrochemicals  and soil exhaustion because they have a limited genetic database and they cannot survive a  natural attack.  On the other hand, traditional varieties have a broad genetic base.  They can survive pests and diseases by evolving.  
**[0:11:38-0:11:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:11:38):**  They might not be as productive as the industrial ones, but it has been proven that if a farmer,  and this is what's important for local economy and it's also a huge political issue, if a  farmer is able to keep his own seed, which is not always easy, you know, seed legislation  is not always very in favor of accessibility of seeds.  Well, if a farmer is able to keep, is allowed and able to keep its own seed, he doesn't  
**[0:12:07-0:12:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:12:07):**  have to use fertilizers and pesticides, agrochemicals in general, and can sell its products directly.  He can have a totally viable farming business and even earn 10 times more than a farmer  that buys seed, buys pesticides and fertilizers and buys through intermediaries.  Balidi is a community that is trying to focus mainly on raising awareness and grow a network,  a community of people that support each other in seed saving, having in mind all these aspects.  
**[0:12:47-0:12:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:12:47):**  And the ultimate one is our own health, apart from the political one or the economical one  for farmers, the health issue is something that connects everyone.  It would be very interesting if we could focus on this aspect.  For the moment, we're mainly trying to focus on encouraged farmers and professional farmers  to grow more of local varieties, traditional varieties, and be able to improve them the  
**[0:13:16-0:13:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:13:16):**  way our ancestors did for many years so that more professional farmers prefer them for  their benefits.  And gradually, this might lead into creating a network of committed professional farmers  that face their farms as an ecosystem of soil and plants and people that each one supports  each other for a better life.  
**[0:13:45-0:13:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:13:45):**  Working class here, Balidi with the support of Forum Synergy is working towards a direction  of affecting seed policy so that traditional varieties can be accessible legally.  The legal framework doesn't allow this moment.  It is said in a way that selling traditional varieties is not allowed because it demands  uniformity and stability in order to sell seeds.  
**[0:14:06-0:14:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:14:06):**  So that uniformity and stability is something that only industrial varieties can achieve.  Traditional varieties cannot do it because they evolve, as we said.  So it's a very crucial issue and our main efforts right now, a big part of our efforts,  of Balidi's efforts, is focused on this.  And we also have an annual seed festival every year, week after Easter, where people from  
**[0:14:32-0:14:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:14:32):**  all over Greece and now from all over the world come and exchange seeds.  We're doing workshops, people exchange experiences, not only on seed issues, but on land, access  to land and new farming practices.  And we learn from one another.  It's like a community that each one teaches the other.  
**[0:14:52-0:14:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:14:52):**  As with all collective efforts, when different people gather, we have differences, but having  this common ground in mind, we try to find the connections that unites us and step on  it and evolve and continue.  You seem to give a lot of emphasis on the human-to-human relationships and interaction,  direct communication, knowledge exchange.  
**[0:15:19-0:15:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:15:19):**  I think the motto of Balidi is from hand to hand and from soul to soul.  From hand to hand and from heart to heart.  Do you think that there is space for new technologies to help catalyze this strive for seed freedom,  for food democracy, for solidarity-based land use and so on?  I think that new technologies are necessary, especially now that the food industry is so  
**[0:15:45-0:15:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:15:45):**  aggressively addressing farmers.  So if we want to create something different, we have to use new technologies that facilitate  what we do and our purpose.  We already use technology that facilitates communication with each other within the country  because we're in different parts of Greece.  
**[0:16:05-0:16:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:16:05):**  So it's necessary to use the simplest form of internet communication.  We could use technologies to improve our seed archive, monitor and control it somehow so  that other people can easily have access to what we have, maybe create a commons of our  seed archives so that other people can share.  So it's a tool in our hands and I think it's necessary for us to use it effectively.  
**[0:16:35-0:16:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:16:35):**  Thanks to Pavlos and Oli from the Grow Observatory for sending us this recording.  The Grow Observatory is an EU-wide citizen science project which helps people to grow  food and care for their soils using regenerative practices.  We have six other interviews from the project on our Soundcloud page, including an extended  version of this one.  
**[0:16:56-0:17:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:16:56):**  Many of these interviews haven't been featured on the main show, so if this has sparked your  interest, visit Soundcloud to hear more.  We hope you enjoy listening to Farmerama as much as we enjoy making it.  A lot of work goes into each episode, so we're always really grateful for support.  If you're interested in becoming a supporter, or if you know someone you think might be,  
**[0:17:22-0:17:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:17:22):**  please do get in touch with us through our website, Farmerama.co.  Charles Dowding is a UK-based pioneer of no-dig market gardening.  We first featured him talking about no-dig way back in episode 18.  This month, Charles tells us how he went about planning and creating his beautiful no-dig  market garden, Homeacres, in Somerset.  
**[0:17:48-0:17:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:17:48):**  And he also has a few tips on how to keep your garden weed-free.  At Homeacres in Somerset, South West England, we've just had a weekend of lovely, thundery  rain and the garden is just looking incredibly abundant and also very beautiful at this time  of year.  When I arrived here, it was an empty plot with just weeds growing and some brambles  
**[0:18:09-0:18:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:18:09):**  and nothing edible.  It was massively overgrown on the South West side by an old windbreak of tall spruce trees,  so I had them cut down, which opened me up to wind quite a bit and I thought, well, I  want something edible that might give a bit of wind protection anyway, and decided in  the end actually to plant a line of apple trees.  
**[0:18:24-0:18:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:18:24):**  So that was a good location for planting some trees and if I'm planting trees, I was hoping  they'll make some fruit.  So I chose apple trees on M26 rootstock planted one year maiden, so that's the cheapest way  you can buy a tree and it's quicker to plant just a small hole, thoroughly mulched, and  they're now four years old and already taller than me, which actually is tall as I want  
**[0:18:45-0:18:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:18:45):**  them to be, and I keep pruning them twice a year and that's looking good along the South  West side of the property.  And then I also was putting in perennial plants like rhubarb and perennial kale and fruit  bushes, raspberries, that was all happened before Christmas in the first autumn here.  And then the next decision to make was where to put the greenhouse and polytunnel.  
**[0:19:06-0:19:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:19:06):**  And what I didn't do though was I didn't have an overarching inch by inch plan of the whole  plot because there's always a bit of getting to know a place.  I needed to get it working and I wanted to be cropping that summer, but I didn't want  to have everything mapped out before I'd really got to know the place a bit.  So Steph McCartney was helping.  
**[0:19:26-0:19:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:19:26):**  We worked out where to put the greenhouse and the polytunnel, which was governed also  by what we found in the soil because this had been an earth room before.  There's still concrete foundations here and my original place I wanted to put the polytunnel,  we actually couldn't because there was some big lumps of concrete still there.  So that's about how you have to adapt to what you find and you can't just sit down with  
**[0:19:44-0:19:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:19:44):**  a pen and paper and draw a lovely design.  I put the perennials in first because they're the long term crop that take longer to establish.  And so I wanted to get them in the ground just as soon as I could really.  Annuals you don't need to start sowing until the spring.  So there wasn't so much rush for that.  
**[0:20:00-0:20:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:20:00):**  And then after that, through the winter, once I got my greenhouse polytunnel in place, it  was just making beds one by one really with an idea of where things were going.  And another key decision is where to put the compost heaps.  So I put them in the middle basically, that makes the most sense.  And just adapting to the site as I went along.  
**[0:20:18-0:20:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:20:18):**  One of the things I'm loving every year actually, even after the rain we've had, there's just  hardly any weeds and how easy that makes the gardening and how I can concentrate therefore  on the sowing and planting and making it beautiful as well.  And we're going through taking off lower leaves of any plants that are starting to decay.  And that gives less habitat for slugs also the way we pick the lettuce.  
**[0:20:40-0:20:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:20:40):**  So generally things always look pretty immaculate and you definitely can have a productive and  a beautiful garden at the same time.  And it's very nice place to be.  And so what is your key tip for the no weeds?  No dig.  
**[0:20:53-0:20:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:20:53):**  That's undisturbed soil covers itself less.  So you just get less weeds growing and compost mulch helps.  It's easier to pull weeds out of compost.  And the other key one is a weed strike in the spring.  So when you see the first year of green in March or early April, run a hoe very lightly  
**[0:21:11-0:21:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:21:11):**  through no deeper than an inch and you're only hoeing in the compost, you're not hoeing  in the soil.  And that way you can kill hundreds, thousands, tens of thousands of weeds very quickly in  a few minutes rather than letting them grow.  Mary Lee Sustainable Farm is part of the Environmental Learning Center at Goshen College in Indiana.  
**[0:21:38-0:21:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:21:38):**  You can drive for hundreds of miles passing vast expanses of corn and soybeans with a  tree here and there.  But on arriving at Mary Lee, you're submerged into a lush prairie and woodland landscape  with lakes all around.  This is a working farm buzzing with diversity, a place for students to see just what's possible  
**[0:22:00-0:22:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:22:00):**  in the Midwest.  John Mishler is Mary Lee's Director of Agroecology and Ellie Shirts is the Assistant Farm Manager.  They explained why the farm is a key part of their environmental center and why it's  so valuable to the college.  And we also heard from two of the former students who have chosen to return to Mary Lee and  
**[0:22:19-0:22:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:22:19):**  volunteer there for the summer.  So I'm John Mishler.  I'm the Director of our Agroecology Summer Intensive, which is a summer semester teaching  college students agroecological methods in the Midwest.  And I'm also a professor in the Sustainable Food Systems major here we have at Goshen  
**[0:22:39-0:22:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:22:39):**  College.  And I also oversee the farm.  Multi-faceted job with a lot of interesting and awesome challenges.  So we manage 100 acres here as the farm, as a subset of the Mary Lee Nature Preserve.  And we manage prairies.  
**[0:22:56-0:23:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:22:56):**  We manage different types of woodland environments.  We manage savannas.  We manage wetlands.  We manage growing spaces.  We manage warm season and cool season grasses.  
**[0:23:07-0:23:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:23:07):**  And all of this is to provide agricultural products.  So we derive food from the land.  But we can also, who says that if you produce food, you can't also have these beautiful  landscapes to enjoy.  And so we really put to work the agroecological approach, letting these landscapes work together  
**[0:23:26-0:23:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:23:26):**  in order to do some of the work for us in order to raise this food and enjoy living  here.  And so students that come to Goshen College, whether they're at Goshen College or whether  they're coming from other colleges for our summer semester, I think this is a very unique  opportunity to practice this really diversified land sharing agroecological approach amongst  
**[0:23:50-0:23:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:23:50):**  the epicenter of corn and bean farming here in middle America.  So my name is Ellie Shirts, and I am the assistant farm manager here at Mary Lee Sustainable Farm.  The main educational program that happens here at Mary Lee Sustainable Farm is the agroecology  summer intensive.  It's a semester's worth of classes and hands-on experience that happens here on the farm.  
**[0:24:19-0:24:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:24:19):**  Students live here for the summer, and they get college credit.  They take classes in soils and vegetable crop management, animal husbandry, and then more  sociology type classes on food systems.  Out of the farm we run a CSA, community supported agriculture, where we offer shares to Goshen  College students and faculty and staff on campus.  
**[0:24:45-0:24:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:24:45):**  I help run the CSA, so once a week I'll harvest food here, and the students here would help  grow that food.  We pack it all up and I deliver it to campus so that they don't have to make the drive  here.  It just makes the food more accessible.  
**[0:25:00-0:25:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:25:00):**  It's a way for them to connect if they can't physically get here.  Last fall, about half of our share was student households, and they really enjoyed it.  They made community meals out of it, and they were excited about the produce every week.  I'm Mandirapanta.  I'm actually from Nepal, but I'm here in Goshen, Indiana to study environmental science.  
**[0:25:25-0:25:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:25:25):**  The first thing that attracted me to Goshen was merely sustainable farm, and I'm really  interested in learning about how sustainability comes together into agriculture.  I'm Jess Raffel.  I am studying environmental science at Goshen College with a concentration in agroecology.  Last summer I came here and took some summer classes on agroecology, and this summer I'm  
**[0:25:52-0:25:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:25:52):**  back focusing on tree care and how that plays into an agroecological system.  In working with the system and being able to learn while doing, I think that's something  that a lot of other colleges don't do a lot of, is just giving freedom to the students,  and that's very valuable in a learning environment.  You get to make mistakes, you get to learn from them, and that's a really important thing  
**[0:26:17-0:26:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:26:17):**  if you want to pursue a future or a career in the field that you're interested in.  I was really surprised at how the whole system functions, and when you start farming, you  become amazed every single day by every little sprout or every little flower that starts.  You plant a seed and then you also learn to be patient as you watch the seed grow, and  you're just so worried about it.  
**[0:26:45-0:26:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:26:45):**  It does sound ridiculous, but you start to care more about not just plants or animals,  but also about people around you.  One of the things that has surprised me is just how big some of the problems that we're  dealing with are with the environment, and how these really are systems problems.  There are many aspects of the environment that need to change, and also the way that  
**[0:27:09-0:27:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:27:09):**  people operate in order to see a more sustainable future in agriculture and food systems in  general.  Even if you don't have any way to produce food on your own, learn where your food comes  from, how you can help make the entire food industry better.  How do you treat your waste that comes from food?  
**[0:27:30-0:27:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:27:30):**  That's a really big thing.  Something I think that everyone should hear is that you can make a difference.  Just start learning about the systems, growing your own food, getting involved, get your  hands in the dirt, and you'll start to care, and that's what we need.  Education is what has driven the spot at Mary Lee.  
**[0:27:52-0:27:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:27:52):**  We're here to educate the public as well as college students.  That's why we're here.  We have all kinds of projects going on all the time, and it's an exciting place.  Sometimes it's a little overwhelming to have so many projects to juggle, but it's exciting  when students come in and are excited about what's happening, and they tell other students.  
**[0:28:15-0:28:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:28:15):**  Some students come back for more than one summer, maybe their student one summer, and  they come back for an internship because they're so excited about it.  I was actually a student here several years ago and was happy to get a job here.  It's a place that I think excites people, gets people excited about life and about growing  food.  
**[0:28:38-0:28:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:28:38):**  We keep a close eye.  We really like to stay connected with agriculture as it's known globally.  We keep abreast of what's going on in the UK and the EU.  We have a lot of work going on in Sub-Saharan Africa, and we stay connected to what's going  on in India.  
**[0:28:59-0:29:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:28:59):**  I'm constantly amazed at the innovation that folks are starting to reimagine agricultural  systems and it's a phrase that can sometimes seem a little overused, but I think it's still  vital putting the culture back into agriculture.  I really appreciate these perspectives that not only understand the utility of agriculture  in producing food to feed the world, but also this idea that agriculture as a way of life  
**[0:29:34-0:29:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:29:34):**  and food as not only sustenance but intertwined within the culture and what makes us who we  are.  I've been encouraged with what I've been seeing in the UK.  I've been encouraged with what I've been seeing here in the States and across the world.  I love to meet folks who are working on similar questions.  
**[0:29:58-0:30:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:29:58):**  Yeah, I'm very hopeful.  I think we're moving in a good direction.  This episode was produced by Abby, Joe and me, Katie.  Thanks to the team at Grow Observatory for sending in the recording from Greece.  And thank you as always to Annie Landless for keeping everyone up to date on social  
**[0:30:23-0:30:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/35-soil-carbon-greek-traditional-seeds-starting-a-market-garden-and-educators-in-indiana#t=0:30:23):**  media, and to all of our guests and listeners.  Farmerama theme music comes from Owen Barrett.  