
    ---
    title: 37: intergenerational tensions, compost tea revisited, agroforestry and Dutch innovation
    ---

    ### Farmerama  (2018-08-25)  
### Author(s): Farmerama  

**[0:00:00-0:00:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to Farmerama. This month we head to Herefordshire for a farmer who  is rethinking his apple growing. We get the latest on composting with and without tea  from an experiment we first heard about last year. And we learn about an innovative business  
**[0:00:18-0:00:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:00:18):**  model for community farming that's proving to be a great success in the Netherlands.  But first we get a perspective on dealing with the inevitable tensions that pop up between  different generations trying to farm together. Here is ecological farming star Joel Salatin  
**[0:00:38-0:00:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:00:38):**  with his thoughts.  This parent-child tension is everywhere. The parents who own the farm or have developed  the farm feel threatened by the children's creativity and seemingly lack of gravitas  
**[0:01:00-0:01:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:01:00):**  about how much work it is to acquire the barn. And of course the younger generation of course  they feel constrained and inhibited by the older generation's orthodoxy. Two things I  would say. One is that there needs to be place for the young person to try something embryonically  
**[0:01:29-0:01:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:01:29):**  without threatening the mothership. And so carve out a hectare, half a hectare, whatever  to create, alright this will be yours, look. What parent would be interested to see what  their child could do in the corner of that barn or the corner of that shed or the corner  
**[0:01:51-0:01:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:01:51):**  of that field. And okay the child is going to say it's not big enough. Well you know  what it has to be big enough. That's the compromise. The younger generation has to be willing to  try a very small embryo and the older generation seeing that it's so small and doesn't threaten  
**[0:02:11-0:02:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:02:11):**  the mothership is much more likely to allow that to happen. The second thing is to actually  separate farm income streams so that the generations can enjoy performance or functionally oriented  compensation so that, I call these fiefdoms, so that the parents can have their enterprise,  
**[0:02:42-0:02:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:02:42):**  the kids can have their enterprise and they sink or fail on their own merits and they  don't jeopardize each other. So that the child's failure doesn't jeopardize the parent's income  and the parent's curmudgeoness doesn't jeopardize the next generation's inventiveness. And so  
**[0:03:05-0:03:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:03:05):**  kind of separating that out to where you're not just all for one and one for all, just  sharing in common. Sharing in common sounds good on paper and it sounds so warm and fuzzy  and communally but in real sense it doesn't work because pretty soon one's going to feel  
**[0:03:23-0:03:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:03:23):**  like they're carrying the heavier load, the other's not and we all feel. So those are,  divide the income streams and create spheres of autonomy and responsibility. In our family,  we have four, we have my wife and I and our son and daughter-in-law, basically four of  
**[0:03:40-0:03:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:03:40):**  us as equal people and we actually sat down and created job descriptions. So we didn't  step on each other's toes and it was very liberating to create these spheres of authority,  autonomy and influence for all of us.  
**[0:04:00-0:04:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:04:00):**  Sophie Alexander was a finalist for Arable Farmer of the Year last year and that was  partly thanks to her work with compost tea trials at Hemsworth Farm in Dorset. You might  remember hearing about these trials in the episode we did on the Organic Farmers and  
**[0:04:14-0:04:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:04:14):**  Growers event in July last year. Sophie is back with an update on the highs and lows  of applying compost teas to arable crops and the next step on her composting journey.  I would have liked to have carried on but one of the big obstacles was that we no longer  
**[0:04:32-0:04:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:04:32):**  had access to the same sprayer and I'd made the decision really that I didn't want to  invest in my own sprayer, I'd prefer to scale up the actual compost making operation and  apply compost to the fields rather than compost tea. We were finding in the third year that  
**[0:04:56-0:05:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:04:56):**  our compost had a very good analysis, it was very active, it had all the right sort of  fungal components and then the tea which is brewed for 24 hours should have multiplied  the biology and we were finding that that didn't really happen. So what came out of  
**[0:05:21-0:05:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:05:21):**  the sprayer at the end which we also analysed was just as good as the compost tea but none  of it seemed to have a really multiplication of what was in the compost. So we were going  through this fairly labour intensive process of making the compost into tea with doubtful  
**[0:05:43-0:05:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:05:43):**  results. So having got the confidence to make good compost I thought right let's spend our  time and money scaling up the compost making process and not worry about investing in a  big sprayer and doing it that way. The other thing that concerned me was that in the trials  
**[0:06:08-0:06:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:06:08):**  we were applying compost tea to growing crops. If I was to do it again now I think I would  apply the tea during the herbal lay fertility growing period because I didn't like just  driving over crops. We tried to do it as early in the season as possible but it would still  
**[0:06:33-0:06:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:06:33):**  leave wheelings and wheelings in crops can let disease in and also I felt that the time  of year it tended to be the sunniest brightest hottest time of year when it's very hard to  get a spray of microbes to penetrate the soil. Anyone else who does it in future I think  
**[0:07:00-0:07:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:07:00):**  one thing that really could be a valuable line of enquiry is the disease suppressing  ability of compost teas on crops. But I was doing it really to try and as a catalyst to  micro biological activity in the soil so I would definitely do it on pasture from now  
**[0:07:21-0:07:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:07:21):**  on and not crops. One of the other considerations about not any longer using compost tea was  the amount of water we ended up using and you know here we are in a drought ridden summer  and I would feel uneasy about not only am I using was I using 8000 litres of water to  
**[0:07:49-0:07:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:07:49):**  dilute the compost and apply to the fields but the cleaning process for both the sprayer  and the brewer itself used thousands of litres and that's not going to any good use that's  just going down the drain. So in terms of building up the compost quantities I'm now  
**[0:08:12-0:08:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:08:12):**  buying in green waste past 100 green waste from a small public waste enterprise. I'm  very lucky to have something fairly nearby which really makes a big effort to clean it  and that forms probably about 30-40% of the compost we're making and then there's a livery  
**[0:08:34-0:08:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:08:34):**  enterprise on the farm so we get straw and horse manure from that. Our own grass cuttings,  wood chippings, old bales of hay, straw and a clay component. We use clay from the farm  making up about 10% of the compost and one of the really interesting things that we've  
**[0:08:59-0:09:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:08:59):**  found so far about that is if we don't use the clay component in a compost pile it doesn't  retain water. If it has got the clay component it remains really moist and retains the water  very efficiently. Part of the process of making this so well-humified, aerobically prepared  
**[0:09:24-0:09:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:09:24):**  compost is you need to turn it a lot. So when you first form the piles you might need to  turn it four or five times in the first 10 days, two weeks and looked at lots of bits  of machinery to achieve that. We had an old tractor but it just wasn't manoeuvrable enough,  
**[0:09:45-0:09:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:09:45):**  you had to have such huge spaces between all the piles of compost and then we looked at  a windrow machine but again it needs quite a substantial tractor to drive it. It's incredibly  slow and mechanically can be quite unreliable and cumbersome. So we bought this sort of  
**[0:10:10-0:10:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:10:10):**  diddy toy, it's called a Noisome Whacker and it's a mini loader, turns on a sixpence and  we can double the number of piles we have within the same space and it has other multiple  uses on the farm so it's a really good gizmo. When we were in the compost tea trials one  
**[0:10:32-0:10:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:10:32):**  of the things that really attracted me to the compost tea concept was that I only needed  to make 100 kilos of compost to treat 40 hectares of field because of the dilution of the tea  and I just at that time couldn't see how I could make enough actual compost to make a  
**[0:10:57-0:11:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:10:57):**  difference on the farm. But having now got more confident about making compost, ultimately  I'd like to make a thousand tons a year but this year I think we'll be up to 400 tons  and it lasts, I don't think it's an application for a subsequent crop, it's a long term soil  
**[0:11:24-0:11:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:11:24):**  conditioning so you can apply it maybe to the grass lays but then it'll have a cumulative  benefit for subsequent crops.  We'd like to thank Rebel Kitchen for their ongoing support. We love that they're a B Corp.  
**[0:12:02-0:12:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:12:02):**  It basically means that as a business you're accountable to maximise not just profits but  also your social and ecological contribution to the earth. The B Corp movement is something  that we find very inspiring and we're delighted that Rebel Kitchen are supporting us in the  
**[0:12:19-0:12:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:12:19):**  work that we're doing.  Stephen Ware and his ancestors have been growing apples on Throne Farm in Herefordshire for  a good long time and in the last century they've found themselves becoming increasingly specialised  
**[0:12:48-0:12:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:12:48):**  in their apple growing. In recent years disease has become a real challenge and it's put some  pressure on the densely planted bush orchards. Stephen's decided to diversify his farming  set up and although apples are still key to his business, the landscape is beginning to  
**[0:13:05-0:13:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:13:05):**  change.  The farm is Throne Farm, that's like what the Queen sits on. The motivation for the  name was that King Charles stayed in the farmhouse in 1645 when we used to make cider on the  
**[0:13:19-0:13:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:13:19):**  farm, well we, my ancestors, and that would pay the workmen but also it was like a diversification  for the farmhouse. And so here we have some silty loam soils which are pretty fertile  and we're blessed with a lot of water, perhaps too much sometimes, and so we have quite a  
**[0:13:38-0:13:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:13:38):**  disease challenge in our orchards for fungi, scab and that type of thing. And so the motivation  really for the agroforestry started from finding ways of growing the apples semi intensively  but with less disease challenge and so by growing them in long lines and then having  
**[0:13:59-0:14:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:13:59):**  a big gap we get heat and air around the trees so they dry out a lot quicker and it takes  that stress away that you would find in a modern bush orchard as we term that.  The big spin off then is that it's like any good permaculture system in that you have  
**[0:14:19-0:14:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:14:19):**  the boundary between the trees and the cropping land and so within that sort of transition  zone we've got a line of trees, then we've got a line of pollinators which bridge the  ends of the field from one hedge at one end to the other end and so our conventional bush  
**[0:14:38-0:14:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:14:38):**  orchards are sort of wildlife deserts almost and we're penetrating right into the field  with that sort of natural predators and pollinators. And then that transition zone continues into  the arable cropping in the middle which as a spin off we have different levels of rooting  
**[0:14:58-0:15:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:14:58):**  zones so the trees root lower than the arable crops and you've got the pollinators in between  which would speak massive diversity within the agroforestry system. So when the leaves  fall you've got the brown leaves to decompose and that encourages the fungal population  
**[0:15:17-0:15:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:15:17):**  which is pretty devoid in our soil and has become over the last few years and that's  it in a nutshell.  So grazing or mob grazing is something that we want to consider. My father had a mixed  
**[0:15:30-0:15:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:15:30):**  farm and it was running right through the year, you had lambs lambing and then calving  right the way through Arab planting spring crops, tending to your cattle, sheep, then  he had a harvest of the wheat and cereals and into potatoes and then selling your livestock.  
**[0:15:52-0:15:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:15:52):**  So mixed farm like that you've got a rotation and it all fits together. Now we've been pushed  down this monocultural route, we lack the organic matter return to the soil which is  a pretty obvious statement that people say but it is what it is. So I'm looking to share  
**[0:16:08-0:16:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:16:08):**  farm with someone who can run some cattle up and down the strips and the nice thing  at is that the trees map a natural avenue for the mob grazing so that it's a bit like  playing golf I suppose, you're pointing in the same direction, the cattle know where  
**[0:16:22-0:16:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:16:22):**  they're going, you know where they're going and they just go up and down in a strip sense  between the trees from the agroforestry which it doesn't sound like much for these days  with mapping but actually it just looks more obvious to me when you actually look at it  
**[0:16:41-0:16:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:16:41):**  now now that we've got the trees in place.  Being at Stevens Farm is incredibly inspiring. It was a massive undertaking and risk to take  out large swathes of the dense apple orchards but the newly planted apple strips look very  
**[0:16:58-0:17:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:16:58):**  happy and there's a multitude of hues and busy bees in every direction.  Koen van Zeyen makes the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture podcast and for the podcast he  interviews key players in the regenerative agriculture world. That includes people who  
**[0:17:17-0:17:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:17:17):**  are bringing new streams of money to the sector and also those who are finding new business  models and scaling up the practices on the ground.  In these interviews I'm talking to people who are scaling up the regenerative agriculture  
**[0:17:29-0:17:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:17:29):**  sector either by increasing the inflow of investment capital or by scaling up the enterprises  on and in the ground and by doing so exploring what it means to be an impact investor in  regenerative agriculture.  
**[0:17:42-0:17:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:17:42):**  Here he speaks to Geert van der Weer, co-founder of Herrenboren, a community-owned regenerative  farm in the Netherlands. With almost 200 families as co-owners, Geert believes this is the beginning  of a scalable system for a new community farming model.  
**[0:17:58-0:17:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:17:58):**  Welcome Geert.  Thank you. Hi Koen.  So to start with a personal question and of course we would love to know more about Herrenboren  
**[0:18:06-0:18:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:18:06):**  and the movement, but what made you start Herrenboren and why regenerative agriculture  in the Netherlands for you?  Yeah, it has to do with my experience since I was working with the farmers association  
**[0:18:23-0:18:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:18:23):**  here in the Netherlands. I have been working there between 1998 and 2003 and I discovered  a lot about the way we are producing our food here in the Netherlands, of course, in Europe  and in the world. And I saw that things should be different than it's been doing today.  
**[0:18:49-0:18:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:18:49):**  So that's why I was trying to do it from, I was trying to change from within the organization  and that took me so much effort that I thought I want to do it differently. So I left the  association, started to work on projects on short chain relationships between consumers  
**[0:19:12-0:19:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:19:12):**  and farmers. And I did that for a couple of years and also I there discovered that starting  with the producer is not always the same as starting to work with an entrepreneur. And  so I discovered that it's difficult for farmers to change their business model, to change  
**[0:19:36-0:19:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:19:36):**  their way of thinking. It's also a cultural thing within the agricultural sector that  I thought, okay, I've seen a lot and I've done a lot and right now I have to do one  thing. I have to develop my own farm concept that shows the world, shows the Netherlands  
**[0:19:55-0:20:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:19:55):**  that it's possible to do it differently and the best way of having some impact is to do  it. So then we started the Heerenboeren movement as we speak of it right now. And well, we  opened the first farm in 2015 in Vauxhall and right now we are having about 20 farms  
**[0:20:23-0:20:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:20:23):**  as in families who want their own farm here in the Netherlands. We are helping to build  that farm. So it's more than just one spot at the moment.  There are many examples where people get together and maybe start farming or buy something,  
**[0:20:39-0:20:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:20:39):**  etc. But what really for me set you apart is that from the beginning you said this needs  to scale. We need to get to 100, we need to get 200, we need to go to 2000 farms that  are operating in this way. So from the beginning you really designed it with scale in place.  
**[0:20:55-0:20:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:20:55):**  And at the moment there's one really operative and there are about 20 that are in different  phases of getting there. But can you explain, let's take the one that is already operational.  What is it? What's the scale? What is so different from the neighbors that are still farming  
**[0:21:11-0:21:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:21:11):**  traditionally and how does it work?  The basic principles are quite simple. There are 200 households representing 500 people.  These households, they became a member of our cooperative and they did an investment  
**[0:21:32-0:21:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:21:32):**  of 2000 euros per household. And they brought also together 400,000 euros. And that amount  of money we spent on, we invested in the first costs we had to make to start the farm. And  the farm is a farm which produces a lot of different products. So we have fruits, vegetables,  
**[0:21:59-0:22:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:21:59):**  we have meat as in chicken, pork, beef. We have eggs and we try to, within these different  product groups, we try to have as much as possible variety. So we have 12 different  apples, 8 different pears, etc. So what the members do, they bring on an annual base all  
**[0:22:33-0:22:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:22:33):**  the costs together by the contribution they pay to the cooperative. So each mouth in a  household in a family, each mouth pays about 10 euros each week and gets in return for  that he gets the products from our farm and compared to the supermarket that's a lot cheaper.  
**[0:22:56-0:23:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:22:56):**  To be more concrete, they are committed for three years in the beginning and of course  they can stay a member as long as they want. But in the beginning they are committed for  three years and that makes it possible to start this farm because in the beginning it's  
**[0:23:13-0:23:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:23:13):**  not up and running completely. So that commitment we needed. But it seems to be not even a problem  to find people who are this committed to the concept. So it has to do with two things.  It has to do with the community feeling, being together, starting together, something that  
**[0:23:39-0:23:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:23:39):**  makes the world a little bit better in your own benefit in this concrete. And the other  thing is that we are trying to improve our techniques in the way we produce the food.  So it has to do with the way we keep our livestock, it has to do with the way we are producing  
**[0:24:01-0:24:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:24:01):**  vegetables, etc. A lot of permaculture influence on our farm. Agroecology is the main principle  we work with. And so on. You can say that it's not only nice and fun to be a member  of the cooperative, but you can also have a lot of influence on the way we are producing.  
**[0:24:25-0:24:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:24:25):**  So actually the entrepreneurship of this farm is not on the level of the farmer, but it's  on the level of the cooperative and every member is the entrepreneur of our farm.  Who is the farmer? Who is doing the farming? Are those the people in the cooperative or  
**[0:24:40-0:24:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:24:40):**  is it somebody else doing the day to day work, a professional?  Essential part of the concept is that we wanted to be independent of voluntary activities.  So there is a farmer who is getting his money from the cooperative.  
**[0:25:02-0:25:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:25:02):**  A fixed salary, which is nice for, I mean, it's very different for many farmers.  Yeah, he's not having the risks or the benefits of the farm. That's what the cooperative members  together have. So he gets a salary to be concrete. So that's one farmer and he has on a yearly  
**[0:25:24-0:25:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:25:24):**  base, there is an amount of money he can spend on hiring more people to work on the farm  if necessary. Because there are a lot of members who want to work on the farm. There is no  necessary element that they have to come to work on the farm.  
**[0:25:45-0:25:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:25:45):**  But if they do, of course, it saves costs, which benefits the cooperative.  Exactly. So basically the daily work has been, is the farmer who is doing the daily work.  And he is the manager of the farm and he can hire more people or he gets his people from  
**[0:26:05-0:26:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:26:05):**  the community working on the farm.  A longer version of this interview can be heard on the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture  podcast. You can find the link to that on our website or just search wherever you get  
**[0:26:17-0:26:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:26:17):**  your podcasts. Thank you to Kern for getting in touch with us and also to Gaia for first  sharing this story with us. What do you think about this model?  I think it's a brilliant new innovation how to set up a farming community or a farm with  
**[0:26:33-0:26:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:26:33):**  many people living from the farm and being connected to the farm. I think it is particularly  important that not everyone has to contribute because not everyone wants to be working on  a farm, even if they want to have access to high quality food. So I think that's great.  
**[0:26:50-0:26:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:26:50):**  The only side to it that I find a little uncomfortable is I think that farmers are actually often  very entrepreneurial in themselves. And it feels a little bit in this model like they're  taking away that opportunity for the farmer to be entrepreneurial and not giving enough  
**[0:27:10-0:27:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:27:10):**  credit to the value of what the farmer does and how they actually are the people who go  out and observe patterns in the field and see what's happening. And that's where real  innovations can happen.  
**[0:27:31-0:27:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:27:31):**  FarmROM is produced by myself, Abbey Rose, Joe Barrett and Katie Revel. Social media  is led by Annie Landless with Eliza Jenkins and Olivia Aldam. And music is by Owen Barrett.  This week we had contributions from Cohen Van Sechen and a shout out to one of our original  
**[0:27:52-0:28:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/37-family-tensions-compost-tea-revisited-agroforestry-and-innovative-business-models#t=0:27:52):**  hosts, Nigel, who interviewed Joel with myself.  