### Farmerama  (2018-51-30)
**[0:00:00-0:00:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:00:00):**  Hello friends and welcome to episode 38 of Farmerama.  This month we hear voices of the food and farming community from all over the world,  including a renowned chef and real food campaigner, and a young woman who farms with passion against  the odds.  Then we head back to the UK to hear about companion crop trials across multiple farms,  
**[0:00:28-0:00:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:00:28):**  and we ask what the sustainable agriculture movement can learn from the cooperative movement.  And make sure you stay tuned to the end, we've got a special message from two old friends  with some very exciting news.  At first, I've been in Turin for Terra Madre, the biennial celebration of the slow food community,  where fishers, shepherds, farmers, chefs, food activists, entrepreneurs, policy makers,  
**[0:01:05-0:01:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:01:05):**  and more from over 90 countries and indigenous communities come together to strategise and  celebrate.  People share their stories, spices, foods, traditions, songs, and hopes for the future.  My name is Katia, I'm from Italy, and my husband Murad from Morocco, we are a mixed family,  we have three children, they have two cultures, but we are in one world.  
**[0:01:36-0:01:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:01:36):**  Very, very happy, it's a very good moment.  My name is Benjamin, I'm from Nigeria.  I'm here for the Slow Food Program, Terra Madre.  It's great because I can see that this is the only way we can fight climate change,  this is the only way we can help the biodiversity, this is the only way we can protect ourselves.  
**[0:02:00-0:02:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:02:00):**  Even for food security, this is the only solution.  I'm Valentina, I'm from Colombia.  I feel more than one person, I feel like everyone, I feel part of the vibration, I feel like  part of something being fermented right now, and just thrilled and happy.  My name is Kishan, I'm from Grenada, an island in the Caribbean, and I'm Christina, I'm from  
**[0:02:28-0:02:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:02:28):**  Honduras, Central America.  I represent Slow Fish Caribbean, and I'm just here to do the forums and share my ideas on  what is happening in my small island community.  And I'm a chef, and I founded the Slow Food in Honduras, so we are very happy.  It's just new, eight months ago, so really happy, first Terra Madre, first time Honduras  
**[0:02:51-0:02:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:02:51):**  seeing here, so it's a night to celebrate.  I'm so happy now.  I'm so happy and it's more funny, funny, more funny, more funny.  It's my first time to be like this.  I met you in the past, I've seen you, met you.  
**[0:03:10-0:03:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:03:10):**  And what kind of surprises you the most, or what excites you the most?  Like this parade.  Abby spoke to all sorts of people at Terra Madre.  See if you can recognize this voice.  I have been to Terra Madre many, many times, but this year it's so important to me because  
**[0:03:39-0:03:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:03:39):**  there's a kind of energy and spirit about it.  It's so hopeful, and I need that right now.  I need to be filled up with hope and to meet the people who are passionate about food,  to meet the farmers from countries around the world.  It feeds me.  
**[0:04:04-0:04:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:04:04):**  All right, we're not going to tell you who it is.  We'll let her introduce herself if you haven't worked it out already.  Here she chats to Abby about the unwavering approach she's taken in managing her now legendary restaurant,  Chez Panisse, which has been one of the driving forces behind the farm-to-table movement.  And she tells us about a project she's recently launched to support the small-scale farming community  
**[0:04:27-0:04:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:04:27):**  in her home, the United States.  I'm Alice Waters, and I'm the owner of Chez Panisse restaurant in Berkeley, California,  and the founder of the Edible Schoolyard Project.  I started Chez Panisse 47 years ago, and at that time we were in a very serious place in the United States.  We had a war with Vietnam.  
**[0:04:54-0:04:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:04:54):**  We had civil rights issues.  And I was so part of that counterculture movement and wanted to have a place to gather.  And so I thought, well, I'll just open a restaurant.  I was a passionate Francophile at the time, and I just thought I will cook simple French food,  and people can come and have a conversation.  
**[0:05:24-0:05:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:05:24):**  But because I believed that we could change the world, I wanted the restaurant to represent the values that I treasure.  I wasn't in it for the money.  In fact, if I had made money at the beginning, I would have been ashamed.  So I didn't even think about that.  I wanted to figure a way that we could divide up the jobs at the restaurant equally,  
**[0:05:57-0:06:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:05:57):**  and that we could work collaboratively.  And it's never been about one person kind of showing off.  It's always been a group that was trying to make things better than they had the day before.  So we're passionate about our relationship to farmers.  We have one farm that we support entirely.  
**[0:06:30-0:06:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:06:30):**  He claims his vegetables are ten times more nutritious because he takes care of the soil.  In a very beautiful way.  He allows to do all the things it needs to do, and then the vegetables can be all they can be.  We have maybe 60 other people that we buy from during the course of the year,  different vegetables or whatever in different seasons.  
**[0:07:05-0:07:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:07:05):**  And every one of them we know personally.  We go and pick up the food right from the farm, or they deliver it to us.  We pay them the real cost.  And I think that that is what has helped to build the big community of Farm to Table  that happens in Northern California.  
**[0:07:28-0:07:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:07:28):**  It's the willingness to pay the real price.  I don't want wholesale.  I want to pay them what it really costs to do the work that allows us to do the most wonderful cooking.  We're always looking for feedback from the customers and from each other.  Was that good?  
**[0:07:56-0:07:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:07:56):**  Should we add a little bit more spice to that?  It's never a personal thing.  It can't be.  We're trying to always get better at what we're doing.  And if we're not ready to hear that kind of criticism, then it can never happen if you take it personally.  
**[0:08:17-0:08:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:08:17):**  The smaller scale farming community, get ready, because we're going to buy food for the schools.  We're going to buy directly from you.  And we're going to give you the real price.  And 20% of the population of the United States is in schools.  We need many more farmers, and we need to connect with the schools that are locally there in your communities.  
**[0:08:53-0:09:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:08:53):**  And we can be an engine for sustainability and nourishment.  18-year-old Muna was at Terramadre with her mother.  Muna is a young farmer from the West Bank in Palestine, a land full of challenges.  She's a young farmer, and she's a very active farmer.  Muna is a young farmer from the West Bank in Palestine, a land full of challenges.  
**[0:09:31-0:09:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:09:31):**  Her family has been farming for generations, and as a child, Muna didn't show much interest in farming.  But she's now thrown herself into the task of tending their land and their animals.  Muna also has a side project.  At just 15, she began gathering young volunteers to harvest and tend abandoned olive groves belonging to members of the Palestinian diaspora.  My name is Muna. I'm 18 years old. I live in a small village in Palestine.  
**[0:10:07-0:10:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:10:07):**  It's called Burin. We have a difficult situation for the farmer and the students.  Actually, my family has a lot of farms.  My grandmother and my great-grandmother like a farm.  I learned everything from my parents.  At first, I was not interested in farming or anything.  
**[0:10:34-0:10:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:10:34):**  But when someone challenged me, they said,  you are a girl just to sleep and eat, and I challenged him to learn everything.  It was my start. I was start from this point.  So then I learned everything, and I'm still learning for now.  I love the land now.  
**[0:10:57-0:11:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:10:57):**  We have chicken, we have goats, and cow.  So the goats and chicken always in the farm and eat our plants.  And I like animals, so we got eggs, milk, meat, everything.  So everything in my house actually from my farm and our animals.  I am a vegetarian because I like the animals and I like to play with them.  
**[0:11:26-0:11:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:11:26):**  I have a lot of friends from animals.  In Palestine, we have a difficult situation because Israel equipped us.  So my village actually there is two settlements and two camps.  My village in the center, and there is settlement, settlement, camp, camp.  I said before we have lots of farms, so some of it in the mountain.  
**[0:11:50-0:11:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:11:50):**  We should get permission to go there because it's under the settlement.  Sometimes they didn't give us the permission.  In the olive harvest, we take permission for like two days or three.  And they pick the hours, so we can just say four or five hours, and that's not enough for us.  And even when we have a permission, they always make a problem for us.  
**[0:12:22-0:12:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:12:22):**  They can take a picture of us and we can't.  They can come and say something bad and the army protect them, and that's not fair.  Actually, the camp in Burin builds in my land, my family land.  So when I was there, the settlers came.  There is a family of settlers.  
**[0:12:46-0:12:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:12:46):**  They make a video of us, and we felt uncomfortable, so that's a bad situation.  You see someone building your farm, your land, and now they want to take your harvest, your olive.  When we was there, there is a man from Israel came and said,  get back to Syria, go back to Syria, you are from Syria.  And we have the proof that this land is for us.  
**[0:13:17-0:13:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:13:17):**  We have the proof.  I'm from the generation that never prayed like a free before, because I didn't know how the free looks like.  I was born when Israel already was occupied us, so I didn't know how the feeling, and how feeling when you be free.  I didn't know the feelings when you be free.  There is a traditional things, we just use to farm.  
**[0:13:46-0:13:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:13:46):**  We don't use chemical things, we just use the animal.  Our products are 100% natural.  And now when I want to produce something, I ask my mom first, and then I ask my grandmother.  And I choose the better way to produce something, because I'm still learning.  I'm still learning.  
**[0:14:13-0:14:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:14:13):**  The most important thing is to not use chemical.  All of these vegetables, they use the chemical things, and that's not good.  Is there anything else you'd like to communicate to the farming community in the UK, in the world?  Is there anything you'd like to say?  I would like to say this message for the youth, especially for the youth, because I started, I have a project in Palestine.  
**[0:14:41-0:14:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:14:41):**  I started with funny things, like a joke.  To take the land for people in the diaspora.  They can't take their land, so we take it, like just the youth.  No one help me, I just called my friends, and they called their friends, and at the end,  there was like 70 volunteers to take this land.  
**[0:15:03-0:15:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:15:03):**  And they were all surprised of what I did.  Now, we think to take our land and produce something just for the youth, so we can make difference.  We can change things.  We get everything we need.  No one help us.  
**[0:15:22-0:15:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:15:22):**  Each one from the volunteers brings something we need.  So we started from nothing, and now we have a very important project to save the land.  And it actually starts from a joke.  So for all youth in the world, you can make change in this world.  Don't be afraid and go ahead.  
**[0:15:45-0:15:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:15:45):**  I just want to ask you a little bit about that.  So you were going to save the land.  What kind of things were you doing?  In Palestine, we have lots of lands.  The owner of this land, people in diaspora, they are outside Palestine.  
**[0:16:00-0:16:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:16:00):**  They forced to go outside Palestine.  So when we leave the land, no one can pick the olive, the settlers, they will come and take this land.  They said that no one here is our land.  So this project, I started when I was 15.  Yeah, when I was 15.  
**[0:16:19-0:16:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:16:19):**  So I like the land.  I don't like people come and steal our land.  So I've been doing this.  And it actually succeeded.  And we make oil.  
**[0:16:32-0:16:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:16:32):**  We sold the oil and we bought a heater for the school.  Yeah, and we give charity.  We give to the charity money and a bit of money to the land.  Now, back to the UK.  Innovative Farmers is a network of farmers and researchers working together to carry out farmer-led research on farms across the country.  
**[0:17:04-0:17:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:17:04):**  One of the current research projects is looking at the effectiveness of different intercropping combinations in arable systems.  Katie Bliss from the Organic Research Centre and the online farming resource Agroecology tells us a bit more about these trials.  Hi, my name is Katie Bliss.  I am an agroecologist and a farmer and I work with the Organic Research Centre on the intercropping field lab and with an initiative called Agroecology.  So Innovative Farmers is a network of researchers and farmers seeking to answer questions of how to use more ecology in their farming systems.  
**[0:17:48-0:17:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:17:48):**  So it might be taking certain practices that have been tested to some degree in science and putting them into practice.  But it's all led by farmers' own problems and their own solutions basically, so they'll trial those in the field and then share those experiences within the group to get out of growing those two crops together.  So within the group, everyone's looking at yield and gross margin and sharing data on that.  And then people are also looking at other factors.  So, for example, looking at weed biomass and comparing the monoculture and the intercrop as well.  
**[0:18:20-0:18:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:18:20):**  So we're standing in a field on Mark Lee's farm, Green Acres Farm in Shropshire.  So Mark is very interested in diversified farming systems, got a very diverse system here.  And one of the crops that he grows is Carlin peas, which is a type of peas growing for hobmidods, for food, for human consumption.  So he was basically looking at how can he grow this pea, which has quite a large amount of biomass, and it was falling on the floor at harvest time.  So he really needs that to be standing up so that he can get optimum quality and optimum harvest, that he's not leaving any lying on the floor.  
**[0:19:00-0:19:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:19:00):**  So he's looking at how triticale, intercropping with triticale, can provide scaffolding to hold the peas up to harvest.  So he's experimenting with one hectare plots of varying seed rates of triticale.  So he's got 250 kilograms per hectare of the Carlin peas, Minerva Carlin peas, a pure stand,  and then one with five percent full seed rate of triticale drilled on top, one with 10 percent, one with 20 percent and one with 30 percent.  So he's just trying to see where the optimum is in terms of that intercrop.  
**[0:19:36-0:19:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:19:36):**  And we're going to come back and look at the standings, so we'll do a ranking in terms of how well that crop is standing up in a few weeks time.  And we'll do some biomass cuts to look at the yield.  And he'll also be harvesting that biohectare plot, taking it over the Weybridge.  So he'll have that data as well. Then he's going to run that through a four millimeter screen cleaner to try to separate out the triticale and the peas.  And if there's any split peas in that mixture, then they can be used on farm for feed.  
**[0:20:10-0:20:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:20:10):**  And the same with the triticale could either be used for feed or potentially also for human consumption as well.  Within the UK field lab, we've got over 20 different farmers engaged.  Many of those are doing their own on farm trials. It's a mixture of organic and conventional farmers.  And so a couple of examples. One is James Hares, who's in Wiltshire as an organic farmer.  He was suffering with quite high levels of wild oats.  
**[0:20:37-0:20:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:20:37):**  So it was trying to look at how he could manage wild oats in his beans, basically.  So he's comparing a monoculture of winter beans, faba beans, with a mixed crop of wheat and beans.  So it was just wheat that was left in the shed. It was to try it out. But also his end use is to feed to livestock.  So we went a few weeks ago, we did quadrac biomass cuts, five plots in the monoculture and the intercrop.  And we found significant difference in the total biomass of weeds, basically, between the significantly less in the intercrop versus the monoculture.  
**[0:21:19-0:21:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:21:19):**  Given that he's trying to manage that within his rotation, that suppression effect of the wheat is definitely what he was looking for.  He also noticed as well, we've got some pictures of it and we'll put them on the field lab page, with the size of the wild oats as well.  So significantly smaller plants in the intercrop versus the monoculture.  And then another one is Andy Howard, who is farming down in Kent.  Within Diversify, within this field lab, he's looking at beans and oilseed rape combination that he calls fabola.  
**[0:21:53-0:22:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:21:53):**  And for various functions, basically. So trying to look at, so he's made a commitment to reduce his inputs by 50 percent in five years.  So he's not using any insecticide, he wants to completely cut that out and reduce nitrogen inputs and so on.  So he's got various objectives that he's looking within that plant team.  And he's done tissue analysis and the nutrients within the oilseed rape plant are optimum, they're not missing anything.  So showing good results there as well.  
**[0:22:27-0:22:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:22:27):**  And he's also noticed that the flowering on those beans, it's getting more flowering on the bean plants that are mixed with oilseed rape than those on their own.  So yeah.  If you want to stay engaged with what's happening, you can see on the Innovative Farmers portal and look on the website.  I guess it's, to me, it's just a really exciting time to be involved in this sector.  There's so much happening with knowledge sharing between organic and conventional farmers.  
**[0:22:53-0:23:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:22:53):**  And I think moving away from labels and just looking at how we can all be using more ecology in our farming systems and getting more research, more on-farm trials happening in that area is really exciting.  You can still get involved with the Intercropping in Arable Systems field lab.  Head to the Innovative Farmers website or Agrocology to be in touch and to read stories from the different farmers as well as see some of the findings.  Rebel Kitchen are a member of 1% for the planet.  This means they donate 1% of their sales, that's not just the profits, to partners contributing to the planet.  
**[0:23:47-0:23:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:23:47):**  It's through this commitment that they're helping to support us to continue to share knowledge in the farming community and spread the word to many more farmers and growers.  And now it's time for another of our regular visits to Jubilee Farm in Northern Ireland.  I reported a few months ago that our first choice site for our community farm had fallen through, but also that we were in negotiations to purchase a small farm.  And this month in Farmarama, I'm delighted to share that we are in the process of getting the farm back to its original state.  We're doing this via Community Shares, making it the first community-owned farm in Northern Ireland.  
**[0:24:26-0:24:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:24:26):**  And supporting us in that process is Tiziana O'Hara from an organisation called Cooperative Alternatives.  Cooperative Alternatives is the community-owned farm in the North of Ireland.  We're a small farm in the North of Ireland, but we're also a small farm in the North of Ireland.  We're also from an organisation called Cooperative Alternatives, and Cooperative Alternatives is the only organisation in Northern Ireland supporting and promoting the development of cooperatives and community enterprises.  So Tiziana, why use a community share offer to buy a farm?  
**[0:25:03-0:25:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:25:03):**  Thank you very much for inviting us.  We think that community shares are a perfect tool to build not only your capital, the capital that you need to purchase your farm, but actually to build the people that will be involved in your farms.  So community shares have this double-edged sword.  On the one side, it gives you the potential and the resources to purchase what you need, but on the other side, it gives you also the membership that you will need to build your business.  We tried to build a community-owned energy project.  
**[0:25:48-0:26:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:25:48):**  We had football clubs, community-owned, and they all used community shares to again raise that capital for them to start or grow their own enterprising idea.  With Jubilee, it's the first time that we do something, we work with yourself, Joni, to buy a farm.  And that's fantastic because a farm requires capital for the purchase, but it requires people to work with the farm and be a member in the same way as any other members will participate with that.  We're often told, as Jana, in conventional economic terms, that competition is the way to go. And in food and farming, we see farms getting bigger and bigger. In the food industry, we see mergers and acquisitions and food companies getting bigger and bigger, all based on the premise that competition is the only way to go.  But of course, as cooperatives, we believe that cooperation is the way to go. So what can the sustainable agriculture movement learn from the cooperative movement about cooperation?  
**[0:27:00-0:27:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:27:00):**  Oh, so much. Look at the cooperative movement, even in a sector like the credit unions.  Credit unions have become a network of small credit unions that work together, serving their own local population.  And that's in the spirit of cooperation among cooperatives. And this is the spirit that we would like to adopt even in other sectors and cross sectors.  After all, we are in Ireland. Ireland was the birth of the agricultural cooperatives, thanks to Oras Planket, or some of the very interesting initiative in Donegal by Paddy De Cope, another forefather of the cooperative movement in the northwest of Ireland.  So we have a great history of cooperation on this island. And what we wanted to promote and to grow is the cooperation among the cooperators in some sort of way.  
**[0:28:09-0:28:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:28:09):**  Competition belongs to a narrative that has proven a bit fallible. And in some sort of way, we wanted to rediscover all the tools using cooperatives as what we know about cooperatives, all tools for modern purposes.  And this is the way we wanted to use the initiative of Community Share and the cooperative for Jubilee.  And of course, in a beautiful link between Horace Plunkett and the founding of the cooperative movement in Ireland, we're being supported by the Plunkett Foundation to develop this community share offer as well as by Cooperatives UK.  So if you're interested in discovering more, you can go to our website jubilee.coop forward slash share offer where you'll have the details of our share offer launching on the 20th of October.  We'll be streaming it live on our YouTube channel. We've got 300,000 to raise. We've already raised 165,000 in phase one.  
**[0:29:10-0:29:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:29:10):**  So if you are interested in cooperating with us to set up Northern Ireland's first community farm, please do check it out.  Johnny Hansen speaking to Tiziana O'Hara of Cooperative Alternatives, the local cooperative enterprise agency supporting the farm share offer. Jubilee's community share offer launches on the 20th of October and will be streamed live on the Jubilee Co-op website.  We'll have all the details on our Facebook page and Twitter if you want to get involved.  And finally, for the special message from two long time Farmeramaers.  Hi there guys, it's Nigel here. Some of you may remember I was involved in Farmerama in the early days, helping Joe and Abby present it.  
**[0:29:59-0:30:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:29:59):**  But I've been quite busy with farming commitments here in Sussex. I wanted to say I'm a massive fan of Farmerama.  I still listen every month and that I've got some exciting news that I've recently got engaged to Hannah, who I met through Farmerama.  Yeah. Thank you, Farmerama. We were both involved with you in different ways.  And then we actually met at a food and farming event and I recognised Nigel's voice.  I was like, are you Nigel from Farmerama? And he was like, yes, I am.  
**[0:30:34-0:30:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:30:34):**  No one had ever recognised my voice before.  He felt very famous and honoured.  But yeah, I think I always thought that I shouldn't get involved with someone in the same field, but how silly that was.  And it's so nice to be able to indulge our passions in farming together.  So big shout out to all the farming couples out there and thank you for bringing us together.  
**[0:30:56-0:31:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-38#t=0:30:56):**  Thanks, guys. Bye.  This month's show was made by Abbey Rose, me, Katie Revel and Joe Barrett.  Additional reporting came from Johnny Hanson at Jubilee Farm.  Social media support is provided by Annie Landless, Eliza Jenkins and Olivia Oldham.  And our theme music is by Owen Barrett.  