### Farmerama  (2018-01-25)
**[0:00:00-0:00:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to episode 40 of Farmerama.  In the last month we've been to two events in the UK, so this episode is going to be  slightly different than usual.  First, we've gone a little grain mad, so we'll be sharing many voices from the UK Grain Lab  in Nottingham.  
**[0:00:21-0:00:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:00:21):**  And then we jump across the Pennines to hear from students at an NUS Student Eats event  in Manchester.  Earlier this month, Abbie went to Small Food Bakery, where the seeds of a grain revolution  were being sown.  Over 120 bakers, farmers, millers, plant breeders, scientists and grain enthusiasts gathered  
**[0:00:50-0:00:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:00:50):**  for UK Grain Lab to learn and share about the grain future we want to create, from seed  to loaf, and doughnuts, and actually rye gingerbread.  In fact, just so many mind-blowingly delicious baked goods.  Or so I heard from Abbie.  I, Abbie Rose, do solemnly, happily swear that I'm going to tell everyone I see that  
**[0:01:16-0:01:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:01:16):**  it's okay to love flour.  Bread is not poison.  Invisibility is poison.  I will make visible all the labour in bread, from seed to mill, and mill to loaf.  Because mills are the levers that farmers need to get new grains in the ground, and  
**[0:01:36-0:01:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:01:36):**  under our butter again.  The Grain Pledge was established in 2016 by Amy Halloran, author of The Bread Basket,  and advocate of regional grain production in the US.  Everyone at Grain Lab was invited to take part in the Grain Pledge, to recognise that  we are all part of this grain system, and we must act together.  
**[0:01:56-0:02:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:01:56):**  There's lots of videos of others doing this on the UK Grain Lab Instagram.  Check it out.  Kimberly Bell, owner and baker at Small Food Bakery, has been on a grain journey in recent  years.  It all started when Hodma Dodds dropped off a taster of a special flour.  
**[0:02:15-0:02:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:02:15):**  It was made from a population of modern wheats, called the Wakelands population, also known  as YQ, that was bred by scientist Martin Wolf.  The beauty of a population is that it's the opposite of a monoculture, in that it's  genetically diverse, and therefore adapts to local environments and changing climates,  whilst building soil health.  
**[0:02:37-0:02:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:02:37):**  Basically, a population is very resilient, and ensures that farmers get a crop every  year.  This is an incredibly innovative project, attracting attention from around the world.  Martin and the team even had to get special permission from the EU to sell these seeds,  as seeds that change year on year are actually illegal to sell in the EU.  
**[0:03:01-0:03:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:03:01):**  That's a whole other story.  Here's John Reid, who runs Redbeard Bakery in Melbourne, in Australia.  Oh look, it's an incredibly exciting moment in my life, because I'm actually getting to  handle for the first time in my life this amazing, beautiful flour, which is the first  time I've ever had a go at a population weight.  
**[0:03:22-0:03:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:03:22):**  This is what's called YQ, it's the Wakeland population weight that's grown right here  in the UK.  I think it's been talked about a lot on Farmerama.  It is the future of farming, because it is what we need if we're going to survive climate  change and global warming, is we need adaptive crops that actually are not monocultures,  
**[0:03:48-0:03:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:03:48):**  and not specific variety driven, but actually population driven.  That's the only way we'll actually get to the point of having... Diversity gives us  adaptability from season to season, year to year.  We get this ability to change the population dynamics will change, and that'll help the  farmer because you'll always be able to harvest something.  
**[0:04:15-0:04:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:04:15):**  You won't have that bad year where you get nothing, you always get something, but it  will change.  We as bakers have got to get used to the idea of change, and actually adapting ourselves.  A big part of the Grain Lab was the baking workshops.  Using these more diverse flours needs lots of experimentation, and so bakers were keen  
**[0:04:35-0:04:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:04:35):**  to share tips and tricks.  Kim has started investigating other forms of grain that allow more diversity and lower  input systems, which led her to Heritage Grains.  John Letts is one of the key pioneers of Heritage Grains in the UK.  He and a few others have been sending off the grains from seed banks around the world,  
**[0:04:53-0:04:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:04:53):**  and planting these very old varieties for years, building up seeds to a point where  they're now being grown commercially.  I think there's a lot of debate in our community about the right way to move forward in terms  of should we be looking for old varieties?  Are the old varieties even old varieties?  
**[0:05:11-0:05:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:05:11):**  If we've taken five grams of seed from a gene bank and grind them up, if Martin's population  has been originally bred from modern wheat, does it really have genetic diversity?  There's all this debate going on in our community, and I think the one thing we all agree on  is that genetic diversity is good.  That's the starting point.  
**[0:05:30-0:05:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:05:30):**  It was kind of obvious to us that as a bakery, if we were going to use the YQ, we also should  use John's heritage population.  We've become kind of obsessed with combining the two.  I'll talk a little bit about ways in which we do that.  This is the flour.  
**[0:05:44-0:05:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:05:44):**  We've got piles of it all over the place.  I'm just going to pass it around and encourage you to taste it.  It's quite interesting.  Could you pass me that jar of wheat that's on the window?  We keep this in the window which John gave me, which is from one of his fields.  
**[0:06:00-0:06:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:06:00):**  It's not quite everything that's in the population, but it's an example of diversity.  We show this to our customers when we're talking about this product because you can literally  see some of the history of wheat in this.  If you want to pass this around and have a look, it's just so beautiful.  Every single one is different.  
**[0:06:18-0:06:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:06:18):**  When I saw what I see as our little pet project, the YQ, growing together with John's heritage  stuff which shows you like, I'm corn to Emma, right through to spelt, to all of the diversity  that he's ended up with by growing them together.  It was just the most beautiful thing I've ever seen in terms of a crop, I think.  Here we are.  
**[0:06:39-0:06:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:06:39):**  We're back to the bakery.  How are we going to use it?  I think brioche is a really good starting point for using alternative flours.  I think it's a brilliant showcase.  Something with fat and it carries flavour.  
**[0:06:50-0:06:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:06:50):**  If you have something with butter in it, you can actually pull out the flavour of the flour  quite well.  I think the flour tastes very cakey.  That's one of the things I like about it and I think also makes fabulous doughnuts.  I'm going to hand knead this because it's one of the differences between the Royal Emerald  
**[0:07:10-0:07:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:07:10):**  Flour and the heritage flour.  You need to be quite a lot more gentle with it.  The next stage of this is going to go into a bulk while we go and have dinner and then  I'll pop back tonight and bung it in the fridge.  In the morning, 8am, I'm going to be shaping them.  
**[0:07:22-0:07:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:07:22):**  If anyone wants to come and help, come and help over a coffee and we'll hopefully, if  everything works, fry them up tomorrow afternoon for a kind of farewell doughnut party.  And then you get to taste them.  It was clear at the gathering that we need to build food networks, not food chains.  We need farmers, millers, bakers, breeders, all talking to each other, just like Kim has  
**[0:07:48-0:07:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:07:48):**  done with Martin Wolf, John Letts, Mark Lee at Green Acres Farm and other farmers she  works with.  Another brilliant example of this is E5 Bakehouse in London, who are great supporters of the  show.  Here is Oscar Harding, farmer at Duchess Farms, and Ben McKinnon, owner and baker at E5 Bakehouse,  
**[0:08:09-0:08:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:08:09):**  to tell us about how a conventional farm ended up working with an organic bakery on a joint  learning journey.  It's an arable farm, conventional farm in the most part, but over the last three years  it's been moving towards doing heritage crops with zero input and that journey has sort  of led to the start of a bit of a regenerative farming programme.  
**[0:08:33-0:08:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:08:33):**  That's kind of where I'm at today.  It started really from achieving really good yields, one year 2013, 14, about that sort  of time, but a few years ago really good yields and the farm didn't make much money at all.  I mean it had a bit to do with the price, the commodity price being low, but it also  had a lot to do with the input costs and writing essentially a huge cheque that the farm had  
**[0:08:59-0:09:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:08:59):**  to write.  I had to write every year for fertiliser and various sprays.  I mean the sprayer would be out a lot, herbicides, pesticides, fungicides, and then the fert  spread is out a lot, so that's a bit of a vicious cycle.  You feed the weeds with the fert, so that kind of led to thinking more about profit  
**[0:09:17-0:09:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:09:17):**  per acre as opposed to tonnes per acre.  Culturally amongst arable farmers it's all about how many tonnes per acre you get and  everyone wants to show off about that and no one talks about profit per acre.  In Germany I think they're quite good at talking about profit per acre as opposed to tonnes  per acre, so that kind of got me thinking a bit more about that and once you start thinking  
**[0:09:39-0:09:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:09:39):**  about profit per acre and realise that achieving massive yields doesn't necessarily equate  to that, then you have to rethink how you do that.  So that's how I ended up finding out a bit about Heritage Reaper, but also we cold press  rapeseed oil.  We've done that since 2012-13 and that sort of showcased adding value to acres.  
**[0:10:03-0:10:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:10:03):**  So you can have a tonne of seed or an acre and you get maybe a tonne, a tonne and a half  of rapeseed off of your acre and sell it on a commodity market for £300-350 or do something  to it, bottle it, sell it and that acre effectively becomes hundreds of thousands.  So that I suppose made me rethink and look at the acreage differently.  And then in how to farm without input, you can't do that with modern dwarf wheat varieties,  
**[0:10:34-0:10:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:10:34):**  so Heritage Wheats came up, poking around on YouTube and stuff and so I met Ben and  then I was like, well look I want to farm this way and grow these kind of crops, would  you buy them if I did it?  And he was like, yeah.  So the next thing, a tonne of seed that he had arranged turned up at the farm and I planted  
**[0:10:52-0:10:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:10:52):**  it and that was it and then he committed to buying whatever I produced.  Really it was chilled, no contracts or anything like that, it was just a gentleman's agreement  type thing and so it was a really nice way to get into it and so that was three years  ago and the deal is still the same.  I grow these Heritage crops, a handful of different varieties now and E5, I'll say  
**[0:11:14-0:11:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:11:14):**  roughly we're planting this amount of acres so roughly I'm probably going to have this  many tonnes and they plan their year of baking and recipes accordingly so it's really super  flexible and it suits me really well and because of no input cost, just a bit of tractor time  planting and harvesting which in the scheme of farm costs they're the small ones.  So yeah, the profit per acre comes up and it's sort of a model that looks like it works  
**[0:11:42-0:11:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:11:42):**  so we're trying to do more and more.  I've realised it more just as of yesterday and today being here but there's Guy Mark  who spoke yesterday in one of the group discussions and he was saying he considers himself a food  producer over a farmer and that was quite interesting and I hadn't really thought about  that to be honest but it feels really good because really the connection with the oil,  
**[0:12:08-0:12:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:12:08):**  we farm it, add value to it by making it into oil then we distribute it and so you have  that connection and so we know loads and loads of chefs now to do with the oil and so we  go to the restaurants and they go, oh have a look at this, we've made an ice cream or  something and so that side of it is really fun and to be able to do that again with wheat,  I was at E5 and I was there a couple of weeks ago and they were sort of showcasing some  
**[0:12:30-0:12:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:12:30):**  of the varieties so they had done loaves that are just purely Oland or purely Lisbon and  to sort of see those and everyone standing around going oh wow and you know with far  more knowledgeable people than me and far more developed palates and things but just  hearing everyone sort of really saying all this great stuff about it and you think oh  cool, well everyone's into it so let's keep doing it.  
**[0:12:52-0:12:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:12:52):**  So yeah it does feel good and whereas with the alternative conventional farming, you  just look at farmers weekly commodity prices and that's about all the engagement you have,  no idea where it goes to, whether it's going off to Felixstowe to go straight on a boat,  whether it's doing anything in this country, you just don't know, it all care, all you  care about is is it a couple of quid more per tonne than it was last week and yeah it's  
**[0:13:19-0:13:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:13:19):**  fairly, and often it's not, so on the basis that that's the only thing that kind of cheers  you up a bit farming wise and it rarely happens, it's a bit sad so it's nice to not be too  involved or be less involved in that now.  Before meeting Ben and going to E5 I didn't see that zero input arable farming could be  profitable or even nearly successful.  
**[0:13:41-0:13:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:13:41):**  I mean there's a bit of a sort of, I don't know, like a stigma about whether you can  make money from organic farming or zero input farming or whatever, I mean it's very much  the sort of culture is you've got to get that five tonnes an acre and so no, I mean that's  my, I mean I was chatting yesterday to a couple of farmers and there's a thing that Gronomist  and I and we all sort of get excited about or used to and it's this concept of a stale  
**[0:14:11-0:14:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:14:11):**  seed bed which is seen as a really positive thing for arable growing wheat because before  you plant in late September everything you're doing is trying to create a stale seed bed  and it's only when you have a step back and you realise what that means and you think  oh, like, you know it's really bonkers now in hindsight that that was such a thing but  that was something that I was proud of, you know, I'd be like, you know, we've done a  
**[0:14:37-0:14:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:14:37):**  really good job, you know, we've cultivated at the right times, we've sprayed glyphosate  at the right times and we've cultivated again and like, yeah, we've got a perfectly stale  seed bed, perfect for the crop of wheat to go in and yeah, and then having a step back  and then realising what, you know, those two words, you know, what that is, stale seed  bed, you know, it's bonkers really in hindsight but, you know, Prince Charles who has a big  
**[0:14:58-0:15:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:14:58):**  organic farm and everyone's like, yeah, fair enough, you know, if you're him you can run  an operation like that or as an old F1 driver, amazing guy with an incredible farm, yeah,  sure, if you've got millions and millions of quid then you can do it, I mean, there's  that saying, some sort of saying, if you want to make a small fortune from farming you need  to start with a big one, you know, and so that culture is very much part of, you know,  
**[0:15:21-0:15:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:15:21):**  modern arable production so, no, I didn't see it as an achievable at all until I met  Ben.  I'm Ben and I'm the owner and I'm a baker and a miller and a farmer at E5 Bakehouse.  What we did is we looked at how much that farmer would normally get per acre from his  land, the farmer being Oscar of Duchess Farm and we said, well, you know, I mean, he was  
**[0:15:48-0:15:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:15:48):**  very happy to get, you know, the same or a little bit more than he would have got, you  know, from the conventional wheat he was growing so he would have, you know, been planting  on his conventional farm a feed wheat, let's say, and getting about four tons per acre.  So with this zero input system that we asked him to do with no sort of fertilizer, chemical  fertilizer or herbicides, fungicides, so on, you know, he obviously cut his costs a lot  
**[0:16:18-0:16:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:16:18):**  but the yield was a lot lower but that was fine for us and he gets a little bit more  than he would have got conventionally and at the moment we're all quite happy with the  situation.  Artisan Bakers have been inspired by the likes of the new wave of American artisan bakers  so who work with really high protein flours with a lot of gluten in it.  
**[0:16:42-0:16:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:16:42):**  We're kind of having to, you know, learn by ourselves now which is obviously really fortunate  so kind of understand more about how those with more sort of gliadin and sort of different  proteins behave and how we as bakers need to handle those doughs to get good results  and that's, you know, one of the things that draws a lot of us to baking is to sort of  the challenge of actually, you know, working with these arguably like weaker flours although  
**[0:17:09-0:17:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:17:09):**  they actually have usually higher protein, the old varieties, like up to 16% quite commonly  than the modern types.  So our sort of thing when we first got it, it was quite difficult so we blended it over  the past few years, we've been blending it with stronger modern wheats but we've just,  you know, really turned a corner with that and understanding now how to work with them  
**[0:17:34-0:17:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:17:34):**  on their own which means we can draw out a lot more, I mean they're bound with flavour,  really nice sort of aroma, very herby and sort of buttery flavours and delicious texture,  you know, they work really well and it's just we're stoked to be buying grains from a farm,  you know, 20 miles down the road from us in, you know, East London, that's really fun but  there's also other grains out there and other farmers and it's really pleasing to get to  
**[0:18:01-0:18:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:18:01):**  know them and be able to sort of expand our network.  We're having a go farming as well.  As bakers, once we begin to feel empowered and have the opportunity to work with farmers,  we feel and our customers feel like, yeah, we are in the part of a food system and we  are actually, you know, the change that we want to see so it's really exciting.  
**[0:18:22-0:18:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:18:22):**  I think diversity is a word that comes to mind.  There's just been so much homogenisation of varieties and methods of farming, you know,  we know that the soil isn't kind of rich and full of hummus and mycorrhizae, we know that  that's probably where we need to be going with sort of much lower input farming and  so one of the solutions to that is older varieties with their deeper roots, more diversity amongst  
**[0:18:49-0:18:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:18:49):**  farms, so not just, you know, a handful of modern wheats available on the marketplace  but you know, farmers sowing their own seeds, land races, populations, old varieties from  the archives, you know, as well as new creations and that gives a uniqueness to all manner  of things.  It gives us a story to our customers and feels we feel linked to the farms and the soils  
**[0:19:13-0:19:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:19:13):**  that they're growing in and it gives farmers the chance to, I hope, be really proud of  what they're growing and, you know, seeing it in products further down the line, not  just bulk grain going off at, you know, rock bottom price onto the commodity market.  It's about having platforms to communicate some of those ideas but obviously just giving  it a go as well.  
**[0:19:38-0:19:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:19:38):**  On the Saturday night we all feasted together on an array of baked goods and delicious produce  brought by the many farmers in attendance.  We were also serenaded by Nathan Mann of Dead Rat Orchestra.  Well, part of the kind of promise-ish that I made was I would try and write something  in response.  
**[0:20:05-0:20:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:20:05):**  So you may have seen me lurking around in the back of your sessions but one of the interesting  things I heard was not only talking about the positives but also sharing the negatives  and sharing the risks and talking to that, talking about that when you're talking about  the stories, you know, that it seems important to share.  You know, because there's no connection with, through the consumption chains, with nature,  
**[0:20:29-0:20:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:20:29):**  with what's going on.  So if it's a bad harvest or a bad season, you know, that may be reflected in what we're  consuming and the consumers, me, it's good to be aware of that too.  And that really chimed with me because as an experimental musician I'm always putting  myself on the edge and I try and induce a sense of camaraderie with the audience but  
**[0:20:49-0:20:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:20:49):**  we're kind of in this together, it might fall apart, probably will, and if it does, well,  you know, there's a grain of something that's more important happening anyway.  So does anybody know the song or the phrase Bread and Roses?  Do you know where it comes from?  So I did a bit of digging and I found this song Bread and Roses which comes from, if  
**[0:21:15-0:21:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:21:15):**  you'll forgive me while I call it, it comes from a, it's a political slogan, first point  by Rose Snyderman in the States in 1911 and in her speech there was a line and she said  the worker must have bread but she must also have roses too.  And it was picked up as a kind of sign that not only should there be a living wage but  there should be enough money to live dignified as well and to feel good about yourself and  
**[0:21:42-0:21:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:21:42):**  so the roses came to symbolise, you know, not just the basics but, and I thought that  I would adopt that because it seems quite a nice way to reflect the community values  and all the other added value that you were all talking about beyond, you know, the grain  or the bread and so I've attempted to rewrite, except for the first verse which I've kept  the same because it's so apt, Bread and Roses.  
**[0:22:12-0:22:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:22:12):**  As we go marching, marching in the beauty of the day,  A million darkened kitchens and a thousand milled off scray,  A touch with all the radiance that a sudden sun discloses,  For the people hear us singing bread and roses, bread and roses.  And as we come marching, marching in our fight against white flour,  
**[0:22:50-0:22:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:22:50):**  We must share our stories for our stories give us power,  Through stories we're connected to our food bodies and land,  And we remember as we sing of bread and roses, We've dreamed of grain gorillas and of bread  on the NHS, And learned that to convert our lands,  We must first convert our heads, Our foods from land not packets,  
**[0:23:31-0:23:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:23:31):**  But so quickly that life spreads, But these songs aren't simply roses,  And our bread's not simply bread.  Dark markets have transformed our foods into commodities,  Our farmers all anonymous and the mills mere factories,  All connection with our lands was swept right from beneath our noses,  
**[0:24:04-0:24:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:24:04):**  But we'll heal the rifts while singing bread and roses,  bread and roses, we'll heal the rifts while singing bread and roses.  And as we come marching, marching our leavened voices spread,  Our cries go ringing through the streets that ancient called for bread,  Small art, small food, small beauty from our hearts and lands all grew,  
**[0:24:43-0:24:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:24:43):**  And yes it's bread we fight for but we fight for roses too.  And as we come marching, marching and we battle for our grain,  And we join in with the struggle and together we shall win,  We've pledged to be ambassadors and to rebuild our closeness,  Our staff as well as bodies, so give us bread and give us roses.  
**[0:25:45-0:25:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:25:45):**  Rebel Kitchen are a member of 1% for the planet.  This means they donate 1% of their sales, not just profits,  to partners contributing to the planet.  It's through this commitment they're helping to support us  to continue to share knowledge in the farming community  
**[0:26:02-0:26:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:26:02):**  and spread the word to many more farmers and growers.  The Student Eats program supports students in setting up food enterprises  in their university or college.  In doing so, they embed sustainable food into student life  and reconnect communities with the food they eat.  
**[0:26:36-0:26:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:26:36):**  In October this year, the Student Eats conference  hosted by Manchester Metropolitan Uni brought together this community  to talk all things from growing and eating to making and selling.  How would you describe your feelings about today?  Overwhelmed, because after getting to know these new people,  
**[0:26:55-0:27:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:26:55):**  I really want to apply those things to what we have right now.  It feels really kind of reaffirming to know that I'm part of a bigger group and movement.  It's been really interesting hearing what other people have done,  not just from the keynote speakers, which were really interesting at the beginning,  but also getting to talk to other people during the day  
**[0:27:17-0:27:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:27:17):**  and hearing about their experiences and what kind of things they're doing.  Claire and Charmaine from Canterbury Christchurch University  tell us about their project, The Gastro Hub.  The Gastro Hub is a little bit different.  It's not a shop where we actually have a space where we sell.  
**[0:27:33-0:27:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:27:33):**  We actually pop up in communities and around campus  doing experiential community events.  But the base of our project is that we're trying to reduce food waste  and bring people together.  So we work with surplus fruit and vegetables from farm level.  
**[0:27:46-0:27:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:27:46):**  Our ingredients are from farms around Kent.  There's a big issue right now of farm level food waste.  People think a lot of the food waste comes from the supermarkets onwards,  but actually there's a lot that doesn't actually leave the farm.  So we have a great partnership with Glean in Kent,  
**[0:28:03-0:28:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:28:03):**  which is a subsidiary of Feedback Global, the environmental and food charity.  What they do simply is send out an army of lovely committed volunteers  and go and glean and rescue beautiful fruit and vegetables  that would have otherwise been wasted.  So we are actually now getting more involved in that source.  
**[0:28:20-0:28:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:28:20):**  So today myself and a couple of our members, our chefs,  were in an orchard in Kent, Selson Farm,  and we were gleaning beautiful varieties of apples,  which we'll be using in one of our stew recipes.  Well, with my role, I'm working with Charmaine  
**[0:28:35-0:28:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:28:35):**  to become the Marketing and Communications Officer.  Through that, what we're doing is we're branching out into partnerships  with local communities, local groups,  and more locally with the Student Green Office  within the university to engage more student volunteers  
**[0:28:52-0:28:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:28:52):**  and basically build up an army of willing volunteers  that will come and help us at events,  build up partnerships, and get more people involved in what we do.  I would say you have to have courage,  because anyone can have an idea and that's fine,  
**[0:29:08-0:29:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:29:08):**  but you need to have that courage to get over your own limiting beliefs.  And a big thing, I'm actually a Business Management student,  so I've been learning a lot through my degree,  and the biggest thing that I would say is you've got to really focus on your marketing as well.  People sometimes leave that as the last bit,  
**[0:29:25-0:29:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:29:25):**  but the marketing is a big part.  And also planning. I'm not always the best.  I do loads of things at once, but I've really learnt through this enterprise  that planning is so important.  So be courageous, but also keep your head on  
**[0:29:39-0:29:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:29:39):**  and make sure you've planned well and accordingly,  and don't be afraid to think far in the vision and run the movie,  as one of my lecturers would tell me.  Believe in what you're doing, believe in the brand that you're getting across,  and if you do that, anything is possible.  
**[0:29:52-0:29:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:29:52):**  What I've really learnt and what I'd encourage people to do is don't just make it just about the food,  make it about people as well, about bringing people together  and make the whole event experiential, especially if you can pay as you feel.  I've found that people sometimes feel like they're not paying me enough  because they had all these other stuff with bells going on around the soup or the stew.  
**[0:30:12-0:30:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:30:12):**  So I would just say really think outside the box in what you're doing,  don't just always make it about the food.  How can you bring people together? How can you develop community?  Share what you do, because even if you think that you're just going up by little steps,  then whatever you do, share it and get the message out there, because every little helps.  
**[0:30:30-0:30:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:30:30):**  It's a real pleasure to hear from students involved in the food system,  whether that is growing on campus or supplying food from local farms.  And it's also great that student unions are supporting these initiatives around the country.  This month's show was made by me, I'm Joe Barrett, with Ari Rose and Katie Revel.  We have help with editing from Louie Hudson, community support is handled by Annie Landless,  
**[0:30:58-0:31:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:30:58):**  Eliza Jenkins and Olivia Oldham, and our e-music is by Owen Barrett.  Thanks to Odette Wills, Agnes Krull and the Student EATS team at the National Union of Students  for getting in touch and picking up the mic and reporting on the event for us.  If you have a project or a story to share, please let us know.  We're here to help you make that story heard all over the world.  
**[0:31:23-0:31:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/40-grain-bread-and-students-helping-to-fix-the-food-system#t=0:31:23):**  Toodle-oo!  You  