### Farmerama  (2019-24-28)
**[0:00:00-0:00:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to Farmerama.  First up this month we hear about the power of growing spaces to provide sanctuary to  some of the most vulnerable people in our society.  Then we head across the pond to Maine where we tap into the knowledge of an organic farming  legend and hear what has inspired him over his 50 years in farming.  
**[0:00:27-0:00:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:00:27):**  Next we hop over to the West Coast to talk biodynamics and wine at scale.  And we end with a few words of farewell from our resident market gardener.  We start with a story that friend of the show Joy Rose sent in over a year ago.  We have to confess we thought we'd lost the recording but we uncovered it again a few  weeks ago and we're really pleased to be able to share it.  
**[0:00:54-0:01:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:00:54):**  Ben Margolis and Sophie Antonelli tell us about Gardens of Sanctuary, a network of green  spaces across the UK where asylum seekers and refugees can become co-creators of community  gardens and environmental projects.  The recording was made just as the initiative was getting started and it's now well underway.  Even so it's as pertinent as ever.  
**[0:01:16-0:01:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:01:16):**  My name is Ben Margolis from the Grange in Norfolk.  My name is Sophie Antonelli from the Federation of City Farms and Community Gardens.  The Grange is a 10 acre small holding in West Norfolk and for the last six, seven years  there my wife and I have been welcoming refugees and asylum seekers onto the site.  There are currently about 30,000 people in the UK seeking asylum and during that process  
**[0:01:41-0:01:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:01:41):**  there people aren't allowed to work.  And what we found through some research that we've been doing recently and through the  literature review is that the people's mental health deteriorates significantly both through  experiences they've had at home, the journey to the UK, but also because of the nature  of life in the UK and the asylum system.  
**[0:01:58-0:02:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:01:58):**  And that gardens and growing spaces and farms and allotments have an amazing potential to  offer incredible therapeutic opportunities for asylum seekers and refugees, but also  for them to be able to share some of the skills that they bring with them from their home  countries to meet people in the local area, to integrate with the local community.  So we've been doing this for some years at the Grange, but we felt like we wanted to  
**[0:02:22-0:02:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:02:22):**  look at how we could support other growing spaces all over the UK to welcome refugees  and asylum seekers who might be in their areas onto their farms and onto their allotments.  So we partnered with the Federation of City Farms and Community Gardens and with the Permaculture  Association and also the City of Sanctuary Network and got some funding to allow us to  do some research to explore it more and then we're going to bring out a report and we're  
**[0:02:46-0:02:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:02:46):**  hoping then to be able to support all sorts of growers around the UK to welcome asylum  seekers onto their farm.  And certainly from a kind of Federation perspective we're really aware, we've got members all  over the UK, from farms down to very traditional city farms and community gardens.  There's a real desire to work with refugees and asylum seekers, particularly in the last  
**[0:03:08-0:03:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:03:08):**  couple of years.  So the process that we've been going through is one of research, so we've had a couple  of different surveys out over the last couple of months, so we've had probably 180, 190  responses to those, mostly from growing groups talking about whether they are or aren't working  with refugees and asylum seekers already, how that's been going, some of the problems  
**[0:03:29-0:03:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:03:29):**  that they might have had, things like working with people who are very traumatised but also  just lack of training, even not knowing how to engage refugees and asylum seekers in the  first place.  So that's been really useful.  Ben's also been doing some research looking at the academic literature, so the evidence  
**[0:03:47-0:03:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:03:47):**  for the benefits of kind of growing within a community context and how that can bring  therapeutic benefits just to people generally but also specifically to people who've kind  of come to this country seeking sanctuary.  So that's been really, really helpful and we're using that to put together what we hope  will be kind of a second phase and we'll be using all of that evidence to look for funding  
**[0:04:11-0:04:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:04:11):**  that would help us put together effectively like a package of training so that we can  work, as Ben said, with groups all across the country and help and support them to work  with people within their communities that they might not even be aware of that potentially  are very marginalised and quite traumatised and bring them into these growing spaces and  yeah do all of the wonderful things that they're already doing but working with an even more  
**[0:04:32-0:04:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:04:32):**  diverse group of people.  So maybe just to explore a little bit more about why gardens can become places of sanctuary,  particularly for asylum seekers and what that looks like in practice and the example of  the project that I've been working on now for several years at the Grange is it's changed  over time and we've learned a lot over time.  
**[0:04:57-0:05:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:04:57):**  Initially we just had residential groups, we're fortunate that we can host up to 16  people at a time and we began to host sometimes 12, 13, 14 asylum seekers normally for a week  or so at a time on just a therapeutic retreat, it was just get out in the countryside, enjoy.  And a lot of the groups we worked with in Norwich, a lot of the asylum seekers said  they wanted to be able to come more regularly so we started welcoming them on our volunteer  
**[0:05:20-0:05:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:05:20):**  days which happen every Wednesday.  So now on a Wednesday at the Grange we have between 10 and 20 local volunteers and between  5 and 10 asylum seekers and that's been really powerful and I think one of the things that  we've learned is that there's no expectation on anyone, particularly on asylum seekers,  to work.  
**[0:05:39-0:05:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:05:39):**  There's always jobs to do and they know that if they want to weed they can weed and if  they want to sow seeds they can sow seeds but they also know that if they just need  to relax they can relax because their lives are so uncertain and challenging anyway.  And what comes out of that is loads of just ad hoc lovely conversations with people from  the local area which has really made a massive difference in how people in our area in rural  
**[0:06:01-0:06:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:06:01):**  Norfolk perceive asylum seekers so the level of community understanding has grown massively  and a lot of prejudices I think have helped to overcome.  The other thing that we've learned through that is give people a chance to share their  own skills rather than just expect people to come onto your site and carry out the jobs  you need and the impact is much greater.  
**[0:06:22-0:06:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:06:22):**  So we mainly do gardening but we also do woodwork and pottery and all sorts of other things  and we found that through those skills people actually show that people come with those  skills and the amount of confidence they gain from having the opportunity to do that and  then to share that skill with other people is really extraordinary.  We've got working with psychotherapists who tell us they've worked with people for years  
**[0:06:43-0:06:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:06:43):**  and who are still stuck in a traumatic space but having the opportunity to be out in a  safe place, doesn't have to be in the countryside, it could be in an urban area, but in an open  space in a garden practising skills that they maybe know from their childhood from a safer  time is therapeutically extraordinary beneficial.  But it has to be set up in the right way and that's really key.  
**[0:07:02-0:07:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:07:02):**  I think working with partners who understand the asylum system, who understand the trauma  that asylum seekers have been through and making sure that volunteers are trained and  that any staff in the project are trained is super important and that's what we're  hoping is one of the things that the Gardens of Sanctuary project can offer is that training  and that support to help people set up these projects in the right way.  
**[0:07:24-0:07:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:07:24):**  The other thing that I would say is I would really encourage groups to start making contact  with local refugee and asylum organisations that will be operating in their area.  The partnerships between them can be really key and also there would be greater potential  to work together potentially on some funding bids and those organisations might have a  better awareness of what funding there might be out there to work with that particular  
**[0:07:48-0:07:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:07:48):**  group of people so definitely get out there and meet those organisations and start building  those relationships.  At the moment we're really open to people becoming involved so if there are people who  listen to this who want to find out more the best place to go at the moment is through  the City of Sanctuary website cityofsanctuary.org.org.uk and you'll find our contact details and some  
**[0:08:09-0:08:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:08:09):**  information and you can register your interest on there and we encourage people to get in  touch and contact us and we can follow up and hopefully work with more people.  Rebel Kitchen are a member of 1% for the planet.  This means they donate 1% of their sales, not just their profits, to partners contributing  to the planet and it's through this commitment that they're helping to support us to share  
**[0:08:39-0:08:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:08:39):**  knowledge within the farming community and to spread the word to many more farmers and  growers.  Elliot Coleman is an organic farming legend.  He has been farming at Four Seasons Farm in Maine for over 50 years and his book, The  New Organic Grower, is a seminal text for organic farmers, especially market gardeners.  
**[0:09:16-0:09:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:09:16):**  When I first learned about organic farming I had been spending all of my spare time as  a semi-pro adventurer.  I used to go on mountaineering expeditions, I was a passionate rock climber, I used to  race whitewater kayaks, ski race, and one day I think it was in my mid-20s I read a  book about small farming and I'd been thinking I should have something more socially redeeming  
**[0:09:40-0:09:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:09:40):**  in my future than the next mountain and it made it sound like an adventure, especially  because I was told that organic farming was absolutely impossible, that you couldn't grow  food without poisons and all these other things and if you've been a rock climber you've  spent your life doing the impossible so I said, okay, let's go for this.  The book I read was by a couple of American back to the landers, Scott and Helen Nearing,  
**[0:10:07-0:10:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:10:07):**  and I got to know them and we got along well and they sold me the back half of their farm  for what they'd paid for it 20 years ago but that sounds better than it is because it was  all forest and so we had to cut down the trees and dig out the stumps and roll out rocks  and we started with about two inches of very poor, very acid topsoil but the advantage  of difficulties is that you learn so much overcoming them and it was probably the best  
**[0:10:35-0:10:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:10:35):**  education I could possibly have had in soil fertility and what makes the soil more fertile  and how you can get there for the least cost and so forth and so that was the start of  where we learned that you don't buy inputs because especially organic inputs like soybean  meal or bone meal are really expensive.  You figure out what you can find locally that will do that and make that part of your farming  
**[0:11:04-0:11:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:11:04):**  system.  40 acres I have, we've finally cleared 14 of them and we have about two and a half of  that in intensive vegetables with greenhouses and despite our climate, I mean there's about  three feet of snow on the ground back home as I speak, we produce year round and in the  winter principally in unheated greenhouses by taking advantage of the fact that all of  
**[0:11:30-0:11:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:11:30):**  the hardy crops like spinach and Swiss chard and scallions and the Asian greens can freeze  and not mind it and so we figured out a very simple system and that's been the best part  of it because that was the next impossible.  Okay, maybe you can do it in the summer, you can't do it in the winter.  No, we can do it in the winter too.  
**[0:11:55-0:12:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:11:55):**  I tell people that a lot of the changes we make on the farm or a lot of the innovation  comes from the fact that I think I hide the fact from myself that I'm basically lazy and  so whenever I'm doing a job, if it is slightly unpleasant, I'm thinking how can I make this  more efficient, how can we do this better, how can we not run into the same snag next  year that we ran into this year and so it's really a continual process of I guess paying  
**[0:12:25-0:12:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:12:25):**  attention to detail to say okay, maybe we could change this, oh wait a minute, no if  we change that then that'll happen, okay so we better go in the other direction and it's  a wonderful mind game, that's the best part of it and it's the type of mind game that  I've always enjoyed because the thing I tell people about when you're climbing, the dullest  part is standing on top, the fun part was trying to figure out how to get there and  
**[0:12:53-0:12:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:12:53):**  so the nice thing about small farming is it is a continual trying to figure out how to  get there.  We have a few tree fruits, apples and some peaches but basically we're a vegetable farm  but we also have chickens for eggs and eggs are a wonderful complement to a vegetable  farm because it's almost a full diet that way, you get your protein and your veggies  
**[0:13:22-0:13:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:13:22):**  and the chickens though graze on what you would call a lay rotation where we've put  our land for a couple of years into a grass legume pasture and then the following year  that land is in crops, the previous crop land gets sown down to grass pasture and the chickens  graze it and this has been a wonderful way to have what I call the self-fed farm with  no need other than the feed I'm bringing in for the chickens to bring in anything from  
**[0:13:55-0:13:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:13:55):**  outside.  If anybody who's farmed has obviously run into difficulties, there are times, we had  so little resources at the start, my farm was being run by a 1948 Willys Jeep which  was left over from the second world war which I bought very, very used and I had a four  horsepower walk behind a rototiller.  
**[0:14:23-0:14:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:14:23):**  Well the engine on the Jeep went out once and when you're that close to the edge economically  then you really, that was a tough time.  We managed to get through that and then a neighbor who decided that we were not his  cup of tea slashed the tires on my Jeep once.  There's always things like that.  
**[0:14:48-0:14:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:14:48):**  I actually eventually made friends with him which was the easiest way to deal with something  like that.  He apologized.  But, you know, there are always difficulties and you think, oh my gosh, how are we going  to get by this?  
**[0:15:02-0:15:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:15:02):**  But human beings are wonderful.  We have wonderful neighbors.  We help our neighbors.  They help us.  And if you live in a rural community, there is a spirit in the rural communities that  
**[0:15:17-0:15:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:15:17):**  I don't know if it exists in cities because I've never lived in cities, but there's a  spirit in rural communities where everybody understands that we are there because the  returns from this lifestyle are so fantastic and that if we want to continue it, we need  to help each other at every opportunity.  Most of the light bulb moments, I would say, came for us from the whole idea of, and it  
**[0:15:48-0:15:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:15:48):**  was the best stuff I read when I started reading about organic farming, the whole idea that  if you grow plants correctly, you won't have pests.  We would see that that worked fantastically, but then there would be times when we weren't  aware that we had done something wrong and there would be pests.  So we used to do trials and we would take a field and prepare half of it one way and  
**[0:16:13-0:16:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:16:13):**  half of it the other way and plant the same crop in it.  And just time after time, there would be pests on one half and no pests on the other half.  The sad thing about this is that all the years I've been on my farm, and I've been there  since 1968, no professor of entomology from the nearby university has ever bothered to  come down and see what's happening.  
**[0:16:40-0:16:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:16:40):**  It's really sad.  And I think they don't want to find out that they have been wrong their whole career.  I mean, I suppose that's pretty discouraging.  If you're about to retire, you find out you've been wrong about these things.  But the balance between what you've done to prepare the soil correctly and all the delightful  
**[0:17:01-0:17:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:17:01):**  biological life in the soil and the effect that has inducing resistance in the crops  is finally now being researched.  And it was just stuff we intuited back then.  But those were the light bulb moments when we'd say, oh my gosh, look, the left-hand  side of that field has pests, the right-hand side doesn't.  
**[0:17:20-0:17:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:17:20):**  This really does work.  And it did.  We joke about our trials.  We refer to ourselves as the national empirical research station because we just try things  and see if it works.  
**[0:17:33-0:17:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:17:33):**  And very often we would have done trials.  And it takes a lot of effort.  So this is sort of kids, don't do this at home if you don't have your farm together.  And then suddenly we would have run out of carrots at the farm shop.  And I'd rush over there and pull carrots, and so we never got to detail it correctly.  
**[0:17:55-0:18:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:17:55):**  But you can learn a lot just by looking around and paying attention every day.  And once you've been farming, I would say, at least three years, if you really keep your  eyes open, you're going to notice a lot more stuff than you ever would have imagined at  the start.  I think I'm a suspicious old hippie, and I see a lot of the interest in no-till.  
**[0:18:21-0:18:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:18:21):**  The research is coming from research done by the chemical companies to justify farmers  pouring on herbicides.  And if you look at it carefully, it is biased in favor of telling you not to till because  they bias their research by only checking the organic matter in the top two inches of  the soil where it was higher under no-till.  
**[0:18:45-0:18:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:18:45):**  If you actually check the organic matter in the rest of the soil, standard organic farming  beats no-till for carbon capture and everything.  So that's one thing there.  I don't think we need to debate.  But if you look at the future of the world, and you want to look at it, let's say, for  
**[0:19:04-0:19:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:19:04):**  the next 100 years, the only system of agriculture that is going to continue to feed mankind  into the future is organic farming, a no-input organic farming, an organic farming that is  understanding how much fertility can come from green manures, cover crops, crop rotation,  mixed livestock, et cetera, et cetera.  And so the future, they're all going to be farming our way or they aren't going to be  
**[0:19:31-0:19:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:19:31):**  eating.  And we do not understand that because if you're running an input system and your inputs run  out, you're over and done with.  And after a while, human beings are going to realize that the type of farming that has  been talked about since the 40s and all those wonderful old books I read when I started  
**[0:19:51-0:19:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:19:51):**  out that were all published by Faber and Faber, I mean, so much of my knowledge background  came from the British Isles and the books that came out of the movement in those days.  They're going to realize that it didn't have to be purest in the way organic sometimes  gets into purest, like how many beneficial bacteria can dance on the tines of a manure  fork or something like that.  
**[0:20:19-0:20:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:20:19):**  But the basic idea that you are working with the natural world and the soil biology and  treating it correctly in order to keep food production going forever, I guarantee you  that's the way everybody's going to be farming.  I've been designing tools for the type of stuff we do.  I've been working on this for years.  
**[0:20:41-0:20:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:20:41):**  And one conclusion that I've come to is that there is nothing new in agriculture.  I'll come up with an idea for a twist on a tool.  And if I research it enough, I'll find out that somebody came up with that 40 years ago  and we've never heard of this person.  So it's really hard to have an overall thing for the farming community.  
**[0:21:03-0:21:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:21:03):**  The thing I tell young people if they ask me is pay attention to detail.  And that's good information in any business.  It's interesting to hear Elliot talk about organic farming because his definition of  organics as working with the natural world and soil biology is actually a form of practice  being adopted by many other farmers who don't identify as organic.  
**[0:21:32-0:21:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:21:32):**  I'd say this is the guiding principle behind regenerative agriculture.  And what's so exciting is that many conventional farmers are rethinking their farming system  guided by soil health and working with the natural world.  Kind of like Fred Price who you heard from back in January's episode.  If you're in the UK and interested in learning more about this approach, then the Ground  
**[0:21:55-0:22:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:21:55):**  Swell Conference in late June is a brilliant event to find out more.  Rudy Marchese is president and chief viticulturist at Montenor Estate where they have 240 acres  of vineyards, one of the largest biodynamic vineyards in the Willamette Valley in Oregon.  Rudy was responsible for converting the whole estate to biodynamic methods over 10 years  ago and he's a globally respected biodynamic wine grower.  
**[0:22:32-0:22:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:22:32):**  The estate is beautiful with large lakes, trees and wildflower meadows.  We love the way Rudy describes biodynamic farming as quote, an approach to plant and  land care that combines novel techniques of building up healthy soil with a renewed awareness  of all the forces at work in the farm organism, among and between the soil, plants, animals  and humans, as well as the cosmos itself.  
**[0:23:00-0:23:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:23:00):**  Here Rudy shares some tips for doing biodynamics on a larger scale.  Hi I'm Rudy Marchese from Montenor Estate in the Willamette Valley of Oregon.  Okay so we have 200 plus acres of wine grapes here, predominantly Pinot Noir and some cool  climate whites and they range anywhere from 35 to 10 years in age.  And since 2003 we started, in 2003 we started the conversion from conventional farming to  
**[0:23:35-0:23:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:23:35):**  organic and biodynamic.  We ceased the use of herbicides, started working with opening up the soil and getting some  cover crops in and using biodynamic preparations in all ways we could to bring some life back  to the farm.  I can't do all this work myself.  
**[0:23:55-0:23:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:23:55):**  I have a crew and a team that works with me so I think the first thing you need to do  is to get those that work with you on board and understanding at least the basics of your  goal and what the agenda will be in terms of changes in practices.  And for the most part it's really the elimination of all the toxics and the addition of practices  such as building and applying compost, putting on the additional sprays, be it biodynamic  
**[0:24:26-0:24:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:24:26):**  sprays or plant teas that will go on the canopies, things like that.  But you need everyone to kind of buy into the thought process and embrace it.  And then after that it's the actual mechanics of it which is in a way the easiest thing.  If you're going to stir a biodynamic preparation for 200 acres, unless you have a team of people  with oars spinning really rapidly, you need to do it mechanically or with a flow form  
**[0:24:58-0:24:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:24:58):**  or something like that.  So you find the best way that works for you on your site and just build the machinery  or buy the machinery so that you can do this stirring and do it properly.  And the same thing with the compost.  Building bigger compost piles isn't so hard, it just requires bigger pieces of machinery.  
**[0:25:21-0:25:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:25:21):**  We just bought an old backhoe that had a big bucket loader and we used that and it's just  dedicated for our compost turning and building and then it's a matter of having compost spreaders  and you can utilize manure spreaders or you can adapt a manure spreader to compost.  So it's basically just getting a little bit bigger equipment and having the will to do  it.  
**[0:25:49-0:25:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:25:49):**  So scaling up from my mind is not so hard.  I think there's a feeling among some farmers that you have to do everything by hand and  it has to be small and intimate and certainly that's a wonderful way to farm but if you  need to have a bigger farm and operate it, it can be done.  And it can be done in a way that you don't lose your sensitivity and you don't lose the  
**[0:26:17-0:26:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:26:17):**  effectiveness of the treatments.  Because we needed a few hundred gallons of spray at a time, so we built a spraying setup  with three tanks or a stirring setup with three tanks that were in tandem with copper  coated paddles that would stir and create the vortex in the sprays.  And from everything I had read and talked with people about, you want to avoid having  
**[0:26:45-0:26:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:26:45):**  any electromagnetic fields around the spray material and the stirring area.  So what we did is we got parts off of an old street sweeper that was a gas engine with  a big hydraulic motor pump and set that off to the side and then piped the hydraulic fluids  up to a hydraulic motor on top of the tanks that does all the stirring for us.  And one thing I was concerned about, I didn't want a machine that you would just turn it  
**[0:27:15-0:27:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:27:15):**  on and walk away and come back an hour later.  I wanted something where whoever was doing it was involved in the back and forth of creating  the vortex and the chaos and the reverse vortex, just as if one were stirring it by hand.  So we made it manually operated where you have to push a lever one way to go clockwise  and then pull it back the other way to go counterclockwise.  
**[0:27:39-0:27:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:27:39):**  So someone is almost forced to watch the creation of the vortex and then make sure that the  chaos and the reversing is adequate and then the reversal vortex and then go back again.  So it kind of puts the intention of the operator into the process.  But we're still stirring 300 gallons of biodynamic preparation at a time.  So it works on that scale for us.  
**[0:28:07-0:28:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:28:07):**  It's the most highly scrutinized agricultural product for quality I think that there is.  And there are many variations and there's just untold number of publications and broadcasts  and whatnot about the quality and character of wine.  So it's a product where the quality and character are paramount in the success of the person  that's producing it.  
**[0:28:33-0:28:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:28:33):**  And I think it's an interesting barometer of the effectiveness of these biodynamic practices  because what we have seen is a real dramatic transformation in not only the quality but  the character and the expressiveness of our wines relative to this farm where they're  grown.  And I think that speaks to kind of the nature of the effect of not only biodynamics but  
**[0:29:02-0:29:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:29:02):**  most sustainable practices where you're really engaging the farm into the process rather  than just utilizing the soil to hold up a plant and pumping it full of fertilizers and  things.  You're engaging the entire biology, the entire population of the environment into producing  this product.  
**[0:29:24-0:29:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:29:24):**  And it really shows in the quality and the character of the place is reflected especially  in a glass of wine that's grown this way on a particular site.  So I think for me it's very profound and the transformation here over the last 15 plus  years has been remarkable and I'd like to share that.  This month's show was made by Joe Barrett, Katie Revel and myself, Abby Rose.  
**[0:29:54-0:29:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:29:54):**  We had help with editing from Louis Hudson and Suzy McCarthy.  Thanks to Joy Rose for sending in the recording about Gardens of Sanctuary and to Chelsea  Green for putting us in touch with Elliot Coleman.  Community support is handled by Annie Landless, Eliza Jenkins and Olivia Oldham.  And our theme music is by Owen Barrett.  
**[0:30:16-0:30:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:30:16):**  We're delighted to be nominated for a Bullseye Award at this year's British Podcast Awards.  The Bullseye Award honours the podcasts producing exceptional listening experiences for niche  audiences and those underrepresented in other British media.  We'll let you know how we get on next month.  In the meantime you can also vote for us in the Listeners' Choice Award.  
**[0:30:38-0:30:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:30:38):**  Just go to BritishPodcastAwards.com forward slash vote and type in Farmerama.  It takes less than a minute and voting closes on the 15th of May.  And while you're at it, if you enjoy the show and want to help us out, rating and reviewing  us on iTunes really makes a difference and helps more people discover this work.  We'll leave you with a message from Joel Rodker who's saying goodbye to Harvest Barn Market  
**[0:31:09-0:31:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:31:09):**  Garden.  We've been following him for the past year through the highs and lows of setting up a  market garden.  Thank you Joel for taking us with you on that journey and all the very best.  We're looking forward to following your future endeavours.  
**[0:31:24-0:31:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:31:24):**  And we'll see you next month.  Toodle-oo!  Hello Farmerama, good afternoon.  I haven't recorded anything for a while, it's been a busy few months.  I'd like you to imagine it's the 6th of March, I'm packing up a long wheelbase, hire van,  
**[0:31:42-0:31:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:31:42):**  sandbags, seed compost, irrigation equipment, ground cover, EnviroMesh, tools, seed trays,  a BCS tractor.  The van is pretty much full to the brim.  My relationship with the landlords at Harvest Barn Farm Shop has come to an end.  I won't go into the details because that would be unfair without all three of us being present.  
**[0:32:05-0:32:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:32:05):**  Let's just say we didn't quite see eye to eye and it wasn't the right place for me.  I learnt a lot and I've been badly stung I guess, but a new chapter has opened.  To find out about that you'll have to listen to the next episode.  For now let's just say this has been a rollercoaster year.  It hasn't really been harder than I expected because I didn't go into this naive, I knew  
**[0:32:35-0:32:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:32:35):**  it was going to be bloody hard and I think I've experienced a good share of challenges.  A lot more, not less than what I imagined might happen, although there have been quite  a few things that weren't predicted.  I guess those are the kind of things that happen to everyone when they're starting a  new business or in farming.  
**[0:32:58-0:33:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:32:58):**  There are always going to be things that you don't expect.  But despite all those difficulties and painful lessons, I haven't been put off and I'm still  committed to market gardening, to agro-ecological farming, to community building, to spreading  awareness of the benefits of small scale farming, to spreading manure, to building soil, to  being outside, to helping wildlife, to promoting locally grown seasonal organic food.  
**[0:33:28-0:33:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:33:28):**  So with all those things in mind, I will continue and hopefully see you soon.  Thanks for listening everyone.  Bye.  I've just come into the polytunnel and I'm taking down a bench and tying up tomato strings  and it's absolutely pouring and the wind is blowing.  
**[0:34:07-0:34:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:34:07):**  I think it's going to be even too loud in here to record anything.  The rain is gusting past the polytunnel.  So luckily I'm inside.  I think this could be an omen that it's time to leave this godforsaken place in the fens.  I think it's time for a cup of tea, the last little bit of tidying up and then back to  
**[0:34:31-0:34:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/45-gardens-of-sanctuary-the-adventure-of-organic-farming-and-biodynamic-wines#t=0:34:31):**  my nice warm cozy flat in Norwich.  Goodbye.  