---
title: 46: Vandana Shiva, Loans for enlightened Agriculture, mulching systems and talking no-til
---

### Farmerama  (2019-05-26)  
### Author(s): Farmerama  

**[0:00:00-0:00:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to Farmerama. This month we hear from an inspirational woman who's  long been banging the drum for biodiversity and small-scale farmers around the world.  Then it's on to a field mulching evangelist and finally loans for enlightened agriculture.  
**[0:00:19-0:00:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:00:19):**  And we finish off with some discussion of how no-till on its own is not always rooted  in a more ecological approach. Vandana Shiva is a force of nature. She's  an Indian scholar, environmental activist and food sovereignty advocate. She spent much  
**[0:00:47-0:00:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:00:47):**  of her life in the defence and celebration of biodiversity and indigenous knowledge.  And we've heard her speak a few times. But last month when she spoke at the Farming  the Future event that was organised by the Roddick and A-Team foundations, she absolutely  
**[0:01:01-0:01:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:01:01):**  blew us away. But what I've learned since then are two  simple principles which in a way are in our ancient learning in all cultures. First that  the currency of life is food. What moves through the web of life to nourish life is food and  
**[0:01:21-0:01:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:01:21):**  nutrition. And when we poison the food web, the highest dharma is the growing and giving  of good food. And the highest adharma is getting lazy in agriculture and serving bad food or  letting people go hungry. I mean, that's all we have to do. Turn the growing of good food  
**[0:01:47-0:01:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:01:47):**  into our sacred duty of being alive on this beautiful earth. And that's why we all have  to become farmers, maybe with just a balcony. When Greece collapsed after 2008, we were  there to launch the Seed Movement and Seed Freedom Movement. And there was this young  
**[0:02:05-0:02:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:02:05):**  man who said, but what can I do? Our jobs have gone, our pensions have gone, there's  nothing. I said, you have a balcony? Yeah. I said, go food. He met me later, two years  later, he said, I feed my entire street. So we've been made so deeply to think that money  
**[0:02:26-0:02:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:02:26):**  is the currency of life. But money is not the currency of life. It is no currency at  all. It is just a medium of exchange. If you look at your notes, it says, I promise to  pay the bearer. It's a pure promise, nothing more. We've turned it into not just an end,  
**[0:02:49-0:02:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:02:49):**  we've turned it into the measure of our humanity. We've turned it into the new God. The metric  of the yield was designed to reduce farming to the production of commodities. And all  you measure in yield per acre is the commodity that leaves the farm. Not the state of the  
**[0:03:09-0:03:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:03:09):**  farm, not the quality of the food. It's nutritionally empty, toxic commodities that are floating  in huge quantity around the world. 90% of the corn and soy are going for biofuel and  animal feed, not even to feed people. And that's why the more commodities you have,  
**[0:03:26-0:03:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:03:26):**  the more hunger you have. Half of the hungry of the world, half of the one billion hungry  are farmers. Half. So our food producers have been turned into the hungry when they have  this amazing role to play to care for the earth. We decided for India to look at all  
**[0:03:47-0:03:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:03:47):**  the costs that go into the chemical agriculture system, including the social costs of indebted  farmers and farmer suicides, the environmental costs, the soil, the death of animals, the  death of bees, the disappearance of water. So we worked out just social and ecological  
**[0:04:07-0:04:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:04:07):**  $1.3 trillion annually, which is bigger than our GDP, the destruction. And then if you  add the health damages, which we haven't done for India, but we have a new manifesto, Food  for Health, and we've got a summary of it. So neurological neurodegenerative diseases,  
**[0:04:24-0:04:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:04:24):**  $1.4 trillion annual costs, autism $171 trillion, birth defects $22.9, obesity $1.2, cancer  $2.5, diabetes $2.5 trillion, endocrine disruption $549 billion, infertility $9.6 million, and  antibiotic resistance $1 trillion. Good farming has to be defined as a health sector. It's  
**[0:04:52-0:04:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:04:52):**  health provisioning. And not only is it health provisioning for human beings, it's health  provisioning for animals, for plants, and it's health provisioning for the planet. Because  I see climate change as nothing more than the metabolic disorder of the planet, all  
**[0:05:11-0:05:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:05:11):**  because of the huge emissions. And there's a focus only on emissions from energy and  the energy sector, but 50% emissions, greenhouse gas emissions, come from the industrial food  system. The production, the fertilizers, the land use change, growing soybean in the Amazon,  
**[0:05:32-0:05:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:05:32):**  chopping down forests, transport packaging, food miles, and food waste, because the system  designed to waste food. Add it all up, it's 50%. And yet, if you work with the earth,  we can repair the broken carbon cycle, we can repair the broken nitrogen cycle, which  
**[0:05:49-0:05:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:05:49):**  is actually 300 times more deadly in terms of emissions. Nitrous oxide is 300 times more  damaging to the environment than carbon dioxide is. We can repair these cycles and heal the  soil and grow more food. Soil with organic matter, and in our farms and in our members'  
**[0:06:09-0:06:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:06:09):**  farms, organic matter has gone up by 99%, whereas in the chemical farms in our valley,  it's gone down by 14%. This is a 20-year study the top soil ecologist of India did. In nitrogen,  it's gone down 22% in chemical farms, it's gone up 100% in the organic farms. But zinc,  
**[0:06:31-0:06:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:06:31):**  which is a big deficiency and responsible for depression, 37% decrying in chemical farms,  14% increase in organic farms. Nobody's putting zinc into the soil. The soil organisms are  creating these micronutrients and trace elements. That's why feeding the soil is our first duty.  
**[0:06:52-0:06:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:06:52):**  First the soil, then the family that's growing the food, which is how we'll end hunger in  agriculture. Then your local community, which is where the gift of food has to come back.  And then high value products, but low volume things so long distance. So trade right now  
**[0:07:14-0:07:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:07:14):**  has become everything you eat has to come from far away. Lots of toxics, you don't know  what you're eating. And if you want to know what you're eating, there'll be one trade  dispute to trash you. And now with Brexit, the US is just looking at England as the dumping  
**[0:07:30-0:07:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:07:30):**  ground of all the worst food and the dismantling of the food and health and safety standards  of this country. It's going to be a very important time for the food and farming movement. Biodiversity  is the only way you can control pests without pesticides. The only way you can control weeds  
**[0:07:48-0:07:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:07:48):**  without herbicides. And it's the only way pollinators get food because we forget the  seed we sow, when it becomes a flower, is food for the bees. And the bee pollinates,  fertilizes the flower, which becomes the fruit. That's the economies we have to build. Where  
**[0:08:10-0:08:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:08:10):**  the bee gets honey, and the flower gets fertility, and neither became less. Because this Cartesian  way of thinking mechanically is, if you have more, I have less. Which has also created  the illusion of cheap. First, that there has to be cheap food to feed the hungry. That  
**[0:08:28-0:08:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:08:28):**  food is not cheap. If you take all those costs to the planet, to the farmers, to our health,  into account, it's too costly for us to continue to produce. And that's why internalizing these  externalities becomes a very important part of it. So it's not cheap. And I think while  
**[0:08:48-0:08:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:08:48):**  we address the ecological apartheid which has separated us from the earth, we need to  address the nutritional apartheid, that has brought a crazy situation where if food is  the currency of our life, and the tiniest of bees, and the tiniest of babies should  
**[0:09:06-0:09:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:09:06):**  be having good food, we have created an assumption that the poor can be deprived. That being  poor can pull you out of the cycle of life where food is the nourishment. And the two  apartheids go together, the two separations go together. The only way we'll be able to  
**[0:09:28-0:09:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:09:28):**  bring the right of all to good food is through the right of all people to grow good food.  I've reached the stage where I say the most important thing the earth is asking us to  do is put our hands, our heads, and our hearts to her service. Farming is the highest vocation.  
**[0:09:51-0:09:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:09:51):**  Farming food is the highest thing you can do. Let us make a 10 year plan. And in the  10 year plan is poison free food and farming, fossil fuel free systems, cultivating young  farmers, growing young farmers, and our university is always there for that service. Thank you.  
**[0:10:16-0:10:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:10:16):**  Thanks to our supporters Rebel Kitchen. Their mission is to redefine health through food,  business, and beyond. They have a different kind of health message, one that doesn't separate  the individual from the whole, and that is based on actions instead of preaching, because  
**[0:10:34-0:10:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:10:34):**  it's all connected.  Last month we had a great question from Niall Furlong on Instagram. They asked why in last  month's show, Elliot Coleman said agribusinesses were pushing no-till and chemical inputs.  
**[0:10:52-0:10:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:10:52):**  And Niall pointed out that it would appear that no-till, which naturally builds soil  health, would not be in agribusinesses' interest. Here's Abbey to respond to this question.  Thanks so much for asking this question. It brings up a very important point and we will  
**[0:11:09-0:11:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:11:09):**  try and answer what we think Elliot was referring to. No-till agriculture, although generally  better for the soil, is not always a particularly ecological approach when applied in isolation.  And there are a number of farmers, most notably in the Americas, who are implementing no-till  
**[0:11:29-0:11:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:11:29):**  agriculture in a rather chemical intensive way that has many other negative side effects.  In the UK, when people talk about no-till, they're often really referring to conservation  agriculture, which actually has three key principles. Firstly, not tilling or not disturbing  
**[0:11:48-0:11:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:11:48):**  the soil. Secondly, always keep the soil covered, so for example using cover crops. And thirdly,  build diversity into your system, so whether that's through rotation or companion plantings.  I think what Elliot was most likely talking about here is purely no-till agriculture that  
**[0:12:08-0:12:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:12:08):**  is practiced with genetically modified crops plus multiple herbicide applications, and  it's a key part of the agribusiness model. This method of no-till farming is common in  large parts of the United States as well as South America. Farmers buy seeds that have  
**[0:12:24-0:12:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:12:24):**  been genetically modified to be resistant to herbicides. They direct drill those seeds  into the land and then apply those herbicides multiple times throughout the year in order  to extinguish any weeds that might be growing in the crop. The crop is of course unaffected  
**[0:12:41-0:12:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:12:41):**  as it's been engineered to resist the toxic effects of the herbicide. However, the whole  ecosystem is probably broken as all other plants are dead and therefore you're back  into the cycle of needing insecticides, fungicides, fertilizers and more. Many conservation agriculture  
**[0:13:01-0:13:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:13:01):**  farmers in the UK do use a herbicide once a year to kill off the cover crop just before  planting their cash crop. But this is a very different approach and these farmers are often  working to minimize their chemical inputs and looking to work with the natural world  
**[0:13:20-0:13:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:13:20):**  as much as possible. Hopefully that sheds some light on your question and as you can  see no-till is not outright good or bad. It's the mindset of the farmer and the journey  they are on that makes the difference.  
**[0:13:38-0:13:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:13:38):**  The Loans for Enlightened Agriculture Programme, or LEAP, is an initiative from the Real Farming  Trust. They provide a mix of affordable loans and grants as well as mentoring to agroecological  food and farming enterprises. Robert Reid tells us more.  
**[0:13:55-0:14:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:13:55):**  I'm here with Robert Fraser from the Real Farming Trust who's here today to talk to  us about the Loans for Enlightened Agriculture Programme. Robert, would you like to tell  us more about the programme?  
**[0:14:09-0:14:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:14:09):**  Yes, thank you very much Rob. So the Loans for Enlightened Agriculture Programme, which  has been given the acronym LEAP, which I think is quite a nice acronym, has evolved out of  our previous programme which was called Just Growth. Just Growth funded eight agroecological  
**[0:14:29-0:14:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:14:29):**  enterprises, food businesses, with a third loan, a third grant and a third was raised  in community finance. We found that to be very successful so we wanted to take that  to the next stage and I've spent the last couple of years trying to create this new  
**[0:14:45-0:14:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:14:45):**  programme, LEAP, which is wider in its scope and bigger in its ambition. So we've raised  about one and a half million pounds for the programme. We're offering affordable social  investment loans to eligible enterprises side by side with a grant, but also crucially a  
**[0:15:07-0:15:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:15:07):**  pretty comprehensive mentoring programme of business advice and support which will help  organisations to develop and become financially viable in the long term. So I think one of  the main objectives is to try and offer funding that allows organisations to grow to the next  
**[0:15:24-0:15:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:15:24):**  stage. Grant funding is becoming rarer and highly competitive and there's a 99% chance  of failure with grants. So we wanted to offer something that was between a grant but not  commercial finance because a lot of the enterprises that we work with are community based and  
**[0:15:42-0:15:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:15:42):**  they don't have any assets or they don't track records so they wouldn't be eligible for commercial  finance. That's the package we've put together and we launched it at the Oxford Real Farming  Conference in January and we had a lot of interest which is fantastic. We've had 38  
**[0:15:55-0:16:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:15:55):**  expressions of interest so far and that's only three months in. We're hoping to fund  between 20 and 30 organisations. We're really looking for organisations that meet the criteria  of enlightened agriculture which the Real Farming Trust has been a proponent of for  
**[0:16:15-0:16:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:16:15):**  some time which is a mix of, based on three key principles, agroecology which I think  we all know about and food sovereignty again which we all know about but also economic  democracy and that's one part of the equation that we're really trying to encourage is that  
**[0:16:32-0:16:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:16:32):**  communities can have control of their own food systems but also a say in the businesses  that operate in their communities either through ownership or membership or some other activities  and voluntary work or whatever. So those are the criteria that we're trying to encourage  
**[0:16:50-0:16:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:16:50):**  organisations with those criteria to apply to LEAP. The funding that we're offering is  between £25,000 and £100,000 so we're really looking for organisations that are beyond  start-up and at a sort of early to intermediate stage in their development and looking for  
**[0:17:08-0:17:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:17:08):**  funding for the next stage in their development. Grant funding is always going to be really,  really important to our sector especially for start-ups and very early stage organisations  and for research and development. So loan finance probably wouldn't be appropriate for  
**[0:17:27-0:17:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:17:27):**  organisations that are in that very early stage or start-up situation. And once the  organisations have looked to scale up what type of impact do you foresee that this programme  making? So yes we're an impact first programme so we're less concerned about the financial  
**[0:17:44-0:17:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:17:44):**  return obviously and we want to deliver a social return, that is our primary objective,  it's a charitable programme so we want to achieve public benefits and social impact  around community resilience, around jobs and livelihoods and about protection of the biosphere.  
**[0:18:05-0:18:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:18:05):**  Would you like to say any more about the Real Farming Trust and the aims of that organisation?  Yes so the Real Farming Trust many people may already know that was set up by Colin  Touch and his wife Ruth West, it's been going since 2008. People probably know it best through  
**[0:18:20-0:18:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:18:20):**  the much loved Oxford Real Farming Conference which Colin and Ruth were co-founders of along  with Graham Harvey and that has grown from 50 people in a side room as an antidote to  the Oxford Farming Conference 10 years ago and this year we had the conference's 10th  
**[0:18:40-0:18:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:18:40):**  anniversary and it's now grown to over a thousand delegates over two days and is a really special  conference that everybody seems to love and enjoy and is a great start to the year. So  that's one programme that we run, we also have funding in Light and Agriculture which  
**[0:18:58-0:19:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:18:58):**  we've already talked about and LEAP sits within that and we are the Secretariat for the APPG  in Agroecology which is the all party parliamentary group for agroecology which is in Westminster  and we're trying to set up now a new initiative called the College for Real Farming and Food  
**[0:19:15-0:19:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:19:15):**  Culture which is Colin Touch's latest programme which is trying to, we sort of recognise that  agriculture cannot be changed ad hoc, we need to re-examine and restructure the underlying  economic principles and the policy environment, the science and technology, the moral and  
**[0:19:37-0:19:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:19:37):**  arts, we need to look at the bigger picture to really allow agroecology to flourish and  to make sure that we can really start to transform our food system so that's an ongoing programme  as well.  
**[0:20:02-0:20:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:20:02):**  Thank you.  One of the speakers at the Oxford Real Farming Conference earlier this year was Johannes Storch  from the Bio Gemüsehof farm in Germany. He explained how they grow field scale vegetables,  
**[0:20:43-0:20:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:20:43):**  keeping the soil permanently covered by organic matter and with roots always present.  They grow cover crops, cut them to create mulch and then use spreaders to evenly distribute  it along their vegetable beds. They've even developed a machine that penetrates through  
**[0:20:59-0:21:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:20:59):**  the thick mulch to plant the seedlings. We spoke to Johannes and also present is Adam  Keys from the Organic Growers Alliance.  I studied organic agriculture or agricultural sciences in University of Kassel. I'm now  
**[0:21:16-0:21:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:21:16):**  a vegetable farmer. Yeah we looked into nature and thought how does nature preserve soil  fertility and we found out that soil in nature is always covered and has always active living  roots which keeps up soil fertility. In deserts we don't have roots and we don't have cover  
**[0:21:43-0:21:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:21:43):**  but we also don't have fertile soils so in farming we often don't have active roots and  don't have soil cover and we wonder why our humus content is lowered or how do you say  this is decreasing but if we keep up the principles of nature, always roots, always cover, we  
**[0:22:05-0:22:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:22:05):**  can increase soil fertility.  The other point is we as a farm, one year we worked with a stopwatch. So we timed how  long do we take for planting in the mulch, how long is it spreading the mulch, how often  
**[0:22:28-0:22:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:22:28):**  do we have to still do some hand weeding or not. So we know the data of our crops, the  working steps, we have the facts of that and so we can calculate very precisely if this  system is financially also worth, or not worth it but it's paying itself and yes this we  
**[0:22:57-0:23:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:22:57):**  need to do as a farm because we cannot just play. I think we can be intensive in production  and intensive in building up soil fertility at the same time. This I think is important  and that's why we need many facts to do that and find a way to keep up soil fertility without  
**[0:23:22-0:23:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:23:22):**  reducing production. I mean in the beginning it was a lot of learning by doing also by  mistake sometimes quite frustrating but we kept on going and I would say the last two  three years we learned that technique has to be very precise, machinery has to be very  
**[0:23:46-0:24:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:23:46):**  precise so that the system works, that we can support nature in serving us again. Let's  call it like this because I think we need to empower nature in a way but we have to  do a quite scientific and quite precise work in this. It's our part and we need to understand  
**[0:24:18-0:24:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:24:18):**  nature in order to do this empowerment. This was one point. The other point I just mentioned  with the facts we really collected data in order to watch nature precisely, watch us  also precisely. Yes, and another point which was this autumn which I found out that we  
**[0:24:44-0:24:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:24:44):**  have to be consistent in what we are doing. We're building up soil fertility during a  season but then we somehow at the end of the season start from the beginning again, sowing  a cover crop before we do a lot of tillage and so on. We destroyed quite a bit of what  
**[0:25:03-0:25:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:25:03):**  we built up during the year so and I saw we have to be consistent in what we are doing  and if we see the nice results which nature provides we cannot stop there. We have to  think ahead. It's a journey, it's not a fixed system. It's a journey which we do together  
**[0:25:21-0:25:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:25:21):**  with nature and I think this couch we have to do, have to have and because we have a  task also towards society as farmers. I think so and now we had a drought, a big drought  this year in Germany and that's part of climate change and here we as farmers are a cause  
**[0:25:49-0:25:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:25:49):**  for the climate change as we part of the society but we also a big part of the solution and  this we have to see and act in our responsibility which we as farmers have which is the soil.  And then to be honest to say there was a mistake but I learned this and that from this. Not  
**[0:26:09-0:26:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:26:09):**  hiding these mistakes and this sometimes made my knees a little bit shaky or shaky and I'm  as a young farmer inexperienced in a way you know but this openness was really helping  me to come further and preventing others to make the same mistakes as I did. So this were  
**[0:26:35-0:26:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:26:35):**  sometimes shaky moments.  Wow, so your experiences with roller crimping because that's something that I have seen  on your website but you didn't pick up on and so you've just stopped that now.  
**[0:26:46-0:26:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:26:46):**  We tried many years to plant into roller crimped or rolled cover crops and like three years  in a row we had quite some loss there because of mice and stuff like this and we stopped  also because we saw that the system of combining in situ mulch which you cover crop which  
**[0:27:16-0:27:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:27:16):**  you grow at the place where you use it combining with transferred mulch has the best results.  It's the most resilient system whatever conditions we have. So for us on our farm this was somehow  was becoming clear that it's going this way and the roller crimping was too, had a too  
**[0:27:45-0:27:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:27:45):**  high risk for us. It's quite an interesting system if you just roll the cover crop plant  in harvest but it's this system is quite challenging or also sophisticated because you have to  make many things right so that it works and I think it's hard to make often everything  
**[0:28:11-0:28:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:28:11):**  right and in this system which we have now where we combine these two cover crop with  the transferred mulch we are better off in every year. First step is in autumn prepare  the beds loosen the soil so that you have mechanically nice soil structure in the top  
**[0:28:31-0:28:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:28:31):**  soil. Next step is sowing the cover crop September, October it's a mixture of rye grain, hairy  veg and winter peas. The roots stabilize the soil and so in springtime we don't need to  do any soil cultivation anymore. The cover crop grows and produces a lot of biomass up  
**[0:28:57-0:29:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:28:57):**  to 12 tons dry matter per hectare which we use on the spot as mulch. We flamel the cover  crop and add some transferred mulch that can be cover crop, clover grass or grassland which  we mow and cut which we add on this mulch layer which was produced by the cover crop.  
**[0:29:20-0:29:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:29:20):**  Like this we have around 7 centimeters high mulch layer in which we transplant with our  machine and by this we don't have any weeds because we don't touch the soil no weed seeds  are germinating. Soil structure is so nice that they can just grow their plants. Next  
**[0:29:46-0:29:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:29:46):**  working step is the harvest. I think it's really interesting the selection of your choice  of cover crops. In England we predominantly use a perennial grass and I noticed that you  only use the cereal rye as cereal grass an annual essentially an annual grass and that  
**[0:30:04-0:30:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:30:04):**  is that essential to your system for terminating cover crops because that's one thing that  we have in the UK is what we need to use the plough because we have to get rid of our cover  crop over winter and cover crop and the big thing in my mind is that well let's stop using  
**[0:30:18-0:30:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:30:18):**  perennial grasses and then we can get rid of this issue with having to till the soil.  Yes definitely perennial grass or crops we don't use as cover crops because we want to  terminate them. We also grow clover grass. We have a seven years rotation with two years  
**[0:30:42-0:30:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:30:42):**  clover grass and five years vegetables with cover crops in these five years of course  always. It's not always two years sometimes we also make one year clover grass but roughly  that's it. But I think it's important to live the change which I want to see. It's one part  
**[0:31:11-0:31:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:31:11):**  demonstrating protesting against things and so on which has its place but I think even  more important is to live the change and put energy and mind into that and speaking faith  there and going with enthusiasm and joy into this kind of work then a change can be made.  
**[0:31:36-0:31:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:31:36):**  That's how I experienced the last years and I just want to encourage everybody to do the  same. I think a change can be made by this.  Just last week we had a great time at the British podcast awards and we were so pleased  
**[0:32:00-0:32:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:32:00):**  to be nominated in the bullseye award category that we won silver for in 2017. Congratulations  to all of the winners. It's a really exciting mix of shows and if you're looking for something  new to listen to I would really recommend you take a look. One of the winners I recommend  
**[0:32:16-0:32:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:32:16):**  is multi story from BBC local radio which has an incredible story about a Norfolk farmers  first ever train ride.  Camera Rama is made by Abbey Rose, Joe Barrett and me Katie Revel. This month we also had  
**[0:32:34-0:32:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:32:34):**  editing support from Suzy McCarthy and Louis Hudson. Thanks to Rob Reed for his recorded  interview.  Community Sport is by Hannah Soderlund with Annie Landless, Eliza Jenkins and Olivia Oldham.  
**[0:32:51-0:32:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/46-vandana-shiva-loans-or-enlightened-agriculture-and-mulching-systems#t=0:32:51):**  And our theme music is by Owen Ballant.  