### Farmerama  (2019-57-30)
**[0:00:00-0:00:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to Farmerama. This month we pop to Hampshire to discuss wood chip for  fertile soils. We get tips on rearing pigs on pasture and we visit a regenerative vineyard  system in Oregon. But first, while I was in Chile on my family's farm earlier this year,  I took some time out to visit Josefina on her ranch.  My name is Josefina Correa and we have 400 acres. It's very big. And I have a bull, I  
**[0:00:49-0:00:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:00:49):**  have a calf, I have cows. I met Josefina on her farm in the Malay Valley, Chile. It's  a really beautiful location. You're sitting just below the snow-capped Andes Mountains.  There's extinct volcanoes up above and then it rolls down into native forests on the hillsides.  And Josefina's land is a ranch so she has many cattle and she rides around on her horse  herding the cattle daily. She told me about how she came to run the farm.  
**[0:01:21-0:01:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:01:21):**  I'm an art teacher and I've worked for 40 years as an art teacher. I love to be an art  teacher. So when I finished my classes of art at the end of the week, I came here. I  cried a lot. It was very difficult. Alone it was very difficult. My husband didn't like  it. Do what you want. But it was a good idea. Now I evaluate. It was a good idea to take  care of this.  
**[0:01:48-0:01:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:01:48):**  You were teaching art in the week and then you came here on the weekends on your own  and built the farm.  Yes, my husband made classes in the university and made classes in another place. He was  intellectual. He didn't like the farm. So he got a job in the University and I said  I'm going to try. I'm trying for 25 years more or less.  
**[0:02:13-0:02:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:02:13):**  Josefina told me that it was thinking ahead to retirement that convinced her to fully  take on the farm. She did not want to spend her retirement in Santiago. And though it  was hard to begin with, now at 76 years old, she says working on the farm keeps her young.  But all along she didn't want to do the work alone. Seeking support and community, she  put a notice in the local veterinarian shop, a call out to other women. And that was the  
**[0:02:42-0:02:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:02:42):**  beginning of a group for women farmers.  So I went to the veterinarian shop and put a little paper. Are you lady? You work your  farm? Call to this number. And now we are 30. We make some meeting once a month and  now we change experience. Sometimes we change products. Sometimes we change friendships.  It's more or less like that.  
**[0:03:09-0:03:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:03:09):**  So the women who own the farms, what kind? Are they all cattle farms?  No, no, no. We have a lot more or less some five cattle farm. That's fruit, dried plant.  We have a lot of, they have a lot of cherries. And I have a lot of things. Cheese, fresh  cheese. Very, very, a lot of berries. They have, they have a milk.  The group has become more than just about farming. The women are friends and support  
**[0:03:51-0:03:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:03:51):**  one another in other areas of their lives too.  We meet, we help. I'm just a widow so everybody come to sleep with me and take care. It's  very nice because you have a lot of people, friends that help you.  Very diverse, the group, because she's from Santiago, people are from some very local  people. It's very nice because you can help each other that way, which is much more efficient.  
**[0:04:22-0:04:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:04:22):**  And in terms of like the future of female farmers in Chile, is it, do you think there's  more women farmers? Is there potential?  Yes. We have a lot new farmers that arrive here. A lot of young people, ladies are taking  care of the farm. It's a new thing.  Josefina has plans for the farm to become an ecological center. They already have children  
**[0:04:45-0:04:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:04:45):**  coming for summer schools. And she plans to grow food that's well adapted to harsher climates.  The farm is definitely an important part of her family's future.  I divide the farm for the children. This place for one, this place for one. And so they know  that everybody is coming to live here. My son, I have two living here. Next year is  going to come to live here. Another one, they're going to be living here because in Santiago  
**[0:05:16-0:05:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:05:16):**  it's very difficult to live. Very expensive. And we are going to have a hill also. A beautiful  hill with very top-toned trees. Very beautiful place. So Rebecca make makimaki and take the  children to the summer school, bring the children here to the hills and they go. No, it's very  beautiful. You lost all your time, but not lost, you gain all your time.  Before we parted, I asked Josefina for any advice she has for other farmers around the  
**[0:05:49-0:05:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:05:49):**  world.  If you do the things well, constant, you can, every lady can do anything. That's the thing.  You must be there, you must study, you must have contact with people that do the same  job because you can change experience. You must work with the people, not against the  people. That's a good idea. Everybody loves you, you work with them.  
**[0:06:19-0:06:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:06:19):**  Down Farm in Hampshire is a 300-acre conventional arable farm and home to the Hampshire Woodfuel  Cooperative run by William Hamer. Farm and Co-op are working closely together. Farmer  Robert Benford diversified his arable operation to take in green waste from the council and  wood from the cooperative, from which he produces woodchip and logs, and compost which he sells  and spreads on the farm to improve the soil. The farm is part of the EU project Woodchip  
**[0:06:47-0:06:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:06:47):**  for Fertile Soils, which is run by Sally Westerway with the Organic Research Centre. Ben Raskin  here talks to Robert, William and Sally all about the project. It's a little bit difficult  to hear in places, but we wanted to share this with you anyway as there are some really  useful insights, so do listen closely.  We're looking at different application rates, we're looking at different systems. We've  
**[0:07:13-0:07:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:07:13):**  got three farms involved with trials on the farms. We're looking at sourcing the chip  from on the farm, so from hedgerows, from agroforestry, short rotation, coppice and  anywhere else you can get it on the farm basically, from trees on the farm.  And we're looking then at the effect that it has on the soil, but also the economics  of collecting it, presumably growing it or collecting it.  
**[0:07:39-0:07:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:07:39):**  Yeah, so it's looking at soil health and improvements in soil health, but we're also hoping, assuming  we get some positive results, to come up with some practical guidelines for other people  who might want to do similar stuff on their farm.  And so we're here at Robert's farm, and as well as being a farmer, Robert's also got  a green waste and timber company going on, which I'm guessing is why you've been chosen  
**[0:08:02-0:08:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:08:02):**  to be part of the project.  Yes, because I came through William, really, who was the sort of link man between us. But  yes, I mean, we've got the wood chip, we've got the wood coming in, we've got the machines,  we've got the, you know, we had the resource, so it wasn't difficult to just switch into  doing whatever was needed for the project.  
**[0:08:24-0:08:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:08:24):**  And your particular interest is on using the wood or the effect it has on the soil, plus  the, what's the draw for you?  Me, I think there wasn't really one. I mean, it's a further outlet for wood chip. You know,  if this goes absolutely crazy and everybody decides they want to put wood chip on their  land, we're going to be selling a lot more wood chip. You know, so to my, my work wasn't  
**[0:08:52-0:08:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:08:52):**  driven by any sort of ethical considerations. It was literally a proposition. You know,  would you like to do this? Yeah, why not? It's interesting.  But equally, you were talking earlier as we were going around the farm about, you know,  you've been putting green waste compost on your land for a number of years and seeing  the benefit of that.  
**[0:09:10-0:09:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:09:10):**  Oh yes, yes, yes. No, no, so to that extent, we're sort of, yeah, in the train. But I mean,  obviously you can see the amount of compost we're getting through dwarfs, probably, any  likely application of wood chip. And it's not that difficult, but you'd have to sort  of set out to do it. You know, so, you know, I just ring up Sam who's got the tree shear  and he comes out and does a shipper shearing. Well, I think now there are lots of tree shears  
**[0:09:39-0:09:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:09:39):**  out there, so that's more difficult.  So anyone could do that?  And then the chipper, well, a lot of our own customers here have got little Timberwolf  chippers and you don't need a huge industrial chipper to produce chip from, you know, the  Ramion chip because it's small diameter by definition. You know, it's not that you couldn't  
**[0:10:01-0:10:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:10:01):**  do it, but you sort of think, now do I know anybody with a chipper? You do not know anybody.  And have I got the right kind of muck spreader? And, you know, it's that kind of inertia,  I guess, for a man who hasn't considered it before. He'd have to figure out where he was  going to get it. I mean, you could hire them.  Yeah, but it's always making a bit easier for him to make that decision.  
**[0:10:24-0:10:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:10:24):**  Just exactly that. And I mean, I think the cost of spreading that wood chip was sort  of 40 quid or something.  Minimum, yeah.  Because, you know, they had that enormous FGS spreader in the field anyway, and it was  just, you know, chuck a bucket in there and off we go. Well, bring it on, see what happens.  
**[0:10:41-0:10:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:10:41):**  But if you have to manage your hedges and you're coppicing your hedges, you've got to  do something with the material that comes off them. So if you've got a grant, you've  got your hedges in a state where they need that rejuvenation work, so they need that  coppicing. So then you get a grant from the government subsidy to coppice them. You've  got to do something with the material. So you either push it all up and burn it, which  
**[0:10:59-0:11:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:10:59):**  is what one of the contractors that we know in Suffolk who coppices hedges used to do.  Oh yeah, yeah. I mean, that would be the standard. I'm sure my neighbour, you know, two farms  over did just that, you know, which they haven't even burned it. But of course, it's not much  money, so it probably wouldn't have been worth sort of saying, I can take that because with  the time you've gone and got it and done everything. So I think there's a sort of a bit of a hearts  
**[0:11:27-0:11:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:11:27):**  and minds. You'd have to want to do it, I think. But if you, you know, I mean, a bit  of proper data justifying the benefits. You know, I think farmers in general do care about  their soil. And we're seeing, I think, a new younger generation of farmer coming forward  who is much more interested in the scientific aspects of it. You know, some of them are  not, some of them are just sort of same old, same old. But some of the answers coming forward  
**[0:11:59-0:12:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:11:59):**  are really inquisitive. And, you know, I would say they're susceptible.  Yeah, we've had quite a lot of interest in the project, definitely.  And William, you're the forestry side.  I've come in on the forestry side, but also as a running of the Woodfield cooperative  meant that I had the wood chip angle up my sleeve. And Sally brought me in really to  
**[0:12:26-0:12:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:12:26):**  look at the hedgerow management plans. And that takes an overall view of the farmholding  as a whole and what wood resources there are. And that gave you an idea of what productive  potential there is. And hopefully this trial will bring out the costs and the benefits  of using the wood chip either on the soil or otherwise into the fuel chain and the cost  savings in the management of the hedgerows, which can be balanced against it.  
**[0:13:02-0:13:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:13:02):**  Because you've got to do something with the hedges anyway.  Exactly. So it's going to be very interesting at the end of the project as to how these  economics work out and whether the soil health benefits tip the balance one way or another.  It's going to be very interesting. But on a conventional arable farm such as Robert's,  I think the risks are relatively small.  
**[0:13:25-0:13:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:13:25):**  It'll be interesting to see the soil results tracked over the next couple of years. Certainly  with the yield mapping on the barley last year, you couldn't make out the plots. You  couldn't see any difference.  So we're at the end of March 2019 at the moment. The first year of trials was last year?  First year of trials was last year. So first year of data. And then second year of trials  
**[0:13:47-0:13:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:13:47):**  has just been set up this winter. So we'll get three years of data off the first year  of trial, two years of data off the second year of trial. We can put it all together,  come up with a good picture hopefully.  Fred Price of Gothany Farm in Somerset was on the show back in January, telling us about  his journey from a chemical arable operation to something much more regenerative. We wanted  
**[0:14:19-0:14:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:14:19):**  to hear a bit more about a key part of his system, the pastured pigs.  Most people associate pigs with mud and lots of rooting around. But Fred has found that  by using herbal lathes and moving the pigs on, they can also be very happy on pasture.  His aim on his farm is to build soil health, and the pigs are a brilliant way to do that  whilst ensuring the farm is financially and ecologically resilient.  
**[0:14:50-0:14:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:14:50):**  How I started, well my grandfather was an industrial pig farmer, I guess you'd call  it. So all indoors and kind of intensively reared and the breeding was different as well.  Now we rear Tamworth, which is a rare breed, which gives us the slow growing characteristics  that we need. And we're all breeding and rearing as outdoors on herbal lathes, cover crops  over the winter. And kind of taking mob grazing beef systems as our ultimate inspiration for  
**[0:15:27-0:15:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:15:27):**  how we want to, where we want to get to, of how dynamic we want to be moving the pigs.  And then we kind of, the finishing element of the pig system is based around a roundhouse,  but straw based at the moment. And we want to get to a point where, again, it's about  managing it so it's a weatherproof building when we need it to be, but then we can tap  into outside areas and forages as and when it's appropriate. So delivering like smaller  
**[0:15:52-0:16:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:15:52):**  quantities of really high quality life and diet. But even when they're in the roundhouse  on the straw, we want to be delivering them a forage based diet. So that's, if you were  to summarize the system as a whole, it's forage based, or at least I think as much forage  based as I believe I can push a pig at this point in time with what we know.  Can you tell me how you started to realize, or like what pastured pork or pastured pigs  
**[0:16:23-0:16:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:16:23):**  means and is, and how you started to realize that was possible?  I guess a lot of people would say, oh, well we put pigs outside on grass and they just  root it all up. I guess I was interested in diversity of cropping and so I was looking  at herbal lays from a kind of arable farmer's perspective in what I wanted to do above ground  reflected the diversity of life below ground. So we were looking at herbal lays, diverse  
**[0:16:52-0:16:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:16:52):**  species cover crops, and the way that the pigs graze, particularly if you manage them  properly, but A, just what species you put in front of them and at what time of year  you're putting it in front of them. They will behave, they will graze. If you just leave  them in one area all year, they'll graze first and then they'll start rooting out. But if  you can move them and be more dynamic with how you operate, then yeah, they will graze.  
**[0:17:19-0:17:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:17:19):**  Can you tell me a little bit about exactly how your system works currently?  So we have three groups of eight sows and they are on a six month cycle. So we wean  at two months old and there's a four month gestation, then they go back to pig straight  away and they're all two months apart. So basically every two months we're weaning about  60, a batch of 60 weaners. And then from two months to six months, the weaners will stay  
**[0:17:48-0:17:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:17:48):**  outside and then between six months old and 10 months old, they'll come into the roundhouse  and the weaners will be fed on a TMR diet. So we grow a lot of Lucerne silage on the  farm and that forms about 55, 60% of the TMR, which stands for total mixed ration. And then  30% rolled barley, which we grow on the farm and 15% beans. And then there's a small mineral  supplement, but that's effectively that mineral supplement is the only thing we buy in on  
**[0:18:16-0:18:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:18:16):**  the farm. So the pigs is a nice, totally closed system really.  And what about some of them spend some time in forests?  Yeah, well, we've got what I would have perceived dead areas before 10 years ago. And now they  can be super high welfare areas for the pigs to use, particularly in the summer when grass  growth is slower. So you've got more of the undergrowth and also the shading of all the  
**[0:18:45-0:18:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:18:45):**  trees for the pigs. So we use them as sporadically as we can because I feel if you can use a  small area of woodland for two months of the year and then let it regenerate for 10, you're  getting a lot more out of your two months than you would if you used it for six months  of the year. But you know, practicality dictates we generally use it for longer than two months.  But ultimately we want to get to the point where we can just drop in and drop out much  
**[0:19:07-0:19:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:19:07):**  more sparingly. I think it's too easy to come to the farm and say, oh, look, Fred's doing  rare breed pigs, isn't this, you know, nice premium product and all that. The only reason  we have pigs here on the farm and the reason our pig system looks like it does is to some  extent to produce a quality pork product. But it's also to pay for the more progressive  aspects of our farming system. Things like perennial crops, mixed species lays, cover  
**[0:19:39-0:19:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:19:39):**  crops over winter. I can now walk out onto those more progressive aspects to our system  and be very happy that they're generating a four to five hundred pound a hectare profit  in the same way that five or six years ago I would have had to go out into a tabletop  wheat crop, high input, you know, milling wheat to find that kind of profit. So now  we have a really regenerative system where the truly regenerative parts of it are actually  
**[0:20:05-0:20:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:20:05):**  the most profitable. And that's because of the pigs. And I think that's the kind of elephant  in the room with regenerative farming is we all know the compelling biological case for  pumping carbon in your soils and getting the biological system functioning for you. But  if you don't make adjustments in how you run your business, it's very difficult to achieve  that in a way that's sustainable both ecologically but also financially. And also, so for me,  
**[0:20:32-0:20:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:20:32):**  the pigs really offer that opportunity to set my farm gate price, know my yield and  also know my input costs and decide how I want to grow those inputs. And we grow them  with low inputs. So we don't use fungicides, we don't use insecticides and we don't use  nitrogen and we accept lower yields. But we accept also that it's part of a really progressive  soil building system. Now, how do I pay for those low input cereals? Well, I feed them  
**[0:21:03-0:21:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:21:03):**  to my pigs and I set my pig price and it all informs this wider story. But that sort of  like shift going from volume to value and from profit maximisation to kind of resilience  of business is humongous. And that's really what the pigs offer the business. So it frustrates  me if people come to the farm and say, oh, Fred grows pigs. Actually, it's the context.  The pigs really are reverse engineered because of what we want to do with the soil.  
**[0:21:52-0:21:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:21:52):**  A few episodes ago, we heard from Dan Rinky and Kim Hamlin, who told us about their farming  experiments at Art and Science in Oregon. Well, Dan also manages Johann Vineyards in  the Willamette Valley. He's been there since 2007 and built up a system that goes far beyond  just organic or biodynamic. He's developed a regenerative vineyard management system.  We asked him to talk us through the different parts of his system. And here's a quick FYI.  
**[0:22:22-0:22:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:22:22):**  He talks about barrel compost quite a bit, which is something those in the biodynamic  community may already know about. It's described as the medium where biodynamic preps meet  biodynamic compost. And from what I can tell, it's basically compost with tiny amounts  of other ingredients such as basalt and eggshells added in.  So we'll start with fall. Just prior to harvest in the vineyard, we'll seed some  
**[0:22:53-0:23:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:22:53):**  cover crop if it needs to. We try to do minimal till or no-till farming situations. So we  don't want to till our soils because we don't want to break up the microbiological ecosystem  within the soil, especially the hyphae. Every time you till, you break up the hyphae and  you're basically killing your hyphal network. Also, at the same time when you till your  soils, you will burn up your organic matter and take away the food. The food quickly goes  
**[0:23:32-0:23:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:23:32):**  away for the microorganisms. When you're building long-lasting humus, you want a nice, low, even  burn of the organic matter or conversion of organic matter, not the fast, rapid conversion.  So we're no-till. I want to have an extremely diverse cropping system, a cover crop, that  has multiple species, as many species as possible, from a good percentage, 30 to 40 percent grasses,  20 to 30 percent legumes, and the rest being broad leaves, assorted broad leaves, and flowering  
**[0:24:23-0:24:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:24:23):**  plants. And we would plant those, hopefully with a no-till seed drill, if you could afford  one. There's some real creative ways you could go about finding out how to get perennial  seeds to grow in an already seeded soil. One of them is through Fukuoka, making Fukuoka  seed balls, or also known as seed bombs. Basically, you take a little bit of clay, a little bit  of water. I prefer to add some mycorrhizae to that, because I think this is a great way  
**[0:25:01-0:25:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:25:01):**  to get mycorrhizae into a perennial system, especially if you didn't have the ability  to plant, inoculate your trees with mycorrhizae prior to planting. This is a great way to get  mycorrhizae in the system. And you mix those all together with a little bit of water and  create little seed balls. So we plant our cover crop, our perennial cover crops, right  before harvest, because in Oregon it becomes very rainy, or could potentially become very  
**[0:25:33-0:25:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:25:33):**  rainy, any time from last week of September. And the rain could start at that point and  go all the way until May of the next year. In winters, I apply several different compostees.  I find that here in Oregon, in our climate, we don't get extremely cold. Our temperatures  are usually around 40 to 50 degrees Fahrenheit. And so I find that our soils are the most  active during that time period when we have wet, moist soils. And so I think this is a  
**[0:26:16-0:26:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:26:16):**  great time to add biostimulants and then also biological inoculants. And I choose my biological  inoculants through the biodynamic methods. So I'll spray out 500, preparation 500, and  then also barrel compost. And I also put out an application, or several applications, of  hydrolyzed fish, which is different than a fish emulsion. Hydrolyzed fish is cold processed  fish that includes collagen, omega-3 fatty acids. The hydrolyzed fish that I get also  
**[0:27:00-0:27:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:27:00):**  includes crab and shrimp shells, which have chitin in it. Chitin is the primary component  of hyphal cell walls and fungal cell walls. And this is basically a fungus food. And I  spray it out there to help the hyphal network build in our soils.  So next, coming into spring, I think one of the main things that we do is we have our  prunings left over from our winter pruning of the vineyard. At that point in time, then  
**[0:27:41-0:27:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:27:41):**  we'll run a tractor through with a mower, a flail mower, and chip them up. So they're  chipped up in place and left in the ground. So that then also becomes food for the microbial  community. I also then make another biodynamic preparation pass of the barrel compost. I  think the barrel compost really helps break that down. And then also in combination with  the fish, the hydrolyzed fish that we already put down, creates a real diverse microbial  
**[0:28:19-0:28:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:28:19):**  and strong microbial and fungal community that will then break those prunings down and  make it available to the whole system. Another thing that we do in spring too is we prune  the trees around the periphery of the vineyard and get those for hardwood cuttings. And we  chip those. And I put those wood chips then into the compost pile again to feed the fungal  communities, especially the saprophytic fungi. And in summer, I would say that one of our  
**[0:28:57-0:29:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:28:57):**  more ecological farming practices would include applying compost. And that is actually, I  guess could be a fall, but that's a post-harvest application of compost.  Last month, we responded to one listener's question explaining a bit about the nuances  of no-till in conservation agriculture. Well, this month another listener responded to that  explanation reminding us of a pressing issue in the UK which we didn't mention with regards  
**[0:29:34-0:29:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:29:34):**  to glyphosate use. There are a number of farmers in the UK who not only use glyphosate to burn  off a cover crop in a conservation ag system, but they also use it just before harvesting  their crops. In fact, we read online that almost 80% of oilseed rape in the UK is sprayed  with glyphosate or an alternative herbicide just before harvest. This practice is known  as pre-harvest crop desiccation. And I'm not 100% clear on exactly why farmers do it,  
**[0:30:07-0:30:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:30:07):**  but from what I understand, it helps to ensure a more uniform crop, particularly in wetter  climates and also many people, or it's often said that it's done in order to dry the crop  out because it essentially kills the crop. But talking to a few different experts, there's  also a lot of evidence out there now that shows that it doesn't actually help to do  that at all and that drying a crop that's been sprayed with glyphosate is actually more  
**[0:30:37-0:30:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:30:37):**  difficult in the end. But anyway, jury's out on that. Many people feel uneasy about this  use of glyphosate as it's applied just before harvesting the crop and therefore is much  more likely to end up in our food system. I do understand why farmers do this, especially  those in wetter climates, as it helps to ensure the consistency of their crop. However, I  definitely feel very uneasy about this use of herbicides. But I'm always open to hearing  
**[0:31:09-0:31:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:31:09):**  more. So if you are a farmer who uses a herbicide in this way, maybe you could get in touch  and let us know why you do it and what you think about it. Or on the contrary, if you  really don't agree with it, let us know as well.  Thanks for listening to Farmerama this month, and every month. Farmerama is made by Abbey  Rose, Katie Reville and myself, Joe Barrett. This month we've had editing from Suzy McCarthy,  
**[0:31:43-0:31:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/47-women-farmers-in-chile-woodchip-pasture-happy-pigs-and-regenerative-vineyard-management#t=0:31:43):**  Louie Hudson and Zach Eppie. Community support for the show comes from Hannah Soderlund,  Annie Landris, Eliza Jenkins and Olivia Oldham. And our theme music is by Owen Barrett.  