### Farmerama  (2019-22-28)
**[0:00:00-0:00:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:00:00):**  It's July and we've now been following the nitty-gritty of the smaller-scale farming  world for four whole years.  Four laps of this world around the sun.  We've chanced upon and dug up many stories, sharing the work of so many inspirational  farmers and growers as the podcast has spiraled from a discussion over dinner into an adventure  
**[0:00:27-0:00:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:00:27):**  which has led us to uncover new ideas, perspectives and techniques along the way.  At Farmer Armour we're working with you all to create a positive ecological future rooted  in the people, on the land and the seas.  We're connecting up a global web of smaller-scale farmers and food producers who are working  for profitable and ecological solutions.  
**[0:00:50-0:00:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:00:50):**  This is not about one farming doctrine being better than the other, but about working together  to find a system that works for all.  So we wanted to take this moment to say thank you for listening, for caring, for sharing  and for helping to build a more ecological world for all.  Thank you to those of you out there transforming our relationship to the natural world from  
**[0:01:12-0:01:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:01:12):**  extractive to regenerative and to those of you who are supporting the movement.  We know none of this is easy and we're here to continue to build awareness of the brilliant  work happening in the smaller-scale farming community and to supercharge our learning  together.  And so here we go.  
**[0:01:36-0:01:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:01:36):**  Hello everybody and welcome to episode 48 of Farmer Armour.  We have some super stories from multiple continents again this month.  We begin in the United States with a cover crop guru from North Dakota.  We nip a few states east to hear from the queen of pastured pigs and then back to the  UK to be immersed in some wilding.  
**[0:01:59-0:02:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:01:59):**  And we're in Chile again, this time to learn about the native trees and how they can form  part of an agroforestry system.  It was brilliant to meet a few of you at groundswell last month.  Thank you to everyone who came up, said hi and told us about your favourite episodes  and who had inspired you along the way.  
**[0:02:25-0:02:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:02:25):**  We love hearing from you.  One of the speakers at groundswell was Jay Furer, a conservationist working for the Natural  Resources Conservation Service in North Dakota.  Jay emphasizes soil health as a foundation for cropping systems, grazing systems, cover  crops, soil biology, pollinators, insects, wildlife and quality of life.  
**[0:02:47-0:02:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:02:47):**  You may have come across him already as he is a key part of Gabe Brown's dirt to soil  journey.  We chatted to him about the power of cover crop mixes and how understanding the carbon  to nitrogen ratio of your cover crop can be very helpful when determining the right cover  for you.  
**[0:03:05-0:03:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:03:05):**  We had always struggled with the idea of carbon to nitrogen ratios, so we were really very  happy when Jay explained it all so clearly.  My name is Jay Furer and I'm a soil health specialist with the Natural Resources Conservation  Service, USDA, and I work out of Bismarck, North Dakota.  I've done this for the past 39 years, so it's allowed me to monitor soils over time.  
**[0:03:31-0:03:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:03:31):**  We've monitored these soils when we moved into the crop land no-till systems and we  monitored them also when we added cover crops and also did some monitoring on soils on our  grasslands and more recently gardens.  We start collectively kind of painting a picture telling us the information on carbon levels,  etc.  
**[0:03:56-0:03:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:03:56):**  Did the carbon level go up?  Did it go down?  Then typically biology correlates directly with the carbon.  If the carbon level went up, it's pretty much guaranteed the biology level is going to go  up.  
**[0:04:09-0:04:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:04:09):**  We've seen these two correlate many times.  I think if we address the question on CN ratios on cover crops, carbon-nitrogen ratios on  cover crops, I think this is one of the key items to making a cover crop successful for  any individual farmer.  We've always known the carbon-nitrogen ratio of the different plant species for many years.  
**[0:04:38-0:04:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:04:38):**  Wheat is kind of sitting up at the high end at 80 to 1.  Soybean might be closer to 29 to 1, somewhere in there.  Some of the brassicas are probably more around 15 to 1.  They're very low.  For the first time when we looked at cover crop combinations, we were able to put a mixture  
**[0:04:59-0:05:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:04:59):**  of plants together.  When we did this, we started to then realize that we could adjust the carbon-nitrogen ratio  of the mixture.  If I was working with a client that had really bare soils, not able to keep a cover there,  then we would lean into a little bit higher CN ratio in the mixture.  
**[0:05:20-0:05:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:05:20):**  Then my residue would then last a little longer.  None of this really made much sense to me until I understood the CN ratio of the soil,  which is tied into the soil organic matter level content.  When you dissect 1% soil organic matter, it's going to have 10,000 units of carbon and 1,000  units of organic nitrogen in every 1%.  
**[0:05:43-0:05:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:05:43):**  If you factor that down, you get a 10 to 1 ratio.  Most of the data is going to be 10 to 1, 11 to 1.  Then we start to understand what 1% soil organic matter is.  We start to understand that the CN ratios then are tied to this ending decomposition  percent.  
**[0:06:01-0:06:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:06:01):**  When we have that high amount of carbon material, say for instance, like wheat, it's going to  take it much longer for the saprophytic fungi to decompose it.  They will start with the high carbon material because the bacteria really can't.  Once the saprophytic fungi have it reduced to a simpler chain, then the bacteria will  come in and finish up.  
**[0:06:25-0:06:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:06:25):**  This takes a longer period of time than something that is very low carbon, in which case both  are probably basically going to be in competition with each other, both the saprophytic fungi  and the bacteria.  They will decompose this very quickly because they all have access to it.  Then we looked at these mixtures and we started to find that when we came in with something  
**[0:06:46-0:06:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:06:46):**  maybe around 30 to 1 for instance, or 35 to 1, there wasn't so much high carbon material  that had tied up all of our nitrogen that wouldn't release then to the crop.  Yet it was high enough to still give us a long period of cover on the ground also.  It was a balance.  When we used monoculture cover crops, we didn't have that option because the monoculture cover  
**[0:07:09-0:07:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:07:09):**  crop, the CN ratio is what it is.  That ship left the harbor.  When we came in with the combinations, it was so interesting because now we could adjust  and we could more closely meet the needs of the client.  When we look at adding a cover crop into a field, we like to take a look at what we don't  
**[0:07:29-0:07:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:07:29):**  have.  Wheat, okay, cool season grass.  I'm probably not going to put much for cool season grasses into that mixture that fall.  I'm going to rely more on cool season broad leaves or maybe I'm even going to look at  some warm season broad leaves if it's early enough in the fall.  
**[0:07:45-0:07:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:07:45):**  I'm probably going to steer away from the grasses because agronomically I still prefer  coming off of a high carbon grass crop.  I think I want to lean a little bit more into the broad leaves.  From the agronomy of it and from the breaking up disease cycles, I think this is really  positive.  
**[0:08:04-0:08:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:08:04):**  The other thing that we want to look at that is on the same line of giving us what we don't  have with the four major crop types.  We have the cool season grasses and the warm season grasses, the cool season broad leaves  and the warm season broad leaves.  Anytime we can go ahead and bring in what we don't have, that puts us in more of a line  
**[0:08:26-0:08:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:08:26):**  for increasing the amount of different root exudates.  They each have their own specific exudate.  This gives us a little more of a balanced diet for the microbial population.  When we first start moving into soil health principles, we're not always thinking of  the quality of the diet.  
**[0:08:46-0:08:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:08:46):**  We're just thinking we've got to feed them and that's a good start.  Then after a while you start to think about things like that and that does make a difference.  If we come in with the diversity of plants, then we see a little stronger response and  the biology does quite well on a balanced meal.  The key concept that I'd use today after a couple of days here at Groundswell would  
**[0:09:06-0:09:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:09:06):**  be start somewheres.  It isn't so important that you do the entire farm in one day.  You can start with a field and you can observe it, but change your methodology.  Look at the principles.  The message I would give at this time is that the principles are unique to their operation.  
**[0:09:29-0:09:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:09:29):**  They're universal in how they operate, but they're unique to your own farm in terms of  how you apply them.  You look at that uniqueness and you can go ahead and find your path based on the principle  and then start somewheres.  I think you'll find that this is going to be a path that will have fulfillment in it.  
**[0:09:51-0:10:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:09:51):**  I think it has challenges for sure, but yet as you go down the path it gets simpler.  We're working together with Chelsea Green Publishing to produce the Women of the Land  series in which we share the voices of women who are fueled by their connection with the  land to build businesses, garner movements and share their stories.  They're standing up for what they know works and crafting a better future for us all.  
**[0:10:18-0:10:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:10:18):**  The first episode in this series featured Leah Penniman talking about her book Farming  While Black.  The next feature was released earlier this week with pastured pig farmer Alice Percy.  You can hear much more from Alice in this special episode, but here's some of our conversation  you won't hear in that main feature, in which she talks about what it means to farm and  
**[0:10:38-0:10:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:10:38):**  eat pigs.  I mean this is a personal question, but have you ever become too attached to a pig?  No, I've had a few brood sows that I was very fond of that I would say I felt a genuine  attachment to and that I was a little sad to see go, but it wasn't devastating.  You go into this knowing that you need to be logical and to a certain extent ruthless  
**[0:11:17-0:11:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:11:17):**  in your decision making.  If you ever had an animal that you wanted to keep without an economic reason for doing  so, in your mind and your bank account you would need to be separating that animal from  your farm system and announcing, okay, this is a pet.  I'm not going to write its feed off on my taxes.  
**[0:11:36-0:11:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:11:36):**  That can't be part of your farming system.  I mean this again is so personal, but do you think that part of being a farmer is coming  to terms with the cycle of life and the process of growing and then dying?  Absolutely.  I am strongly of the opinion that anybody who eats meat should at least once in their  
**[0:12:02-0:12:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:12:02):**  life take a live animal and turn it into dinner.  If you cannot confront that reality, then you should absolutely be a vegetarian because  that's just simply a reality of what meat requires.  I think that if you can approach it in a way that respects the animal and avoids pain,  then it is simply part of nature.  
**[0:12:33-0:12:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:12:33):**  I think it's been great for my kids.  They've witnessed all of it.  They've seen the births.  They've seen the deaths.  They actually enjoy being a part of on farm slaughter and butcher and not in a sadistic  
**[0:12:49-0:12:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:12:49):**  way.  It's just like it's exciting.  They know they're going to get good food.  They're interested in the anatomy of the animals.  I've explained to them, this is how we do it so that the animal doesn't know what's  
**[0:13:00-0:13:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:13:00):**  coming, that the animal doesn't suffer.  They're aware that that's important.  On that point, maybe you could talk a little bit about what it means to have a more humane  death or slaughter and butchery.  Certainly in the UK, there's a lot of legality around being able to slaughter your own animals,  
**[0:13:24-0:13:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:13:24):**  certainly if you want to sell them.  What do you think needs to change there?  There's a lot of legal restrictions around slaughter for sale here too.  We were only ever slaughtering and butchering on farm for our own food.  The rest of our animals went to a commercial slaughterhouse.  
**[0:13:46-0:13:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:13:46):**  One thing that's really nice about this area is that we don't have any of those enormous  slaughterhouses.  They're all quite small.  They're overseen by a single person.  They have a low flow of work.  
**[0:14:04-0:14:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:14:04):**  They can afford to and they're not cheap to use.  The processing costs are very high as a result.  That's part of the reason that my pork was exponentially higher than the pork on the  supermarket shelf.  I think that a lot of the welfare problems that you see in mainstream slaughtering plants  
**[0:14:30-0:14:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:14:30):**  have to do with the enormous size.  I don't know if you heard the stories of the slaughterhouse workers were getting neurological  symptoms because they were on a conveyor line where the hog heads were going through and  they were extracting the brains from the skulls.  I think for the Chinese market, I can't remember what they were being used for.  
**[0:14:57-0:15:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:14:57):**  But the rate of work was so high that the hog brains were getting aerosolized and the  workers were breathing in basically pig brain fumes.  And it was literally causing neurological illness.  And when you're trying to rush animals through a system that has to move that big that fast,  there's no room to slow down, allow an animal to move at its own pace calmly.  
**[0:15:25-0:15:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:15:25):**  They're using electric prods to keep these animals moving through the aisles.  They don't have time to wait for an animal to calm down before they approach it with  a bolt gun.  At the slaughterhouse that we used, there were a select number of staff people.  They'd all been there for a long time.  
**[0:15:42-0:15:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:15:42):**  They were trained in how to handle animals.  I watched them handle animals and they did it with patience and with an understanding  of animal behavior and how the animals would move in response to subtle cues rather than  beating them through the aisle with electric prods because they had to get tens of thousands  of animals through that day.  
**[0:16:03-0:16:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:16:03):**  So then a big part of humane pig rearing is also, you know, ensuring, minimizing stress  in transport and slaughter.  Yeah, and a lot of that just has to, it's literally slow food.  You have to slow down and take things at the animal's pace.  And if you don't have the time or the inclination to do that, you're inevitably going to end  
**[0:16:29-0:16:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:16:29):**  up with stressed animals.  No, so clear.  And I mean, that visual was very dark of the pig brains.  So we got the picture.  If you want to hear more, be sure to tune in to the full episode released earlier this  
**[0:16:45-0:16:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:16:45):**  week.  You'll find it on your podcast feed.  It's called Alice Percy, Happy Pigs Taste Better.  And she talks to Abby about rearing pigs on pasture, some of the challenges she faced,  her favorite breeds, how they helped her soil and more.  
**[0:17:03-0:17:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:17:03):**  And we definitely recommend listening to the Leah Penniman episode as well.  Isabella Tree and her husband, Charlie Burrell, have been farming at Nepe Estate in West Sussex  for over 30 years.  In 2001, they realized all the work they were doing trying to make their streamlined conventional  farming operation turn a reliable profit just wasn't going to pay off in the long run.  
**[0:17:31-0:17:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:17:31):**  And so inspired by a large oak tree on the farm and some key research, they sold up all  their machinery and stopped actively interfering with the land, aside from some minimally managed  roaming animals.  Everyone who visits Nepe Estate comes back with an enchanted look on their face at the  amazing wildlife they've seen.  
**[0:17:55-0:17:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:17:55):**  And they talk of just how alive it all is.  But as we've covered on the show before, often the idea of rewilding can be anti-farming.  So it's definitely not without its challenges.  We caught up with Isabella at Groundswell to get a farmer's perspective on it all.  We'll be hearing about some of the nitty gritty challenges next month.  
**[0:18:16-0:18:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:18:16):**  But first, a fun taster as we enchant you with some of the unexpected ways that beauty  has sprung into being at Nepe.  My name's Isabella Tree, and I am co-owner of Nepe Estate with my husband, Charlie Burrell.  And I recently wrote a book, Wilding, about our story of going from intensive farming  to rewilding.  
**[0:18:39-0:18:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:18:39):**  We now have pretty much 3,500 acres of rewilded land.  So that is land that was 20 years or so ago intensive arable and dairy.  So in terms of biodiversity and nature excitement, virtually a desert.  To now being one of the most significant places in Britain for nature, because we have so  many rare and endangered species, as well as just the biomass of all the more common  
**[0:19:08-0:19:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:19:08):**  species back.  So really it's an area that is now driven by free roaming animals.  We have Old English Longhorn being a proxy of the aurochs, our ancient ox.  We have Exmoor ponies being a proxy of the tarpon, the original horse.  We have Tamworth pigs being wild boar.  
**[0:19:29-0:19:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:19:29):**  And then we have fallow deer, red deer, and roe deer.  And all those animals, those herbivores, are moving through the landscape, very low numbers.  But the way they disturb the land, the way they have different eating preferences, their  different behaviours, all create niches for other wildlife.  So it's like creating a kind of shifting dynamic habitat that is ever moving.  
**[0:19:51-0:19:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:19:51):**  And that is just rocket fuel for biodiversity.  I think one of the most astonishing moments, and one that was the most challenging for  us really in the early days of the rewilding project, it really challenged the old mindset,  the farmer's mindset in us that hadn't yet disappeared, was when we suddenly saw hundreds  of acres being covered by creeping thistle.  
**[0:20:19-0:20:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:20:19):**  With our old farming mindset, we would have got out with the glyphosate and the toppers  and got rid of it without even thinking about it.  But there we were, having kind of taken this pledge that we were doing a process-led project,  we were going to intervene as little as possible.  The only intervention really is the animals.  
**[0:20:35-0:20:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:20:35):**  They manage the place for us and we manage the numbers of the animals, but that's pretty  much it.  Otherwise, we have to sit on our hands.  That's the key to letting rewilding happen successfully.  But the creeping thistle was a real challenge.  
**[0:20:50-0:20:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:20:50):**  And we were having your sincerely disgusted letters from the public, people were writing  to their MPs, we were having poems written in the press.  And we were just getting nervous about it because year on year, about the second or  third year, the creeping thistle was just continuing to kind of colonise the whole of  the Repton Park and part of the northern part of the estate.  
**[0:21:12-0:21:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:21:12):**  But we really, really did keep our nerve.  Then we woke up one summer morning, it was a Sunday morning, and there were painted lady  butterflies just passing by our bedroom window like tracer.  And we couldn't work out what was going on.  So we rushed downstairs to see where they were going.  
**[0:21:35-0:21:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:21:35):**  And they were landing straight on that creeping thistle, because the thistle is their main  food plant for their caterpillars.  It's where they lay their eggs.  And we stood in the middle of this creeping thistle and all around us, you could hear  the sort of susurration, the sort of shimmering of tens of thousands of butterflies.  
**[0:21:55-0:21:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:21:55):**  I mean, one butterfly is silent, but you're in tens of thousands of them, you can hear  it.  It's like a distant waterfall or something, amazing, amazing experience.  And after the butterflies had left and laid their eggs, a few weeks later, those creeping  thistle heads were in shreds.  
**[0:22:19-0:22:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:22:19):**  It was like a kind of abandoned army, these skeletons left, these, you know, the plants  were in complete decline.  But underneath them were these anthills that had grown up because they've been protected  from the grazing animals by these thorns, by the creeping thistle.  So that little habitat had become a haven for anthills.  
**[0:22:43-0:22:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:22:43):**  It had become a haven for pregnant common lizards, which were finding this place safe  to have their young and all the insects in there for them.  It had become a little insect paradise during those few years that the creeping thistle  had been there.  And then the following year, it had completely disappeared.  
**[0:23:06-0:23:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:23:06):**  So the lesson really for us was to absolutely trust our instincts and sit on our hands.  Nature doesn't like a monocrop.  Something will come in sooner or later, some pathogen, some virus, some pest will destroy  it.  And so now when we see ragwort, we see St. John's wort, we've got fleabane coming everywhere,  
**[0:23:28-0:23:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:23:28):**  we just know it's fine, nature will sort it out.  We're going to be publishing a full version of this interview, which will be on the feed  sometime in the next month, in which she tells us her vision for the future of farming and  why she's proud to be a farmer.  Finally this month, we talked to Ido of Mass Neuron, who's developing an agroforestry system  
**[0:23:50-0:23:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:23:50):**  in Chile that helps to stop deforestation and enable many farmers to have native trees  as part of their farming operation.  My name is Eduardo.  And we are working on agroforestry system with native Chilean species.  The idea is that most of the native Chilean species have been taken away, deforested,  
**[0:24:13-0:24:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:24:13):**  because they don't see any use to them.  So we want to introduce a system that is reforesting and creating work for farmers at the same time.  The brand is called Mas Neuen, which in the Mapuche language means more life force.  We're looking for components from the Chilean forest to use in cosmetics and in superfood.  We have a small farm.  
**[0:24:38-0:24:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:24:38):**  It's about three hectares that we work on.  It's in the Horizonte del Mar Valley, central Chile.  It's next to the coast, next to the sea.  So we have a relicked ancient forest, a Valdivian winter rainforest to be more precise.  There's quite some Chilean trees and a lot of them are, you can use them for botanics.  
**[0:25:05-0:25:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:25:05):**  They have volatile components.  So one of them is called Peumo.  It smells really nice and it's a very special tree.  They're doing research on it now and it's one of the trees that creates ozone.  So it has an amazing smell and it retains water.  
**[0:25:24-0:25:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:25:24):**  So that's one of them.  The other one is Maki.  It's a bush.  It has a berry which has a very high amount of antioxidants, almost seven times more than  the acai berry.  
**[0:25:39-0:25:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:25:39):**  So it's very strong.  And in the seed you have lots of fatty acids, omega-3s, 6 and 9.  So very interesting.  Especially in central Chile there's a lot of deforestation.  It's between 83 and 86 percent of the native forest has been deforested for the past 150  
**[0:26:02-0:26:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:26:02):**  years.  So it's quite a mess.  So there's lots of decertification happening in central Chile and I think one of the best  ways to fight that is to bring back the native forest.  The big problem is that most of the farmers don't see any value to this forest.  
**[0:26:23-0:26:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:26:23):**  So if you create an agroforestry system that is also a farmer system, then you can justify  to the local farmers that they start changing their crops to native species.  So it's a combined system.  It's not only forest.  So there's silvopasture in between.  
**[0:26:43-0:26:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:26:43):**  So you could see rows of agroforestry system with flowers, bushes, trees and then in between  long lines of maybe quinoa, rye and different animals going in between.  So basically we're emulating a savannah system.  So the species that we're looking at, the native species, they all have medicinal properties  and they all have power food properties.  
**[0:27:13-0:27:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:27:13):**  So very high nutrients, very high in fatty acids, essential oils and most of the components  from the specific species we can use in our own products.  So in that way Mosnuén becomes a regenerative brand and it's taking its components from  a regenerative system.  And one of the things that you really see here in Chile, there's lots of monoculture  
**[0:27:37-0:27:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:27:37):**  and there's lots of standard agriculture using lots of foreign species.  People tend to copy what's working and that's normal.  I think that happens in a lot of places, but I think in Chile lots of farmers are not copying  maybe in the best way or the most positive way.  And so you see lots of deforestation to create vineyards, to create avocado plantations and  
**[0:28:09-0:28:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:28:09):**  I think one of the biggest problems that we have here is the loss of our water supplies  because of that.  And so that doesn't really help the decertification that's happening because of the deforestation  that already happened.  An avocado tree, for one kilo of avocados you need about 200 liters of water because  
**[0:28:29-0:28:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:28:29):**  it has to change water into fatty acids.  And so you need a lot of energy for that.  And so just imagine taking away a hundred hectares of sclerophyll forest that's doing  water retention and changing it to avocado plantation that is just sucking up your water  supply.  
**[0:28:50-0:28:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:28:50):**  So that's a big issue.  The important thing I want to say is that we should really value the natural systems  that are already there.  So we should really value the native species because we really need them.  If we want to have a chance against the changing of the climate, the loss of water and the  
**[0:29:13-0:29:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:29:13):**  loss of biodiversity then we should really start to protect them and not only protect  them, we should regenerate them, bring them back, restore them.  The Mapuche people here in China, they have been in a constant battle actually protecting  their grounds and they're not just protecting their grounds, they're protecting the forest,  the rivers, the mountains.  
**[0:29:35-0:29:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:29:35):**  So they are very key in the whole thing of regeneration and protection of the Chilean  biodiversity.  Yeah, big example.  Really don't discard the native species of where your farm is situated.  Most of the native species, and that's not only in Chile, I think that's around the world,  
**[0:29:59-0:30:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:29:59):**  you know, they're really good at water harvesting, water retention, soil remediation.  They are the original pioneers so we should respect them.  I think we should conserve pristine places.  So I don't think we should go too deep into the jungle or too deep into the forest collecting  these species just because we want to collect.  
**[0:30:22-0:30:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:30:22):**  I think we should look at species that can grow really quickly, that can have different  effects when it comes to pharmaceuticals, when it comes to cosmetics or to food.  So a berry like maqui is easily as commercial as an arándano or a blueberry.  So I think we should sort of find a balance in that and I think we should be careful though.  I don't think we should use all the species.  
**[0:30:57-0:31:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:30:57):**  I think also, especially here in Chile, the Mapuches, they have extended knowledge of  the medicinal plants and there are a lot of them that they don't share because they're  too sacred.  So I think we should respect that.  Absolutely.  
**[0:31:11-0:31:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:31:11):**  Maqui is a good example.  It's a berry so that berries can easily be adapted to a farming situation and it can  also be adapted to a forestry situation.  So it's sort of in between.  But there are different species here in Chile that are not so easy to propagate and so you  
**[0:31:36-0:31:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:31:36):**  would have to go in the forest and really collect them over there.  I think that's where we are drawing the line.  Thanks for listening to Farmerama this month and every month.  We're excited to be heading into our fifth year of Farmerama with your support.  If you want to help us then please take a second to review us or to share the show with  
**[0:32:09-0:32:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:32:09):**  any friends or family you think might be interested.  Farmerama is made by Joe Barrett, Katie Revel and myself, Abby Rose.  This month, Suzy McCarthy and Louie Hudson support it by producing some of the features.  Community support for the show comes from Hannah Soderlund, Annie Landless, Eliza Jenkins  and Olivia Aldam.  
**[0:32:33-0:32:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/48-cover-crops-pigs-to-pork-wilding-and-chilean-agroforestry#t=0:32:33):**  And our theme music is by Owen Barrett.  Toodle-oo.  