### Farmerama  (2019-17-29)
**[0:00:00-0:00:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to another episode of Farmerama.  This month we begin by looking at the links between regenerative agriculture and climate  change.  Then, we take a walk on a Scottish beach with a seaweed entrepreneur.  And we have some more from bee lover extraordinaire, Bridget Strawbridge, star of our latest podcast  
**[0:00:26-0:00:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:00:26):**  in the Women of the Land series.  We met Charles Massey a few months ago at the Ground Swale Conference.  He's a sheep farmer in southern Australia.  He shared his overview of regenerative farming after talking to over 80 farmers for his PhD,  and brilliantly links it to human health and climate change.  
**[0:00:56-0:00:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:00:56):**  My name is Charlie Massey.  I'm obviously from Australia, southern Australia.  We have a bit over 2000 acres of what you'd call temperate grasslands.  Primary agricultural production is merino sheep for super fine wool into the Italian  market.  
**[0:01:13-0:01:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:01:13):**  And we've developed a breed that's animal welfare friendly, no industrial inputs, and  off native grasslands.  So it's rather a lovely thing to be doing with nice natural fiber.  In fact, I don't call myself a farmer.  I call myself a landscape manager, because that's what I'm really doing and trying to  
**[0:01:35-0:01:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:01:35):**  further heal it.  So there's three or four extraordinary lateral innovations in new cropping, broad acre and  small.  All of them built around healthy soil, which is what's been totally ignored by the industrial  world and even going back to university after 40 years, I resat through a soil course and  
**[0:01:54-0:01:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:01:54):**  they still did not teach soil biology.  It was all chemistry and physics.  The heart of this whole matter is healthy soil biology.  I could give you many stories, but these people farm in Western Australia, which is some of  the oldest farming soils in the world, 3.8 billion years.  
**[0:02:11-0:02:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:02:11):**  If you think about much of North America and Northwest Europe, it's pretty much post-glacial,  10,000 years, full of nutrients, humid.  This is Western Australian country, hardly any nutrients left.  So almost beach sand they farm on.  It's like it's white sand, basically.  
**[0:02:29-0:02:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:02:29):**  And in the last 10, 12 years in the Western Australian wheat belt, the largest in Australia,  millions of hectares, virtually all the farmers have gone into huge debt.  The banks are really very careful on foreclosing, because it could be a domino across millions  and millions of hectares.  At the same time as that's happened, these people have grown a business from 600 hectares  
**[0:02:50-0:02:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:02:50):**  to 15,000 by making profits.  And they've made the profits because they've completely moved away from industrial agriculture.  So no more herbicides, no more synthetic nitrogen or fertilizers, super phosphates and stuff.  And what they've done is convert the same modern machinery, but to a biological technique  where they wrap worm juice, vermi juice, in combination with compost extract around the  
**[0:03:21-0:03:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:03:21):**  seed as they're planting.  So normal industrial foods like wheat and canola, but they've eliminated all the industrial  inputs and just using biological.  So their costs of over 90% are gone.  And now in the last few years, they've probably been going eight, 10 years now.  
**[0:03:41-0:03:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:03:41):**  In the last couple of years, their yields now, compared to neighbors across the fence  using the same varieties, their yields are better than the traditional industrial by  30% or so, but they don't have the costs.  And their country is just regenerating.  They're getting diversity coming through.  
**[0:04:02-0:04:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:04:02):**  They use animals, as in the holistic grazing, to graze through it, because they're integral  to the system, because of the ruminant bugs in their stomachs that help reseed country  after summer, et cetera.  But you need that animal impact to keep the ground covered and to cycle the humates and  other things out of the animal's stomachs and keep that green.  
**[0:04:23-0:04:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:04:23):**  The secret is having as much green or cover on the land for as much of the year to put  the sugars in the soil to drive the whole thing.  So it's completely back to front with the industrial model, which is simplification,  control, dominance, and just a few inputs going in.  It's a classic Mediterranean-type climate.  
**[0:04:41-0:04:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:04:41):**  So in the autumn, the rains will start.  In our country, I think six months out of Kilda, so May, expect the rains to go through.  So the crops go in then.  The rain will stop November.  They'll harvest December.  
**[0:04:57-0:05:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:04:57):**  So about five months of the year, it's dry and hot.  And so if the soil isn't covered and it hasn't got some green come through through more perennials  and forbs, those soils aren't being maintained and healthy, let alone protected.  Because the statistics, the research shows that if you have a 40-degree temperature,  which everyone thought was only in Australia, but now it's in Europe, 44 the other day in  
**[0:05:23-0:05:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:05:23):**  France and it's coming to the UK.  If you have, say, just a 40-degree summer day and you don't have your soil covered,  half a centimeter underneath, you get this baking effect and you get a 65-degree centigrade  temperature.  And so all the soil biology, it can't stand that.  
**[0:05:41-0:05:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:05:41):**  So it's sort of just basic.  Cover the soil.  Hopefully, you have green forbs and perennials pushing the sugars in to maintain the life.  And so it's sort of a counterintuitive, but it's not really counterintuitive.  Mother Nature's had a few million years to get it right, and we tend to think that she's  
**[0:05:58-0:06:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:05:58):**  pretty dumb and let's simplify.  So it's sort of back to square one stuff, thinking through the lens of nature rather  than the arrogance of reductionist human science.  One of the key organisms in the soil, really healthy soil, are the root fungus, what are  called microhazel fungi.  
**[0:06:21-0:06:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:06:21):**  They're amazing creatures.  They have a partnership with plants.  The plants will photosynthesize, they leak sugars into the soil or exudates, which feeds  the fungus.  And the fungi have a partnership, some biotic relationship.  
**[0:06:36-0:06:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:06:36):**  They're part of the bargain is to go off and source the nutrients.  And a healthy cubic yard of soil, these fungi have microscopic feeding tubes called hyphae.  In a healthy cubic yard of really healthy soil, there might be 25,000 kilometers of  these micronutrients.  If you go and spray, aggressively plow, put on poisonous fertilizers, you kill off nearly  
**[0:07:04-0:07:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:07:04):**  all that.  And you're left with these drug addict plants who are waiting for their drug fix of industrial  fertilizers.  Where's all the hugely important nutrients, minerals, micronutrients that we've evolved  for over a million years?  
**[0:07:18-0:07:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:07:18):**  They're not there.  And then we wonder why the wheels are falling off human health and its systems.  It's sort of so basic, and yet it's now a huge business behind the whole industrial  machine and industrial medicine and industrial foods, industrial fertilizers, industrial  chemicals.  
**[0:07:38-0:07:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:07:38):**  It's in denial because there's too much vested interest.  The big end of town, the vested interest in the whole industrial system, the big food  processors who are processing the hell out of our food so there's nothing much left of  it, like your white goods, et cetera, or the junk food businesses, the big chemical companies,  big pharma, all those.  
**[0:07:59-0:08:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:07:59):**  It's in their interest to have us on the drug fix chain of the industrial world.  The latest research from the FAO, the United Nations FAO, shows that 70% of the world's  food today comes off peasant farms of two hectares and less or so.  And then if you increase the size of that up a little bit more, it's probably 75%, 80%.  We're wasting globally another 30% of food.  
**[0:08:27-0:08:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:08:27):**  So it's just rubbish.  I mean, the amount of wasteland now, I mean, the European communities' subsidization policies  have forced about 30 million hectares to go out of production.  There's so much wasteland around that's without even turning over other green lands around  the world.  
**[0:08:45-0:08:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:08:45):**  If we can feed, estimates by scientists who aren't captured by the big end of town and  are looking at this seriously independently, we could feed 11 billion tomorrow if we convert  it across to a truly biological, regenerative, organic agriculture.  So it's a complete furphy that's put around by the big end of town.  And that's the other exciting component here.  
**[0:09:08-0:09:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:09:08):**  We can feed the world and we can feed them healthily.  So when the solutions are there, we've got to start adopting them.  That's the exciting thing.  And we haven't even got on to addressing the Earth systems and climate.  Where I'm based is still attached as a visiting lecturer at the Australian National University.  
**[0:09:26-0:09:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:09:26):**  Down the corridor are some of the world's leading Earth system scientists involved in  climate.  But as I said, there's nine.  We know our planet is being sustained by nine integrated Earth systems.  It's not just climate.  
**[0:09:42-0:09:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:09:42):**  There's also biodiversity.  There's land systems.  There's the phosphorus nitrogen cycle, et cetera, et cetera.  All of them destabilised to a major extent now.  Some of them very, very dangerously.  
**[0:09:56-0:10:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:09:56):**  At least three of them were into uncharted territory like climate and biodiversity.  Humans have caused the sixth greatest extinction event ever on Earth, which we're in the middle  of now.  And if you look at those nine systems, almost all of them, the single greatest cause or  also major factor is industrial agriculture in causative terms.  
**[0:10:20-0:10:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:10:20):**  So a flip side of that is a new regenerative agriculture that heals rather than damages  can have a huge impact.  And one of the leaders, just looking at if we're just going to address climate, is Paul  Hawken.  For the last three or more decades, been one of the world leaders in social environmental  
**[0:10:35-0:10:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:10:35):**  change, as you know.  Looks like blessed unrest, the ecology, commerce and stuff.  About 15 years ago, he got sick of asking climate scientists, okay, it doesn't look  good.  What do we do?  
**[0:10:48-0:10:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:10:48):**  And most of them said, I don't know.  That's not my field.  I'm crunching the numbers.  So Paul said, well, to hell with it.  So he went and got 80 leading scientists and analysts.  
**[0:10:59-0:11:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:10:59):**  Let's look at the 100 best methods to pull carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere or stop  it going up.  And they've crunched 80 of those methods in rigorous detail.  Published a book a couple of years ago called Drawdown.  And I've got to know Paul and working with him.  
**[0:11:14-0:11:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:11:14):**  And I said, Paul, I looked at the numbers.  Fantastic work.  In the top 30 or more, there's seven or eight regenerative agricultural approaches, like  silvopastoral systems, ecological grazing, organic agriculture, et cetera.  They're all doing the same thing, healing those landscape systems.  
**[0:11:37-0:11:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:11:37):**  Let's just call them RegenAg, because basically they're all the same variant.  What are the numbers telling us?  When we looked at the numbers, regenerative agriculture is number one by nearly two and  a half times the next best method in pulling down carbon and putting it away in the soil  and stopping it.  
**[0:11:54-0:11:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:11:54):**  So that's why I think this is such an important story.  We have the best solutions to the threat to the earth systems, and we have the best solutions  to the human health crisis.  And that's not a hell of a story, I don't know.  And so the average person in the city can get out and start growing organic veggies  
**[0:12:10-0:12:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:12:10):**  or support farmers who are growing their regenerative healthy food and buy fiber like good wool  or something.  And the farmers can, we now know it's profitable to start switching.  We have the techniques for both broad acre agriculture and grazing.  So this is one hell of a story.  
**[0:12:29-0:12:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:12:29):**  There's been a huge amount of work looking at what are called complex adaptive systems.  Now I had to teach master's students, I had to get my head around it.  There's about 12 traits which I won't go into.  It's basically a complex adaptive system could be the earth itself, those nine systems organising  themselves to sustain the unique conditions.  
**[0:12:48-0:12:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:12:48):**  It could be a catchment, it could be a farm.  So any complex system that is constantly acting and interacting and to maintain a state.  Now one of the key traits that really hit me between the eyes is that when disturbed  or inputs come in or what, and if left to its own potential, these systems will self-organise  back to a state of health.  
**[0:13:15-0:13:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:13:15):**  It may not be the same where it was, but there's capacity to self-organising using all the  different capacities within it to a more stable, healthy state of equilibrium or whatever you  want to call it.  And that idea of self-organisation is really what's behind regenerative agriculture.  It's farmers starting to do things in a healthy function that enables nature and her ancient  
**[0:13:40-0:13:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:13:40):**  systems that are long co-evolved to self-organise themselves back to a higher, better state.  In resilience terms, there's a whole theory now on resilience of systems.  It's getting energy or whatever into the system to kick it back to a healthier state of function  and regenerate.  And if you look at the Latin roots of regeneratis, it's got strong ethical overtones of improvement,  
**[0:14:03-0:14:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:14:03):**  et cetera.  So it's a far better word than sustainable, I believe, because sustainable is so overused.  It can mean marking time, treading water.  I think this is open-ended, absolutely open-ended, and a healthy open-endedness where humans  can play a role by doing the right thing, injecting energy or inputs, but enabling nature  
**[0:14:22-0:14:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:14:22):**  to do the work.  So it's really an exciting concept.  Small farms are more in model with diversity of ecosystems.  And the small farmer is he who walks the paddock by day, knows his farm intimately, and reacts  to it rather than some of the big industrial scale model farms.  
**[0:14:46-0:14:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:14:46):**  Now, you can have these big farms we do in grazing situation, but the farmer is still  intimately involved.  And I think, as Schumacher once said, small is beautiful.  I think there's a role.  Like any diverse ecosystem, we need all types.  
**[0:15:01-0:15:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:15:01):**  But the idea that we have to get bigger is, to me, an anathema.  I don't think that's necessarily a measure of excellence here.  It's diversity.  And small farms are absolutely, hugely important, because it means family farming.  It means diversity.  
**[0:15:17-0:15:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:15:17):**  It means intimate control, the old saying of the oxen groweth fat under the eye, or  the footsteps of the master.  It's so true.  Once you start getting too big in corporate structures, that intimate connection with  the land disappears, and it doesn't work as well.  
**[0:15:41-0:15:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:15:41):**  Earlier this year, I spent a day at the Bow House, a production space and marketplace  on the Balkaskie Estate in the East Nuke of Fife.  The East Nuke is a coastal area known for its picturesque fishing villages and fertile  soils.  Talking to people that day, there was a recurring theme.  
**[0:15:59-0:16:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:15:59):**  Despite the obvious abundance of the area, it's frustratingly difficult to directly  access local food.  The Bow House aims to act as that missing link in the chain by connecting small-scale  growers and producers with shoppers and restaurants.  We'll soon be releasing a short all about the Bow House and its efforts to rejuvenate  
**[0:16:19-0:16:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:16:19):**  the local food system in the East Nuke.  In the meantime, here's a conversation I had that day with Jason Biles, who sets up  his stall at the Bow House during its monthly market weekends.  Jason runs East Nuke Seaweed, whose aim is to excite, educate and empower people to reduce  their environmental impact by eating wild, locally produced and seasonal food.  
**[0:16:44-0:16:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:16:44):**  He took me on a walk to the local beach, which was just a stone's throw, or maybe a pebble's  throw from the Bow House.  Not everyone knows you can eat a lot of parts of the hawthorn.  Back in the days apparently traditionally it was an important little food source for  school kids, you know, because they're smaller.  
**[0:17:07-0:17:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:17:07):**  So the little berries, you know, they're like a mini apple and apparently they'd forage  those on the way home.  And they used to traditionally call it cheese and crackers.  So the berry was the cheese and the leaf was the cracker.  And they'd wrap them up.  
**[0:17:24-0:17:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:17:24):**  I actually read about that in New Zealand before I came to Scotland.  And then we came over and here I was eating leaves off the hawthorn, thinking not everyone  did it.  And everyone thought I was crazy, you know, because that's sort of some of this lost knowledge  that people aren't doing it anymore in the same way.  
**[0:17:45-0:17:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:17:45):**  It's only been a very, very short time in the history of the planet and the history  of man that we've not been doing that stuff.  So I think it's quite natural for people.  And also the more disconnected that we've become from nature, you know, we get all those  symptoms of it.  
**[0:18:02-0:18:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:18:02):**  You know, you can, depression and loneliness, all this stuff, you know, so people are really  looking to reconnect.  And that's a good way to do it is through your food.  Because it's something that we have to do, you know.  And I think it's important that people don't look at food as just a way to fuel the vehicle,  
**[0:18:23-0:18:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:18:23):**  but look at it as a way to actually excite ourselves and each other and, you know, and  really see it as, you know, a spiritual thing.  You know, not just a way to power you through your day.  When I first brought seaweed into the house, the kids turned up their nose and they were  like, seaweed?  
**[0:18:42-0:18:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:18:42):**  But now, actually the youngest one especially, she's like, Dad, where's the seaweed?  And piling on everything.  You know, they actually now got to slow it down and say, oh, just a little bit less,  Nadia, because, you know, I want some.  Here we are.  
**[0:18:55-0:19:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:18:55):**  So that's quite a quick little walk.  Already here you can see why the Esnuke is really good for seaweed, because you get such  a big tidal range.  So all those rocks and another, probably not even another hour, most of these rocks will  all be covered up.  
**[0:19:17-0:19:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:19:17):**  You know, what will be right up here.  For me, actually, part of the magic of actually being out there in that environment is that  you're walking around on land that only gets exposed, you know, maybe four or five times  a year, some of these, on the super big tides.  And also, there may have not been humans walking out here for 10,000 years.  
**[0:19:37-0:19:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:19:37):**  And maybe the last time a human was walking out there was before the last ice age, you  know.  So that alone, you know, for me is part of the magic.  Do you want to head down to the coast?  Yeah, I think I can do it.  
**[0:19:49-0:19:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:19:49):**  For a wee look?  On land, you know, the stalk of a plant, for seaweed, we call it a stipe.  So at the end of the stipe, you've got the holdfast that attaches itself to the rocks  or maybe buries itself in the sand.  The way to harvest that would be to cut it up there.  
**[0:20:08-0:20:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:20:08):**  And that still leaves some leaf on there, and that'll continue to grow.  And certain species, like, I mean, I've been harvesting sea spaghetti this year, and actually  some of the areas where I've harvested the sea spaghetti go back, and you actually notice  it's actually growing faster.  You know, a bit like land plants.  
**[0:20:23-0:20:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:20:23):**  It actually encourages growth.  So done in the right way, you can actually do that with seaweed as well.  You know, different species grow in different areas, but just up here a little bit further  out and, you know, maybe I can run out quickly if you guys don't want to.  We can see there's a bit of pepperdolls growing up there, and that's one of the varieties  
**[0:20:43-0:20:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:20:43):**  of seaweed.  When people try that, it's something they really don't expect.  So I can try and get us a little bit of that if you like, and then it might be time to  head back after that.  It was just a quick walk today.  
**[0:20:57-0:21:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:20:57):**  Just so I can get the levels right, can you just tell me the classic question as always,  what did you have for breakfast?  Okay.  Well, I had seaweed, eggs on toast with seaweed.  On brand.  
**[0:21:15-0:21:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:21:15):**  Very good.  Cool, thank you.  My name is Jason Behoels.  I'm originally from New Zealand.  I've been in the Eastern Uke now for three years.  
**[0:21:25-0:21:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:21:25):**  I came up here for a commercial seaweed harvest management job.  I've now decided to go into business for myself, but for me, my big focus is really about education  and educating the local people of the Eastern Uke about the abundance that is available  right on their back doorstep there.  And obviously with that comes educating them about safety and also educating them about  
**[0:21:51-0:21:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:21:51):**  sustainability.  But for me, a big passion is not only seaweed, it's just all wild food in general.  And I really think that through eating more wild, seasonal and locally produced food that  we can actually all make a reduction in our impacts on the planet.  I was actually working on the railways in New Zealand.  
**[0:22:16-0:22:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:22:16):**  I just sort of stumbled onto that job.  I was working with a kaumatua, which is an elder for the Maori in New Zealand.  And this kaumatua was into seaweed.  So working on the railways there, we got a lot of downtime.  We'd spend half our day sort of sitting on the side of the tracks waiting for trains  
**[0:22:37-0:22:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:22:37):**  to go by before we could go do our work.  So we got a lot of time to forage on the coast because the rail follows the coast there.  So that's really how it all started, that I was introduced to seaweed in New Zealand  working with this kaumatua.  Years later, I was in Glasgow and a friend of mine had heard about seaweed harvesting  
**[0:22:58-0:23:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:22:58):**  up here in Fife.  So I came up and I checked it out and really it's all gone from there.  My first experience in the East Nuke was early sunsets, Kingsbarn sunrises and the heron,  who was my first resident.  So I met up here in Fife and the heron for me really signifies that space where earth,  
**[0:23:21-0:23:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:23:21):**  sea and sky all meet.  And that's his hunting ground, that's where they hang out.  So that's really how the heron ended up on my logo because we share that space together  and we're all connected, whether it be heron or humans.  We're all sharing this space and I think we need to remember that we're all connected.  
**[0:23:43-0:23:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:23:43):**  It's not about me being down there and maybe chasing the heron off because he's taking  my space.  We've got to share it together.  Unfortunately the company I was working for is no longer operating in this area.  So after three years of investment in seaweed in this area, I decided, well, I'll stick  
**[0:24:01-0:24:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:24:01):**  with the seaweed.  That's how East Nuke seaweed was originally born, but for me it's all about education.  So I believe that everyone that lives here in the East Nuke, with that total abundance  that's on their back doorstep, they should all have the confidence to go and interact  with that and harvest a bit of their own seaweed.  
**[0:24:22-0:24:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:24:22):**  And obviously with encouraging people to go down and forage seaweed, I need to also really  be educating people about how to do it in a safe manner, how to do it in a sustainable  manner.  So really that's what it's about for me, is educating the local people about the abundance  that's available and about safe and sustainable ways to do it.  
**[0:24:43-0:24:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:24:43):**  As Jason explains, seaweed has multiple benefits.  First of all, it's a kind of a forgotten resource that we have.  It's not something that in the UK is traditionally being looked at as a food source, a direct  food source.  And it's always been used here for agriculture.  
**[0:24:59-0:25:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:24:59):**  But it's such an amazing plant.  It's so packed full of minerals.  It's high in magnesium and potassium, which is things that are very much lacking in our  diet and our soils, and just the fact that it is so abundant out there.  In a time when our soils are getting such a hard time, here you've got seaweed that  
**[0:25:18-0:25:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:25:18):**  doesn't need soil.  The other thing is that seaweed does actually have a direct positive impact on our soil.  You can just walk down to any beach anywhere in the world and you'll find piles of seaweed  rotting away, turning down into soil, and highly mineralized soil as well.  So it's a good way to put minerals back into the soil, but we can also directly access  
**[0:25:44-0:25:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:25:44):**  that ourselves by eating it.  So again, it's just about giving people the confidence to go and try it out, and have  a bit of fun with it.  I'd like to start supplying a bit of fresh seaweed to local businesses, but again, I'd  like to keep it local.  
**[0:25:58-0:26:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:25:58):**  I don't see the point going out there and then cutting it sustainably, walking home,  and then sending it off somewhere, wrapping it in plastic and sending it away.  I don't really see the point in that.  If you're not in the East Nuke, go and find your own coastline, and start harvesting  it locally.  
**[0:26:14-0:26:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:26:14):**  You've got the right to roam, so anyone can roam on any land.  In Scotland and the UK actually, there can be ownership of beaches, but you can walk  on there as long as you're being respectful.  If you're thinking of foraging seaweed yourself, make sure to ask the owner of the beach.  That might be a local council, the National Trust, or an individual landowner.  
**[0:26:37-0:26:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:26:37):**  Jason also points out that if you're harvesting deep in the intertidal zone, you're likely  to be on Crown Estate land.  Visit thecrownestate.co.uk and search for seaweed to find the information you need.  It's a bit the same as harvesting land plants.  If you're harvesting plants on land, you shouldn't rip it up from the roots, because in effect,  
**[0:26:57-0:27:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:26:57):**  you've killed the plant, and there is regulations against that.  That's why if you're taking seaweed, you should leave the whole past on there, and leave a  certain percentage of the plant behind.  Then it's still living, it can regrow, you're not breaking any rules.  The whole ethos behind foraging in the first place is that you take what you need.  
**[0:27:18-0:27:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:27:18):**  If you want to take a bit extra for your neighbor, because they can't get out, then that's fine.  You shouldn't be down there taking away kilos and kilos of it.  Also, you have to be careful of things like water quality, all the rest of it.  So it does pay to do a bit of research.  And on my tours, I go into the sustainability, I go into the regulations, and I go into ways  
**[0:27:38-0:27:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:27:38):**  that you can find out about the water quality, and places that you can contact to find out.  If you're keen to go foraging on your nearest beach, here's a very quick beginner's guide  to different seaweeds.  You've got three classifications of seaweeds.  You've got browns, greens, and reds.  
**[0:27:58-0:28:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:27:58):**  We've just been through winter, so during the winter there's actually a couple of really  good varieties of seaweed that are available out there.  You've got larva, well known down in Wales, that's what they make their larva bread out  of, also known as nori in Japan.  But that's actually very abundant seaweed in the whole coast of the UK.  
**[0:28:16-0:28:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:28:16):**  So that's a really nice one.  The season's over now, unfortunately.  The reason why that's so good is because it grows right through that hunger gap.  The best time of year really to harvest that is February.  There's not much else to get.  
**[0:28:26-0:28:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:28:26):**  But the interesting thing with seasonal foods, what I've found, is that nori, the larva example,  it's ready in February, but you can still get it in March.  And in March, you start to get the wild garlic coming up.  They actually go really well together.  You'd almost think that somebody had designed it.  
**[0:28:41-0:28:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:28:41):**  When stuff's in season, it tends to go really well with other stuff that's in season.  Right now, we've got a laria esculanta, or otherwise known as dabblehawks up here.  That's another one that's in season right at the moment.  It's a long kelp, a brown seaweed.  Really nice, but it's a very short season.  
**[0:28:58-0:29:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:28:58):**  And of course, if you're out there going on the low tide to harvest it, it's in season  for six weeks, but you've got roughly about three weeks worth of days that you can go  out and get it.  So, you know, it's quite elusive.  So that's something I really like about it.  
**[0:29:11-0:29:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:29:11):**  Coming into autumn, which really, if you think in terms of the ocean, that's sort of the  summer for the ocean, because it's been heating up all summer, and then the ocean's nice and  warm then.  So that's actually a time of abundance for the ocean.  So we've got a nice one that's very popular in Ireland, the dulse, and that's red seaweed.  
**[0:29:31-0:29:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:29:31):**  Yeah, that's a little of a brief introduction.  Pretty much all seaweeds are edible, as in the fact that they're not toxic for you.  So yeah, unlike mushrooms, there's pretty much no toxic seaweeds out there.  So I kind of encourage people to head down to the beach and just start munching on any  old seaweed, and you'll soon know whether it tastes good or not.  
**[0:29:49-0:29:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:29:49):**  But you know, you can be confident in the fact to know that you're not going to do yourself  any damage.  Yeah.  Is there anything else you'd like to say?  Any sort of message you'd like to send out?  
**[0:30:00-0:30:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:30:00):**  Hi, mum.  No, I think just really, you know, I'd love for people to contact me and come out on a  tour and learn more about, you know, what I do and what we can all do together, you  know, and let's have some fun.  Let's have fun with it.  
**[0:30:18-0:30:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:30:18):**  We're working together with Chelsea Green Publishing to produce the Women of the Land  series in which we share the voices of women who are fuelled by their connection with the  land to build businesses, garner movements, and share their stories.  Women who are standing up for what they know works, crafting a better future for us all.  So far in this series, we've featured Leah Penniman talking about farming while black,  
**[0:30:44-0:30:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:30:44):**  and Alice Percy sharing about happy pigs taste better.  The latest installment is with pollinator queen Bridget Strawbridge.  Her book, Dancing with Bees, came out on the 5th of September.  It's a beautiful journey of awakening through learning about the bees.  As a taster of the longer episode, here's Bridget talking to us about her mum.  
**[0:31:08-0:31:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:31:08):**  My mother basically went from being disabled to bedridden in just really under a year and  reached the stage where I wasn't able to care for her, didn't feel able to care for  her.  So she spent her last, oh, her last seven or eight months in a nursing home.  When she reached the stage, which many elderly people do, she was terminally ill, she had  
**[0:31:33-0:31:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:31:33):**  lots of ailments and a little bit of dementia as well.  She reached the stage where she'd stopped reading and she'd stopped, she wasn't interested  in the news anymore or television.  And I was just, I just couldn't think what to do to help her on the days that I couldn't  visit her.  
**[0:31:53-0:31:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:31:53):**  She was lonely.  She was terribly, terribly lonely.  So I had seen on a wildlife trust website, I'd read about a project where one of the  wildlife trusts had put bird tables outside the windows in nursing homes for elderly people.  And that's a no brainer and there are lots of bird tables, but they're very, very often  
**[0:32:16-0:32:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:32:16):**  nobody actually fills them up with bird food.  So we bought, it's like a bird feeding station with lots of different feeders on it.  And we filled it with nuts and sunflower seeds and fat balls, you know, everything we could  think of and put it right outside her window.  And we arranged her room so that she, her chair was facing the window and I just thought,  
**[0:32:42-0:32:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:32:42):**  please let the birds come on, please let her notice them.  And they did.  And it changed, it changed her end of life.  It made her end of life bearable.  All of a sudden she became absolutely obsessed.  
**[0:33:00-0:33:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:33:00):**  She did become obsessed with the birds.  She didn't know what some of them were.  She used to describe them to us and we had so many phone calls.  She'd be on the phone, if she could work out how to use the phone, sometimes she couldn't,  but she'd be on the phone and she didn't even say it was her.  
**[0:33:17-0:33:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:33:17):**  We'd just pick up the phone and there'd be my mother suddenly describing a bird and I'd  be thinking, gosh, what is it?  What is it?  Because she wanted to know the name.  I worked out what most of them were, you know, she used to say, it's got a very long tail.  
**[0:33:30-0:33:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:33:30):**  So I think, okay, it's a long tail tit.  Or she knew the robin, she always knew the robin.  She knew the black birds.  And then there was a whole flock of birds that were her favorites and they turned out  to be gold finches and she thought they were like little jewels because they're so brightly  
**[0:33:49-0:33:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:33:49):**  colored and she chuckled and they were just joyful for her.  And there was one bird that she described to us as being upside down and we thought,  because she had a little bit of dementia, we thought perhaps she was getting muddled  and she got terribly, she actually got quite distressed because we couldn't tell her the  name of this bird because we hadn't seen it.  
**[0:34:12-0:34:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:34:12):**  She kept saying, but it's upside down, it's upside down.  And we were there one day in her room when this bird came and it flew across from, because  her room looked out over a farmyard and this bird flew across and landed upside down on  the nut feeder.  And to me, it was just, I just straight away knew it was a nut hatch.  
**[0:34:37-0:34:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:34:37):**  Nut hatches are upside down.  So we were straight away able to tell her that it was a nut hatch and that was great.  She knew that the bird was a nut hatch.  But there was another bird as well that just a few days before she died and we'd reached  the stage where, because it was May and it was a sunny May, this was just last year,  
**[0:35:02-0:35:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:35:02):**  and we'd opened, she had patio doors and we had the patio doors wide, wide open.  And about three days before she died, when we opened the doors, a racing pigeon came  and the racing pigeon came and landed on the patio and it started to come in to the bedroom  as well.  And I mean, I think the carers would like to shoot it out because it's probably not  
**[0:35:26-0:35:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:35:26):**  very hygienic, but when you really are at the end of life, all you want is just something  that's good.  And when she chuckled, she was really tickled pink to see this ridiculous racing pigeon  in her room.  And it dropped a feather one day and I gave her the feather.  
**[0:35:44-0:35:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:35:44):**  And you don't really know, we knew she was dying at this stage and we knew that it was  days, maybe weeks if we were lucky, but probably days.  She was a very, very religious, my mother.  She's a Roman Catholic and she wasn't at all frightened about dying because she truly,  she knew she was going to heaven.  
**[0:36:03-0:36:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:36:03):**  So she had this great calmness and this peace about her.  And I gave her this feather to hold and she held it and we had to make sure that the carers  gave it to her when she woke up as well because she wanted to keep holding the feather.  And my brother, my brothers, one of them lived in Dubai and another in Australia.  And when my brother from Dubai called her on Skype and we would open Skype for her to  
**[0:36:33-0:36:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:36:33):**  arrange for her to listen and she knew us.  But I asked her to show Peter the feather.  I said, look, show Peter what you've got.  She was tiny and she held up this feather and I'd already told Peter about the pigeon.  So Peter knew it came from a pigeon.  
**[0:36:48-0:36:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:36:48):**  And he said, oh, that's a nice, nice that.  So where did that come from?  And we expected her to say from the pigeon.  But she said an angel, I think.  So somehow she thought the pigeon was an angel and the pigeon stayed actually until it stayed  
**[0:37:06-0:37:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:37:06):**  until the day she died and was gone then.  So it's birds, birds made a difference, huge difference to my mum's.  Yeah, her last, her last months and her last days, her last few days, right up until when  she lost consciousness.  It was the birds that made a difference to her.  
**[0:37:29-0:37:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:37:29):**  As farmers, we can sometimes get caught up in the many things to do and then you forget  to stop and look at all the birds and bees around us.  This is a brilliant and poignant reminder of the power of noticing and stopping to just  enjoy the natural world around us.  See we listened to the full episode, which is on our feed to learn all about different  
**[0:37:56-0:38:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:37:56):**  types of bees, their nests and where you can spot them.  Since reading the book and speaking to Bridget, we've all found ourselves looking and interacting  with our flying insect friends in a whole new way.  Now for a request.  We're really keen to hear what you think about the show and learn more about who you are.  
**[0:38:18-0:38:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:38:18):**  So we've created a short survey to help us understand what you like and what you'd like  to see more or less of on the program.  It's only going to take a few minutes and it's pinned on Twitter in the show's episode  notes or you can head to farmerama.co to complete it there.  Thanks for listening to Farmerama this month and every month.  
**[0:38:46-0:38:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:38:46):**  If you're able to share the show with your farmer and producer friends or anyone you  think might be interested, it's really, really appreciated.  Farmerama is made by Joe Barrett, Katie Reville and myself, Abby Rose.  This month with Louie Hudson helping on editing.  Community support for the show comes from Hannah Soderlund, Annie Landless, Eliza Jenkins,  
**[0:39:12-0:39:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/50-regenerative-agriculture-and-climate-change-seaweed-entrepreneurship-and-noticing-nature#t=0:39:12):**  Olivia Oldham and Mary Hurd.  Our theme music is by Owen Barrett.  Toodle-oo.  