### Farmerama  (2019-14-27)
**[0:00:00-0:00:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to Farmerama.  This month we hear from microbiology pioneers in the USA about compost's role in building  microbial life and how to produce a more fungally dominated compost.  I have a few thoughts on soil health versus soil carbon.  We have a rallying cry from a member of La Via Campesina to get us all in action growing  
**[0:00:26-0:00:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:00:26):**  food and we give you a teaser for one of the characters in our upcoming series, Cereal,  which uncovers the secrets behind the bread we eat.  Finally, we hear about a community project growing their own beer.  Dr David Johnson is a microbiology researcher and associate at the Center for Regenerative  Agriculture and Resilient Systems at Chico State University, California.  
**[0:00:54-0:00:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:00:54):**  He's been doing breakthrough work creating biologically balanced fungal dominated compost  for carbon sequestration and improved soil health.  He's devised a compost methodology with his partner, Hui-Chin Johnson, called BEAM, Biologically  Enhanced Agricultural Management.  Compost is usually thought of as fertilizer, a way of adding nutrients to the soil.  
**[0:01:18-0:01:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:01:18):**  BEAM compost is a bit different in that it builds soil health by building soil biology.  It replaces soil microbes in soil degraded through extractive agriculture methods.  Abby caught up with David and Hui-Chin a few weeks ago at the Climate Underground Conference  at Canney Fork Farms in Tennessee.  In the last few years, you've come across something that you're quite excited about.  
**[0:01:43-0:01:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:01:43):**  And could you tell me a little bit about that?  You know, when was the breakthrough moment or when was a light bulb moment came on and  what does that look like?  Well, it started with a job.  I got at New Mexico State University with an environmental research and education program.  
**[0:02:00-0:02:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:02:00):**  Do something good with dairy manure.  It was the second day on the job and my boss called me and he says, I've got a project  for you.  You can imagine my excitement.  Dairy manure.  
**[0:02:13-0:02:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:02:13):**  But it turned out a little different than what we expected as far as the results.  The people that had it a decade before us, they concluded that the compost they made  from the dairy manure was bad for soils.  And we kind of scoffed at that, but looked at the data.  They were right.  
**[0:02:31-0:02:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:02:31):**  They were putting down a very saline product that was actually stopping plants from growing.  So we got the project.  I started out doing a similar composting process, the windrow, where we would turn it.  And she got tired of me coming in with dirty clothes and she says, we're going to do this  a different way.  
**[0:02:52-0:02:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:02:52):**  So we put our heads together and we came up with a bioreactor that's actually static.  There's no turning involved.  You keep the moisture content about 70%.  That's optimal, what we found out now, for fungi to grow.  It's aerobic because we put it on a pallet and we have tubes that run up the center so  
**[0:03:13-0:03:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:03:13):**  you get circulation up through the center.  You're never more than a foot away from ambient air, so the whole process stays aerobic.  And we allow it to mature over a year.  And it was in that maturity that we saw a change in the diversity of the microbes.  The diversity quadrupled in the microbial community as it would mature.  
**[0:03:35-0:03:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:03:35):**  We put some of that into some trials, into plant growth trials, and we had extremely  good results seeing plants grow twice with our compost, what any other compost did.  We thought we should put this in the field and try that out.  We tried it in the field and we've been on a plot now for about 12 years.  And what we noticed is each year after we had applied, we applied this once.  
**[0:04:05-0:04:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:04:05):**  And at that time we were doing it at about 400 pounds per acre, but we've cut back.  We don't need to put that much now.  It's actually about a pound to two pounds per acre rate.  Quite a significant drop.  But in that original experiment we saw yearly increase in growth.  
**[0:04:23-0:04:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:04:23):**  We only applied once, as I was saying.  The management after you apply this is key.  You always need to have something growing in these soils because that's what feeds the  microbes and allow them to increase in population and increase in their functionality.  And we would see these communities would start to develop, the microbial communities for  
**[0:04:44-0:04:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:04:44):**  nitrogen fixation, both free living and symbiotic nitrogen fixers.  We saw microbes that were involved in mobilizing phosphorus.  A lot of the soils that we have right now are very, have a lot of phosphorus in them,  but it's locked up.  The soil physical chemistry doesn't allow the plant to access it, but we saw a lot of  
**[0:05:06-0:05:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:05:06):**  microbes that were involved in that releasing that, how that those, the chemical structures  there in and making it accessible to the plant.  We saw microbes that were involved with metal oxidation or you could extract, they could  extract all the elements that the plant needed.  We saw microbes involved with methane reduction, methanotrophs, nitrous oxide reduction.  
**[0:05:33-0:05:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:05:33):**  Not every problem that we have in agriculture and its influence on our ecosystem that we  live in, these microbes seem to be able to address it.  We saw also a increase in microbes that do phytohormones.  They work with plants to increase plant growth.  We saw microbes that would break down about every xenobotic or every chemical that we  
**[0:05:59-0:06:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:05:59):**  put on a field, you know, 2,4-D, malathion, all the polychlorinated biphenyls that we  see, just almost every chemical that man has made, there's an organism that seems to, that's  a food source for it.  So it's, we just keep going on this, doing the research.  We see an upregulation in genes that are involved with quorum sensing.  
**[0:06:27-0:06:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:06:27):**  And quorum sensing is when either a single-species group of microbes get together or a multi-species  group of microbes get together as a community.  And they can function as a community for expressing genes as a community that they can't as an  individual.  And we saw an upregulation, five to ten times upregulation in those particular messenger  
**[0:06:51-0:06:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:06:51):**  RNA that are used to transcribe these different proteins.  So this just opens up more and more our understanding of how these soils work, how dynamic they  are, how if we start to bring the biology back into these systems, we don't need the  fertilizers, we don't need all the pesticides and herbicides as well because you start to  improve soil health this process.  
**[0:07:16-0:07:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:07:16):**  What we're seeing, fungi are instrumental in both the logistics and communication in  these soil systems.  And what we've done with our agricultural approaches for the last hundred plus years  is everything we've done has been detrimental to the soil fungal community.  We lose them, you lose the logistics and the communication.  
**[0:07:42-0:07:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:07:42):**  And that just cripples your system.  You're never working with a fully functional microbial community if you don't have the  fungal community there.  And it needs to be dominant by a biomass measurement.  We see such improved growth once you pull the whole system in there.  
**[0:08:01-0:08:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:08:01):**  It's a system we're rebuilding.  Fungi are not the ultimate end-all, be-all on this, but they're instrumental in having  everything work together.  But you also have to have your protozoa, your micro arthropods, it's a system as I say that  we're rebuilding to bring back functionality.  
**[0:08:24-0:08:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:08:24):**  We see increases in the productivity or the net primary productivity of these systems  up to a five times increase in the biomass production on the front end.  On the back end, the changes that we see in respiration, these systems become more carbon  use efficient where they're respireless of this organic matter that you fixed into the  air and they're actually putting it more into the biological form in the soil.  
**[0:08:51-0:08:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:08:51):**  We see a five times reduction in the respiration or four to five times increase in the carbon  use efficiency of this system.  Play both these against the middle, you start to build up soil carbon at a significantly  higher rate than what we think we can right now.  The implementing or getting the soil microbiology back in the soil will have significant impact  
**[0:09:18-0:09:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:09:18):**  on almost every major problem we have on this planet.  We see that the carbon part of this, the carbon increase in the soil will just be like the  icing on the cake.  It's not the focus of this, there's so many other issues as far as having more water infiltration  into your soils because you're building that carbon out.  
**[0:09:39-0:09:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:09:39):**  Increasing that water more efficiently, if you have a system that has better photosynthetic  capacity then the water use efficiency and the photosynthetic capacity both work together.  You're capturing more carbon with the sunlight that you receive.  Increasing the quality of the food that we eat because also what we notice as you restore  this biology is the micronutrients become available again.  
**[0:10:07-0:10:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:10:07):**  We saw up to a thousand percent increase in iron and manganese in soils that should have  been decreasing because of the soil physical chemistry.  But the microbes themselves free up these elements that the plant needs.  What will that do for our health if we start to get those micronutrients back in?  If the plants are healthier and the products that they give us, they directly correlate  
**[0:10:33-0:10:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:10:33):**  it to our health.  A lot of the foods that we get, it's the microbiome in those foods that we're also processing  that gives us our health.  What would that do for if every continent on this planet could start looking at agriculture  just a little different, start relying more on the biology?  
**[0:10:55-0:10:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:10:55):**  We might not have the mass migrations that we see.  We might have systems that function in these foreign lands where they could start to rebuild  their soils.  There's so many issues that this could change.  Our health probably being one of the biggest ones and how long are we going to be able  
**[0:11:14-0:11:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:11:14):**  to afford the way the health system is going now?  We are degrading our health because of the foods we eat.  It's just a simple change of perspective on realizing that we rely on our microbiome.  We rely on the microbiome in the soils.  All this works together in a system that we need to rebuild.  
**[0:11:38-0:11:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:11:38):**  If you're interested in composting, then you've got more to come next month as we'll be releasing  the next in our Women of the Land series.  This time we feature Rhonda Sherman, the queen of vermicomposting, talking about her book,  The Worm Farmer's Handbook.  At the Climate Underground Conference, there was much debate between soil scientists, politicians,  
**[0:11:59-0:12:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:11:59):**  and practitioners, and two things really stuck with me.  One was that many soil scientists thought Gabe Brown's claims that he has increased  soil organic matter by 9% in 20 years is impossible, and that it goes against all scientific evidence  to date.  However, Johnson and his crew from UC Chico felt that maybe it was possible based on the  
**[0:12:23-0:12:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:12:23):**  extraordinarily positive results they've seen when activating the biology in the soil with  the compost.  I'm not convinced either way, but it was interesting to see how much debate it provoked, and still  goes on.  The other topic that I felt a little concerned about was the debate on soil carbon versus  
**[0:12:43-0:12:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:12:43):**  soil health.  The climate change narrative predominantly centers around reducing the amount of carbon  in the atmosphere, and there's no doubt that soil has the potential to sequester large  amounts of carbon.  However, I really felt that we could end up in a really bad place if we focus on soil  
**[0:13:01-0:13:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:13:01):**  as a carbon sink, rather than focusing on improving soil health.  You could see the weird and wonderful shortcuts people were coming up with to sequester more  carbon, like genetically modifying plants to take down more carbon, as well as using  carbon markets to financialize the sector.  To me, neither of those ideas considers the holistic benefits of soil health.  
**[0:13:23-0:13:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:13:23):**  Of course, improving soil health has the added benefit of sequestering carbon, but it's also  so much more.  It reduces flooding, provides better resilience in drought, more nutritious food, more consistent  yields, and that's only the beginning.  As farmers, I think we really need to reiterate to everyone that soil is so much more than  
**[0:13:46-0:13:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:13:46):**  a carbon sink, and we need to regenerate our soils and build resilience into our land-based  systems, not just focus on how much carbon we can sequester.  In my view, climate change is not just about carbon, it's about the many Earth's systems  and building resilience.  Jyoti Fernandez, co-founder of the Land Workers Alliance and member of La Via Campesina, spoke  
**[0:14:11-0:14:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:14:11):**  earlier this year at Fixing the Future, a brilliant conference put on by Atlas of the  Future.  Jyoti gave an impassioned call to action.  She got people to their feet and all wild up, so we wanted to share some of what she  said with you.  
**[0:14:25-0:14:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:14:25):**  So, my name is Jyoti, and yes, I work with the Land Workers Alliance.  We're a union of small-scale farmers in the UK.  There's not that many of us, because the UK was one of the first countries to industrialise  its agriculture and to remove the peasant farmers from the land.  And take those people that own the land and were growing for their local communities and  
**[0:14:50-0:14:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:14:50):**  you know, way back, you know, a century ago, and remove them from the land and push them  into the urban centres to work for the industrial capitalism, basically, the beginnings of capitalism.  But we're still pretty strong, there's about 1,500 of us in the UK.  I have a farm myself.  My father was from India and his family were peasant farmers.  
**[0:15:15-0:15:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:15:15):**  My mother was in America and her family had come from Europe, from Italy and from Germany,  on both sides, and started a farm in Iowa.  But then that generation in the 1950s, 60s was when people were moving away from the  land.  And there was a real mindset that we actually needed to industrialise our agriculture, we  
**[0:15:31-0:15:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:15:31):**  had to move towards the Green Revolution in order to try and feed the world.  But what was happening at the same time is this whole push across the world to take what  was a world fed through agroecological farming systems, which is what Via Campesina, my organisation,  fights for.  We are 300 million farmers across the world fighting for agroecology, which is the right  
**[0:15:52-0:15:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:15:52):**  to produce food using the land that is owned by the community and by small-scale farmers,  using the water resources and the seeds that we save and the animals that we breed and  all the agrobiodiversity that's out there to feed our local communities and our families  first, and have a real connection to the land and the soil and the nature around us, and  we passionately believe in that.  
**[0:16:14-0:16:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:16:14):**  Well, that was the dominant model of what the fed the world, and is still the dominant  model of what feeds the world today.  70% of the world's food is still produced by peasant farmers using 30% of the agricultural  resources.  But in the 1950s, 60s, back when my father was learning about the Green Revolution and  
**[0:16:32-0:16:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:16:32):**  science and all these sort of things that are these solutions to feed the world, was  when that model was being taken over by the political system as the dominant way to feed  the world.  And so, so many loans were given out and scientific resources and research and development were  given out to countries so that they can convert their agriculture to industrialised agriculture  
**[0:16:51-0:16:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:16:51):**  instead of using manures for feeding the land and compost and all sorts of things that came  from nature in the systems around us, they started using chemical fertilisers, started  using pesticides, started using herbicides instead of learning how to use a hoe and to  plough with your animals or find other ways that you can mulch and grow food naturally.  Started using these genetically modified or hybrid seeds to grow our crops, which were  
**[0:17:17-0:17:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:17:17):**  very convenient for supplying food to be shipped across the planet.  But with that, losing all the tremendous amount of agrobiodiversity that is the bedrock of  feeding our planet.  All of this started and as countries started to get pushed into this model of agriculture  by a global economic system and lots of corporations that wanted to make money out of this transition  
**[0:17:38-0:17:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:17:38):**  to a different way of feeding ourselves, then countries got locked into a cycle of borrowing  money to take farmers that were on small plots of land and growing food for their local communities  and convert them into systems when they're growing on big fields and then those big fields,  they work for the agribusinesses that then ship that food across the planet to feed everyone  else.  
**[0:17:59-0:18:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:17:59):**  All these things take away the resources, the fundamental resources that are very important  for people to have self-sufficiency and food security and high nutritional value for their  own communities.  In the UK, we believe strongly that we have to get involved in politics in order to be  able to sort this out.  
**[0:18:18-0:18:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:18:18):**  As everyone who eats has a stake in the food system, you can make real choices.  You can make real choices about where your food comes from.  I have to say, after 20 years of standing on a market stall on a Saturday, I really  appreciate absolutely everybody that makes those choices to come out and buy food from  a small producer because as small businesses, it makes a massive difference.  
**[0:18:38-0:18:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:18:38):**  But more than that, you're all citizens and you're part of a global democratic community  and we have to take control of this planet because if we let everything that happens  to it on a political level be dominated by agribusiness lobbyists and the large farmers  organisations that are promoting an industrialised food model and the large landowners, then  what happens that we're operating in, the context that we're all operating in, gets  
**[0:19:02-0:19:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:19:02):**  progressively harder and harder and harder.  We cannot ignore that.  Voting with your pocketbook isn't enough.  It's a very neoliberal response to an absolute crisis that we're facing where we let capitalism  and we let the powers that are actually massively distorting the world we want to see have the  
**[0:19:26-0:19:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:19:26):**  power and we have to take back that power and that's extraordinarily important.  So with La Via Campesina, we have 300 million members.  Can you imagine what it's like to get consensus decision making out of 300 million members?  We have very long meetings, sometimes 18 hours long with headphones on, listening to people  and we have a speaking order of man, woman, youth and give everybody two minutes to speak  
**[0:19:49-0:19:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:19:49):**  and then we come up with action plans of what we're going to do to try and tackle the trade  system, the World Trade Organisation, the Committee on Food Security, all the different  things that are going on, all the land grabbing, all the genetically modified seeds, all the  pesticides that are being poured onto our fields and destroying our impact populations.  We think about women's rights and the rights of migrant workers and how it all feeds into  
**[0:20:13-0:20:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:20:13):**  the multiple crises that we've got going on with war and racism and everything else.  We want to create a real solution on a globalised level by all of us standing together to fight  these things and we work in teams and we come up with position policy papers, we figure  out who's going to go to what meetings and get those voices of civil society and all  of us that care about a better planet to those meetings.  
**[0:20:39-0:20:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:20:39):**  I trek back and forth to Westminster all the time talking to as many politicians as possible.  We have marches, we have demonstrations, we lock ourselves onto things, whatever we can  possibly do to make sure that we can reclaim this planet and it has to start with what  you do with your own life.  It starts with what you do with your life, what occupation you choose and I really want  
**[0:21:02-0:21:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:21:02):**  to encourage as many as possible of you to go into farming.  Don't just publicise farmers, don't just invite farmers to conferences, be a farmer.  We need more farmers.  It's the most sustainable occupation you could possibly choose and raise your children that  way and feed your children that way and respect and give maximum respect to farmers and then  
**[0:21:23-0:21:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:21:23):**  take that and make that message the dominant message that gets to government.  We have to stand together on this because if we stand together on this we can shift  things.  Social movements are the only thing that has ever shifted things and if we can create that  mass political consciousness that a better food system is what we need and demand in  
**[0:21:42-0:21:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:21:42):**  order to save this planet then we can shift things.  It's only been since the 1960s that we've had this huge amount of agrochemicals being  poured into the earth, that we've had all these plastics wrapping up everything that  are filling up our oceans.  We can shift it back and we have to do it rapidly.  
**[0:21:59-0:22:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:21:59):**  We only have about 12 years to act as all the youths and all four of my girls are youth  climate strikers and they've been telling me to get a move on, you know, and so I've  been trying to get, you know, I had two meetings with Michael Gove, our Secretary of State  last year and I looked him in the eye and I said we absolutely have to do something  about this and he's like well what do we need to do?  
**[0:22:16-0:22:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:22:16):**  And I said get me on the panel that cites out the new agricultural policy and he did,  right?  And the thing is when I go to government and when we sit there and we try and take the  voices of the farmers and all the passion of our youth and all of us who want this better  world directly to the policymakers and say that what they're telling you is a lie.  
**[0:22:35-0:22:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:22:35):**  We can feed the world without destroying it.  Then we can get them to change their minds because they're human beings too and they  are a part of this planet that is being destroyed rapidly underneath them as well.  We have to call them out and we have to make this happen and every single one of you can  be a part of that.  
**[0:22:51-0:23:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:22:51):**  If you want to hear more stories from the conference and also hear about pioneers working  for a better future around the globe then be sure to look up Atlas of the Future.  We are very excited to announce that we will be doing things a bit differently in November  and December.  You may have noticed that co-host Katie Revel hasn't been on the show for a few months.  
**[0:23:28-0:23:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:23:28):**  Well that's because she's been busy putting together a six part series on the cereals  industry in the UK from soil to loaf.  The first episode will be released Sunday 24th of November with the following episodes  coming out almost weekly.  So you'll have lots of farmerama to listen to at the end of this year.  
**[0:23:48-0:23:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:23:48):**  The series is very aptly called Cereal.  In the series Katie asks how the industrial food system has come to dictate the way that  seeds are bred, grain is grown, flour is milled and bread is baked and eaten and what impact  that's had on producers, consumers and the environment.  The series seeks answers to those questions and introduces some of the people who are  
**[0:24:14-0:24:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:24:14):**  building alternative models that are fit for the future.  One of the many people featured in this series is John Letts of Heritage Harvest.  He's one of the original pioneers growing different types of grain in the UK.  John spoke to Abby about how he first came across heritage grains and why he's so excited  about them.  
**[0:24:33-0:24:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:24:33):**  So if we could just go right back to the beginning of your journey.  Maybe you can just tell us a bit about, you know, how did you become interested in grains?  Now that is ancient history.  That's a good thing I'm an archaeologist.  I grew up on farms.  
**[0:24:56-0:25:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:24:56):**  I grew up as a, what do you call it, a nerdy little kid collecting seeds.  I was really interested in plants from an early age and gardening.  Skipping forward there wasn't room for me on the farm so I thought I'll study it.  So I was really interested in genetics and I started off doing plant genetics thinking  I'll be a plant breeder.  
**[0:25:12-0:25:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:25:12):**  I'm going to breed new types of varieties of wheat that will save the world and feed  the world.  You know, green revolution.  Let's do it.  And this is the early or mid to late 70s.  
**[0:25:22-0:25:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:25:22):**  But after a couple of years I worked as an assistant plant breeder and I got sprayed  by a lot of very nasty chemicals one day.  Agent Orange, it was purple when they sprayed me with it, was a defoliant and a herbicide.  I was working on a plant breeding project and I thought, no, there's got to be a better  way of doing this.  
**[0:25:38-0:25:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:25:38):**  So I switched and went into environmental science and started hanging out with people  who I think had a different perspective and I realized that the problem was not producing  new super varieties.  That was just the early days of biotechnology, just the early days of GM.  And I said, no, no, no, what we need is more ecological ways of doing this.  
**[0:25:59-0:26:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:25:59):**  We need to mimic natural ecosystems.  So I actually went into ecology and environmental science.  So I thought, well, what is this transition from hunting and gathering where we all lived  as natural ecologists in a sense to farming?  So I wanted to know more about that transition because obviously our farming systems have  
**[0:26:16-0:26:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:26:16):**  gone very badly wrong and I want to know more about that.  So I thought, well, the way getting out that information is through archeology.  So I ended up doing environmental archeology, looking at the history of plants.  So archeobotany, the short word.  And I ended up at UCL and I worked with some amazing people at UCL who really were the  
**[0:26:34-0:26:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:26:34):**  experts on the origins of agriculture.  So the first domesticated weeds, how those wild grasses move from being wild into being  domesticated crops.  So I worked in Turkey for three summers as an archeologist and on some of the earliest  sites of agriculture because I wanted to understand all the different ways in which this transition  
**[0:26:55-0:26:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:26:55):**  to modern agriculture happened or at least to agriculture happened.  The later changes in the last century which have I think destroyed agriculture are nothing  to do with ecology or any of the other things.  It's all about corporate profit.  So I tried to understand that genetically and in all ways.  
**[0:27:14-0:27:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:27:14):**  Skipping forward, I ended up at the University of Oxford at the Natural History Museum and  I was working on archeological samples and a friend walked in with a shoebox.  He said, oh, this is going to change your life, John.  I said, why would that be?  He opened up the shoebox and there were about 15 different ears of wheat covered with soot,  
**[0:27:36-0:27:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:27:36):**  black.  And he said this is from a medieval roof.  And there were two other archaeobotanists there.  He said this is from a thatched roof and we thought, well, thatch decays.  Organic materials will degrade.  
**[0:27:48-0:27:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:27:48):**  I didn't know anything about thatch.  I'm Canadian.  And I didn't realize that every 30 years you just renew the roof, put a new layer on top  of the old and you don't even rake off the old.  Well you don't do that for the first couple of hundred years because you build up about  
**[0:28:00-0:28:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:28:00):**  a meter and a half thick of thatch and then it becomes one off, one on.  But the point is the bottom layer is never replaced.  So if you can tell when the building was built and if the building was built in 1350, you've  got a perfectly preserved base coat of medieval wheat from 1350.  No one really believed it so I had to prove that.  
**[0:28:20-0:28:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:28:20):**  So I did.  I went out and I took samples of this ancient thatch from all over and the striking thing  in the shoebox was that every year was different.  It was genetic diversity.  It was a land race.  
**[0:28:32-0:28:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:28:32):**  It was the fact that there was that diversity.  And I was writing reports on medieval farming but it's all based on written records, manorial  records, historical accounts and it's all really subject to a lot of bias, historical  bias.  But this was a chance to look at the actual medieval crops.  
**[0:28:51-0:28:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:28:51):**  In the end I ended up going to the University of Reading because Oxford wasn't particularly  interested to be honest.  So I ended up at Reading in the plant breeding department and to be quite honest they weren't  particularly interested either in the end because they were all committed to biotechnology,  GM again.  
**[0:29:08-0:29:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:29:08):**  So I thought well actually it's very scientific to understand the way medieval crops functioned.  It's about ecology.  Science is a means to an end.  I'm a scientist.  I wanted to know about the genetics and the ecological dynamics in the field because if  
**[0:29:23-0:29:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:29:23):**  we're going to have truly sustainable farming well we need to mimic those natural systems.  And what is a wheat field?  Well it's a wild grass ecosystem isn't it from the Middle East?  That's what I was thinking, the way I was thinking.  So I went through all the English medieval records and tried to make sense of it from  
**[0:29:43-0:29:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:29:43):**  illustrations and paintings.  And you can build up quite an interesting picture of what a medieval wheat field looked  like.  One of the reasons I did that, well one was the bottom layer of thatch is very well preserved  and often the whole plant is there.  
**[0:29:55-0:29:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:29:55):**  Based on that evidence like the ratio of straw to grain I can build up a picture of what  they call the harvest index, the ratio of grain to overall plant biomass.  So I can basically get to quite an accurate figure on what the yield was of a medieval  field, not just based on manorial records.  To do that, to compare with these samples, I started taking wheat out of the gene banks.  
**[0:30:15-0:30:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:30:15):**  Without few, we only have a fraction of the genetic diversity that was in our fields that's  been preserved.  And I grew them out in plots just to compare, but then that took on a life of its own because  all the thatchers said, well we want this really tall straw.  The wheat's six foot tall and tough as nails, this is what we want.  
**[0:30:30-0:30:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:30:30):**  Because if they grow modern wheat it's too short, it's full of nitrogen, it's very weak  and it rots.  They obviously want a roof to last for 30 years.  So I thought, that's great, I can produce thatching straw.  I might be able to fund my research that way.  
**[0:30:44-0:30:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:30:44):**  I certainly don't want to do GM research here at Redding.  But not only that, look at all this lovely grain that's being produced.  The waste, the byproduct from the thatching crop is a beautiful flower for making really  interesting historic breads.  Which of course now you'd call that the artisan bread movement, but 20 years ago they weren't  
**[0:31:02-0:31:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:31:02):**  calling it that.  So growing out a thousand different little trial plots of these ancient heritage wheats  was a chore.  You've got to plant them by hand, harvest them with a sickle, snip them off and then  thresh them and get the grain out.  
**[0:31:17-0:31:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:31:17):**  So I thought, I can't maintain all of this.  So why don't I just do what people did in the past, which they grew mixtures, genetically  diverse populations.  And ecologically in diversity there is strength.  And that's what all ecosystems are.  
**[0:31:32-0:31:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:31:32):**  The minute you have uniformity, nature hates uniformity.  So okay, I'll make it happen.  So that's what I did, I literally mixed all the grains together of all these hundreds  and hundreds of wheats I had.  And also I didn't have a farm.  
**[0:31:46-0:31:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:31:46):**  I needed somebody to grow them for me.  And you can start off with a little tiny handful, 25 seeds, but it will take you five years  to get up to enough that's commercial.  So if you start off with 500 little handfuls, you've got a little bit of a start.  And then nature will just weed out those that aren't adapted.  
**[0:32:03-0:32:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:32:03):**  And that's all I did.  I started growing all these ancient grains and one thing led to another.  And I just kept bulking up the grain.  The focus on the thatching straw slightly slipped for now, but I'm going to get back  to it soon, I hope.  
**[0:32:18-0:32:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:32:18):**  And since then, then 10 years, let's say, the artisan baking thing has kicked off.  So a lot of people got more interested in it for that.  But really it's only the last couple of years that it's really worked for me because now  I found that alternative market with the distillation and hopefully the beer.  So that was a very long-winded answer, I know.  
**[0:32:35-0:32:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:32:35):**  You said something short.  We're going to be holding a harvest celebration which will double up as a launch event for  the cereal series in London on the 21st of November and Nottingham on the 29th of November.  Watch out on Twitter for tickets which will be available soon.  Anne Bodkin of Grow Beer has been reworking her community in Brixton Beer through the  
**[0:33:11-0:33:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:33:11):**  Brixton Beer Company since 2012.  They grow their own hops and make community beer.  So it's the idea of bringing growing and drinking beer together.  It's literally bringing those two aspects, but making sure that everybody who's involved  is plays a part.  
**[0:33:39-0:33:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:33:39):**  So we nurture the growers, they grow some hops and we collectively act like a patchwork  farm and then we work with a brewer to brew a, it's called a green hop beer.  So you literally pick the hops and within an hour the beer is brewed.  And it makes a delicious, it's quite a light beer, it's not a heavy flavoured beer, it  hasn't been, the hops because they're freshly picked it's quite a light beer.  
**[0:34:13-0:34:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:34:13):**  So we brewed a beer for, since 2011, the project started in 2011 and it started, the idea of  Grow Beer started in central London, a place called Brixton.  So we had this idea, we called it the Brixton Beer Company and we had our first brew in  2012 and we had about 35 growers who contributed, who all grew hops and in September 2012 we  all picked the hops and we took them down to the brewery and the brewer was called Peter  
**[0:34:48-0:34:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:34:48):**  Hayden.  We brewed, I think it's 1200 plates in the first year, which we didn't think, which was  amazing because we didn't think that we would grow and get any beer for at least three years  because apparently that's what hop farmers do not make beer until about year two or three.  Growers tend to absolutely adore and nurture their own plots and what we were interested  
**[0:35:12-0:35:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:35:12):**  in seeing was that if, could we create something which was a collective between all of these  growers that together they kind of, we created something.  So we put a call out on social media and sort of said who would like to grow hops?  And we were most interested in seeing if people responded to it.  So those who respond, who were intrigued by it, became the first growers collectively.  
**[0:35:43-0:35:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:35:43):**  So we were all growers, including the brewer, he grew as well and it was like we were doing  this collective single activity.  We had half the people who were intrigued by the question had never grown a single thing  in their life, which was phenomenal.  They were intrigued by the idea and that's the kind of people we wanted to work with.  
**[0:36:04-0:36:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:36:04):**  The actual act of growing is really straightforward and it's a rhizome so it's really kind of  got really nurtured roots, gnarly roots and it's relatively easy but things can go wrong  throughout the year but that's like any hop.  So it's relatively easy, yeah.  About six months later we got invited to the London Brewing Alliance at Fuller's Brewery  
**[0:36:32-0:36:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:36:32):**  and we basically wanted to test out the next part of the project which was finding a brewer.  So we turned up one night and the Fuller's Brewery in their tap room was full of every  brewer that exists in London and we were given a really generous welcome by Derek Prentice  who's the head brewer there and within about five minutes of us talking the chap who was  running Camden Brewery, Jasper, he put his hand up and he said I'm going to buy every  
**[0:37:10-0:37:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:37:10):**  single one of your hops from forever and Helen and me looked at one another and we went that's  not what the project's about, you know, we're not interested in selling the hops, we're  interested in kind of trading the hops because the idea is challenging things about land  ownership, challenging things about you only do things for money and so this was more about  what can a collective do without control, necessarily without full control but actually  
**[0:37:41-0:37:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:37:41):**  you can trade your way so knowing that we had, the brewers were interested we then at  that stage we went in search of South London's only brewer at the time who was an amazing  chap Peter Hayden who had a microbrewery called the Florence Brewery and we got in contact  with him and said we've got this idea, explain what it was, said we'd be into the London  Brewery and would you like to be involved and he said yes and he said I'm going to grow  
**[0:38:12-0:38:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:38:12):**  one as well.  We had all the ingredients to make it happen and then the absolute brilliant thing was  everybody who started growing just really embraced the knowledge sharing and we did  this on social media and so somebody would post a picture and kind of go I've got this  bug on my plant, you know, what the hell is it and somebody else would kind of tap in  
**[0:38:35-0:38:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:38:35):**  and say that's a ladybird larvae, you know, keep it there, love it, you know, and it became  this we were growing together and growing our knowledge so that was lovely.  Then of course when we worked out the time to pick the hops everybody, so the collective  came together, it was the first time they'd ever been together because it had all been  virtual before and that coming together we'd said pick the hops at six o'clock, get down  
**[0:39:01-0:39:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:39:01):**  to the brewery by seven and bring your hops and it was fantastic.  Everybody rocked up, even those who didn't grow anything, nothing grew that year but  some people kind of opened this beautiful wooden box and there was a single hop cone  inside, others had bin liners full and it was just a joy because we said the project  works and so we tried it.  
**[0:39:30-0:39:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:39:30):**  I think those are the kind of main moments and each year that joy of turning up and not  knowing who's going to turn up with hops is actually so exciting because in life everything  else is so controlled but this is, you know, it all happens on the night and it either  happens or it doesn't happen but it doesn't really matter.  So there's a website, Grow Beer and it's, you know, the question is if you want to grow  
**[0:40:00-0:40:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:40:00):**  beer you click on that button, if you're a brewer click on that button, if you, it basically  just makes it really easy.  So I think the roots of the project are still the right roots but it's quite interesting  how it's adapted.  The not having a, not knowing whether it's going to take that risk and not knowing whether  
**[0:40:20-0:40:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:40:20):**  it's going to work I think is a, I think there's a brilliant, brilliant, knowing when to make  something happen or knowing when to kind of just let something happen, if it's going to  happen it's going to happen.  Get involved, you know, make it happen, open your door, you know, it works in all sorts  of ways so yeah, small farming communities can make it happen.  
**[0:40:48-0:40:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:40:48):**  Now for a request, we're really keen to hear what you think about the show and learn more  about who you are so we've created a short survey to help us understand what you like  and what you'd like to see more of and less of on the show.  It should only take you a few minutes, it's pinned on Twitter, in the show's episode notes  or you can head to farmerama.co and complete it there.  
**[0:41:23-0:41:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:41:23):**  Thanks for listening to Farmerama this month and every month.  If you're able to share the show with your farmer and producer friends or anyone you  think might be interested it's really appreciated.  Farmerama is made by Jo Barrett, Katie Revel and myself, Abby Rose, this month with help  from Louie Hudson.  
**[0:41:42-0:41:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/51-compost-soil-carbon-vs-soil-health-a-call-to-farm-cereal-and-community-beer#t=0:41:42):**  Community support for the show comes from Hannah Soderlund, Annie Landless, Eliza Jenkins,  Olivia Oldham and Mary Heard.  Our theme music is by Owen Barrett.  Toodle-oo.  