### Farmerama  (2020-21-23)
**[0:00:00-0:00:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to Farmerama.  This month we bring you the first of three special episodes focusing for the most part  on stories from the Oxford Real Farming Conference or ORFC which took place in January.  This year we were delighted to be the ORFC's official media partner.  So fresh from the conference we hear about the role of myth making and storytelling in  
**[0:00:30-0:00:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:00:30):**  building the regenerative farming movement and we learn about a new initiative to put  nutrient density at the heart of good food and farming.  Then we hear from a young fashion designer about her innovative accessory collections  reawakening our connections between fashion and farming.  And we have an urgent call for councils across the UK to recognise the value of real farming.  
**[0:00:57-0:01:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:00:57):**  In a few days time, Trekkadugan Farm in Pembrokeshire will be put up for auction and we'll be hearing  from Gerald Miles about efforts to protect it as a community resource.  As part of this year's ORFC, writer and storyteller Georgia Wingfield-Hayes shared a piece called  The Herdsman.  It tells the true story of Charles Ellett.  
**[0:01:25-0:01:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:01:25):**  He's now a happy herdsman at the ethical dairy but he previously worked at an intensive dairy  farm with 1500 cows where his mental health crashed.  Through Charles' story we learn what cheap food is doing to the land, the animals and  the people involved in its production.  We'll be releasing the full story as a short.  
**[0:01:47-0:01:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:01:47):**  First though, let's hear from Georgia about why storytelling and myth making are crucial  to the regenerative farming movement and why they're so central to what ORFC is all about.  We can tell the big picture story which we can't do with fact.  Fact we have to zone in on specifics.  And then there's the depth.  
**[0:02:13-0:02:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:02:13):**  So if we're disseminating facts we're rarely really touching any emotional notes or you  know the deeper sense senses of who we are as humans whereas with story we can really  speak to those deeper parts.  We have responses in our heart, in our emotion, in our gut.  And I think that's incredibly powerful and it's why storytelling has been the means of  
**[0:02:38-0:02:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:02:38):**  disseminating information through the entirety of human history.  We've sat around fires and told stories.  So it's now like a foreign language that we have to relearn because at conferences like  this we get lots of people standing up and disseminating facts which is wonderful because  we learn loads.  
**[0:02:59-0:03:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:02:59):**  But storytelling it's broader and deeper because the storytelling that's used to sell neocatalyst  ideas and what we might call old wives tales and you know things that you shouldn't go  to bed with wet hair because you'll get pneumonia or do you know what I mean like silly stories  like that that we've believed potentially as a culture and science has disproved.  With that we've thrown the baby out with the bathwater in that we've thrown away this  
**[0:03:38-0:03:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:03:38):**  much deeper relationship through our senses with the world.  We're living in this post-truth age where we've no idea actually when we go on the internet  whether we're reading fact or fiction.  It's becoming more and more difficult and this you know this is a nightmare but it's  actually potentially very exciting because I think it might help cultivate an age where  
**[0:04:08-0:04:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:04:08):**  people are like well actually the only way I really know what's true is if I come back  if I reclaim my autonomy over my senses and over how I interact with the world that there's  a deeper inner knowing.  If we again if we can learn that language that then we can override all of the of everything  that we're being fed you know we were so conditioned to give autonomy to fact to external authority  
**[0:04:44-0:04:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:04:44):**  but a society that does that is infantilizing its people.  I would say that the kind of crux of it all is trust.  It's very very challenging for us to trust ourselves and our inner knowing because everything  in our culture tells us we shouldn't.  And so don't beat yourself up.  
**[0:05:11-0:05:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:05:11):**  It's a journey but experiment with trusting.  Experiment when you have the opportunity when it's like your head says something and your  heart says something else and it's safe to trust your heart.  Trust your heart and see what happens because it's like that is the way that we step by  step bring that autonomy back within ourselves and find our way to a much deeper sense of  
**[0:05:39-0:05:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:05:39):**  who we are which is so much more exciting than the way that culture has us living.  People at a conference like this really are other people at the forefront of understanding  that and rekindling that and rebirthing it if you like.  And it's so important this is so vital this deeper relationship with with the earth with  other beings cultivating humility to realize that we don't have all the answers we can't  
**[0:06:16-0:06:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:06:16):**  possibly have all the answers living systems are incredibly complex.  Science can't understand the totality of that complexity and therefore we have to find other  ways to approach these systems.  We are we are these amazing complex sensory beings who can can read the world on on many  different levels if we if we allow ourselves to and if we if we allow ourselves to relearn  
**[0:06:49-0:06:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:06:49):**  that language.  So for me storytelling a myth really that's where I really get excited about it because  we get down and dirty if you like with who we are who we actually are and who we have  the potential to become which is which is a far greater more exciting being than neo  capitalism would have us believe we are.  
**[0:07:13-0:07:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:07:13):**  I'm a big advocate of beauty as a key part of a positive farming future.  Beauty in the deepest sense of the word.  The Greek root of the word beauty is related to the word for calling.  So beauty in this in this case being something that moves you and calls you into being alive.  When you listen to Charles's story it really brings to life the value of beauty on a farm.  
**[0:07:39-0:07:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:07:39):**  Without it farms may house living creatures but they have no vitality.  Matt Adams is a deep ecologist and Elizabeth Westaway is a public health and nutrition  specialist.  They recently launched an initiative called Growing Real Food for Nutrition or GRIFFIN  for short.  
**[0:07:59-0:08:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:07:59):**  GRIFFIN promotes the importance of growing eating and measuring the quality of nutrient  dense food.  Matt and Elizabeth are officially bringing to the UK the work of Dan Kittredge and the  Bionutrient Food Association who are helping to develop a Bionutrient Meter.  At ORFC they invited growers to bring in their vegetables and do a BRICS test to get a crude  
**[0:08:22-0:08:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:08:22):**  idea of nutrient density in their crops.  We are right at the beginning stages, we need support and we need to find funding to make  it happen.  So the intention behind it is to ask the question what is nutrition because I think it's a deep  deep question and for me as a deep ecologist I'm interested in the world view, a world  
**[0:08:43-0:08:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:08:43):**  view that suggests that actually we're a part of nature but we are living in a world that's  dominated by the view where we try and control nature.  So I am interested in promoting anything that can question our current world view, so we're  questioning this assumption.  So control it seems to me is leading to a decline in the nutritional quality of our  
**[0:09:05-0:09:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:09:05):**  food which is affecting both the health of the planet and human health as well and we  can feel and see that all around.  So growing food for nutrition is about thinking of a different way of our relationship with  the world and with nature and that we are realizing we are a part of nature.  So when you begin measuring food for its nutrient quality you begin to think about what's going  
**[0:09:28-0:09:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:09:28):**  on, you begin to ask that deeper question of what is nutrition and with the BRICS test  it's such a simple simple test that you can, everybody can just squash an apple and with  a few drops look into a refractometer and find out roughly whether that's a poorly grown  apple or a really excellent grown apple.  And from field observation which is growers in the field actually watching what happens  
**[0:09:54-0:09:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:09:54):**  in these situations, if you've got a carrot for example that's in the excellent category  it not only tastes really really brilliant, you get an increased yield, it grows really  well and there's even this claim that there's an absence of pest and disease and the plant  is able, what's happening is that plant is able to communicate with the life in the soil  and it's feeding that life in the soil with these exudates, the carbohydrate that it produces,  
**[0:10:23-0:10:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:10:23):**  it gives up to half of that down to the exudates down to feed the soil microbes.  And in return the microbes are increasing in number so as an organic life form they  are sequestering carbon in order to grow in population in number and with an abundance  of microbes in the ground they're the ones sourcing all the mineral elements that the  plant requires and there's communication going on there so it's a fabulous story.  
**[0:10:52-0:10:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:10:52):**  So the plant is saying to the microbes look you guys wake up and here's some food to help  wake you up, I need a little bit more selenium or molybdenum or some phosphorus and these  microbes are working in harmony with the plants to do that, it's a beautiful symbiotic relationship  and when we allow the plant and the microbes to work together what the result of that is  is nutrient dense food, it's a plant that's well grown and so the BRICS test is a way  
**[0:11:20-0:11:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:11:20):**  of assessing that, it's a crude assessment measuring carbohydrate which relates to photosynthesis  and then moving that on to take it to the next level is the development of the bio-nutrient  meter so it's a scanner that uses spectroscopy that means light reflectance and in order  to calibrate this tool we need to do the laboratory analysis to find out what the nutrients are  for example in a carrot and then relate that to the reflected signal we get back from the  
**[0:11:53-0:11:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:11:53):**  scanner so that when you build out a database with lots and lots of samples you begin to  expose the nutrient density of the food that we're growing and that is revealing already  some interesting results where spinach for example has got 14 times more iron in the  best grown samples than the worst grown samples and that's significant and in carrots they  found 200 times more polyphenols than the worst grown carrot and polyphenols as you  
**[0:12:30-0:12:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:12:30):**  probably know relate to secondary nutrients and secondary nutrients I think is the big  buzz story that's going to come up for nutrition because it relates to the plant's ability  to look after itself in an outdoor setting and so it's this communication constantly  with the microbes on an hourly, two hourly basis whatever asking for certain chemistries  for certain minerals to build it compounds and as we're now knowing what the compounds  
**[0:13:02-0:13:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:13:02):**  the secondary metabolites there are thousands of them just in one carrot alone so it represents  you know an amazing chemical laboratory that's stimulated by life there's two things together  so measuring nutrient density and developing the scanner which would make it easy to do  that will expose the information of what's going on in our food but it'll also become  like a quality standard you can set the bar and say well if we can produce food of this  
**[0:13:34-0:13:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:13:34):**  quality then we know that in order to do that you have to look after the soil and so we're  making healthy soil and also we know that that food is going to make us healthy because  it's now packed full of nutrients grown by nature and I think the real big as I said  the real big thing around secondary nutrients is this range and diversity of secondary metabolites  where I think the key is going to come so we could get potential cheating to show that  
**[0:14:08-0:14:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:14:08):**  hey we've got loads of sugar in this tomato and but we can also then ask the question  with the meter do we have lots of secondary nutrients as well because you can grow your  tomato in a hydroponic environment and it won't it won't need to fend for itself it's  mollycoddled so it's not going to produce all these secondary nutrients so hopefully  the scanner will begin to pick up on these subtle nuances that make all the difference  
**[0:14:39-0:14:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:14:39):**  and and also the the ultimate test will then be to taste it and decide for yourself is  this good or not and there's an irony here I'm going to shoot myself in the foot we don't  need a scanner because we should have the innate ability to taste that food for ourselves  and understand whether it's good or not but we've lost that ability so the benefit I feel  the benefit of the small farmer is that here is a way of testing the quality of food that  
**[0:15:11-0:15:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:15:11):**  would create the level playing field and it's not about certification it's about setting  a quality standard it's about setting a bar and saying this is the quality we'd like and  if you can produce that then we'd like to pay you respectively for that and I have this  little vision now of the future where when the grower is elevated in society and respected  then I know that we'll have we'll have hit a nutrient dense regenerative state there's  
**[0:15:41-0:15:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:15:41):**  been a hundred bio nutrient meters made they've been you know handmade and I have I believe  the one and only bio nutrient meter in the UK so that's why we want to do something good  with it and our intention we need to find a laboratory which we are in negotiation with  that can do the testing and yeah let's go from there.  We've been wanting to share the work of fashion designer Alice Robinson for a few months.  
**[0:16:15-0:16:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:16:15):**  Her pieces beautifully bring farming into the limelight.  Alice grew up in a rural community and so went back to her roots to create two collections  each made solely from one animal using all parts of the animal for the collection not  a scrap wasted.  Alice told us all about it.  
**[0:16:37-0:16:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:16:37):**  I was faced with a challenge when I was doing my masters at the Royal College of Art to  create a collection and leather was sort of thrust upon me as if this was the material  in which you made pieces with which from that point of view I could understand because leather  is an incredible material to withstand many conditions and last a really long time it's  incredibly durable and great natural material to work with.  
**[0:17:02-0:17:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:17:02):**  However being a part of the conversation of what we're choosing to what systems we're  choosing to be a part of food wise I then found that quite difficult to understand what  this material I was being given and where this had came from and what food system it  had been a part of.  For me I was brought up in Shropshire as part of a very farming family.  
**[0:17:23-0:17:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:17:23):**  My father was a vet and was brought up in that rural system of understanding my farmer,  the butchers, the systems in which the animals being bred and the husbandry.  My father was a large animal vet so that was sort of something I just always been aware  of and respectful of.  I've now created two collections both of which are the tag numbers of those animals.  
**[0:17:50-0:17:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:17:50):**  So I have 11458 which is a sheep, New Zealand Texel ram crushed with a Welsh mule and Bullock  374 which is a Longhorn limousine cross.  Both are from my home county and farmers which I have known and visited and understand their  practices.  The sheep collection I created 11458 I spun the wool and tanned the hide and so the whole  
**[0:18:23-0:18:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:18:23):**  collection sits within one box.  So the size of that box is indicative of the animal which has created the collection.  So there is a jumper, a pair of gloves, a bag, a pair of shoes, a little card wallet,  all of the hardware, other bones sort of dipped in silver and engraved and then a perfume  which is based on the trees and plants and time of year in which the animal came from  
**[0:18:49-0:18:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:18:49):**  that field.  As a designer only working with what I've been left with, basically trying to have design  which is mindful and not wasteful working with what is there rather than creating more  problems.  I then served 350 burgers of sheep 11458 at the launch of the collection.  
**[0:19:08-0:19:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:19:08):**  So for me it was sort of trying to then have that connection back, have that conversation  that there is, it's not too far apart from what you're holding to what you're putting  in your mouth and that the fashion industry has a huge role to play in educating people  and to widening the conversation from not just going oh this isn't an animal product  therefore it's eco because it's not come from a food industry.  
**[0:19:40-0:19:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:19:40):**  So following on from that collection we're curating an exhibition called Food Bigger  Than the Plate which was on at the Victoria and Albert Museum and they asked if they could  exhibit it but I had already been speaking to my local farmer who's a guy called Malcolm  Adams and has the most beautiful farm called Charity Farm.  And so the connection to working with that farmer and that land and that community was  
**[0:20:03-0:20:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:20:03):**  something that was really important to me.  I then took Bullock 374 through the entire process, went to the abattoir, took the hideaway,  tanned the hide, both hair on and hair off and then had the split.  So the split is when you slice through the thickness of leather and that drop you then  buff up and that's why you have suede.  
**[0:20:25-0:20:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:20:25):**  So it was important for me to be able to have the hair on in this collection which really  showed what breed the animal was.  So long horned limousine cross meant he was like brindled and it was incredibly beautiful  and also really emotive which I think is also key to creating the work is that the preciousness  of these items and this throwaway culture if you're able to sort of engage someone that  
**[0:20:56-0:21:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:20:56):**  isn't just the spring, summer 16 that there is something that to be cherished.  I then used the horns of Bullock 374 to make the buttons and the bones to make buttons  and the closures and then worked with a perfume maker in Cornwall to create a perfume which  was based on the field in which Bullock 374 came from.  I through working this way had the opportunity to know which tannery I was working with to  
**[0:21:28-0:21:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:21:28):**  understand how the water filtration systems worked, where was every single element of  waste from this one animal going and documenting it throughout because as a designer as well  it's a huge lesson to learn and you know you can then make certain design choices or  just system choices that you know it's so useful to be able to design out problems.  There's a statistic that two thirds of a hide is wasted in the production of one accessory  
**[0:22:02-0:22:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:22:02):**  because leather is an animal byproduct so there are bits that are stretchy or the tummy  is you know not the best place to cut from but it's all relevant for different items  so for me I was I decided that I would design and make the entire collection at the same  time so that I could problem solve and repurpose all of these this design to fit the purpose  of each item.  
**[0:22:31-0:22:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:22:31):**  So everything is designed as long and as wide and and specifically to fit fit the hide that  then means that when the collection all sits together it has this image of exactly what  has gone into creating this item.  I then spent nine and a half hours with a butcher which was such an experience who knew  it took nine and a half hours to butcher an entire bullock.  
**[0:23:02-0:23:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:23:02):**  Well it does and it's really cold and it was great it was such an informative day.  I worked with my local butcher who was absolutely brilliant I had spreadsheets and and all this  labeling to make sure that every cut I chose to make was for a different purpose so I sold  the meat locally to like the local community as much as how Malcolm Adams the farmer would  have.  
**[0:23:34-0:23:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:23:34):**  I then also did dinners that were sort of centered around the whole conversation of  of the project so for the closing of the exhibition at the Victoria Albert Museum I did a dinner  for 70 people and it was three courses of Bullock 374.  I had the leather collection present and it was just really trying to bring back this  connection between food and what we're wearing and how the two industries have just this  
**[0:24:07-0:24:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:24:07):**  huge overlap.  I then also got to do the same style of dinner but up north with the guys from the abattoir  and the butcher and the local farmer and our community and we had big chuck pies and pints  and it was just brilliant but it was just amazing how far apart those two sort of worlds  were so yeah that was that was really great.  
**[0:24:32-0:24:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:24:32):**  There's a growing Fibre Shed movement here in the UK linking farmers, processors and  fashion designers.  We're helping to get Fibre Shed UK started so if you're interested in being involved  then do follow Fibre Shed UK on Instagram or you can tune into future Farmerama episodes  and we'll be keeping you in the loop.  
**[0:24:58-0:25:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:24:58):**  Finally we wanted to share the story of Trega Dugan Farm in Pembrokeshire, South West Wales.  Its history goes back to the 11th century and it's been a council farm for nearly a  hundred years.  Now though the council has decided to sell it off.  A group from the local community including farmer Gerald Miles is fighting to buy Trega  
**[0:25:19-0:25:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:25:19):**  Dugan and turn it into a community farm but their attempts have so far been thwarted despite  the fact that they've met all of the council's demands.  The council says it's following due process and it's announced that the farm will be put  back up for auction on the 4th of March.  Sam Ruddock is one of the backers of the Save Trega Dugan Farm campaign.  
**[0:25:43-0:25:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:25:43):**  She told us the community are appealing to other potential buyers to step back and allow  the community to fulfill the dreams for themselves and all who live there.  Sam also highlighted that this is part of a larger concern as more and more county farms  come up for sale.  As she put it, how can we repurpose them and get them to be part of the movement for social  
**[0:26:06-0:26:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:26:06):**  justice, food justice and land justice in the UK.  Here's Gerald to tell us more about the fight for Trega Dugan Farm.  We have over 40 council farms being sold all over Wales and the one locally to us which  is near the village of Soliver is now going to be sold.  It was my cousin's husband's farm and he farmed it all his life over 60 years.  
**[0:26:41-0:26:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:26:41):**  The council are selling this off to get more money to invest into the social care and what  they actually are responsible for.  These farms are more than an asset in monetary terms.  It's the opportunity for young people to start farming.  These were bought after the First World War as an opportunity for young people that came  
**[0:27:08-0:27:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:27:08):**  from the war to start farming and this is what it should be kept at.  At the moment now with the council selling it, they're denying us the opportunity of  turning it into a community farm which would be a place for the community to enjoy it,  to be rewarded in being there, in learning how to grow vegetables.  It can be such a gem to the well-being of the community and it would empower the community  
**[0:27:46-0:27:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:27:46):**  because it would be their farm, a place they could care for, it could be shared in so many  ways, creating small enterprises like making cheese, preserves, having a small butchery  there, different crafts, having children there to see how vegetables are grown, employing  young people on the place and making it a vibrant local enterprise involving the people  and the farm together.  
**[0:28:23-0:28:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:28:23):**  The point is it's a community farm, it's our farm anyway.  The council should by right give it to us because we're going to do a job they should  be doing.  When we approached the council about this in the first place, we invited them to be  part of it but at the present we're getting no support from the council.  
**[0:28:51-0:28:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:28:51):**  In the first place they thought we were dreaming in our approach of creating a community farm  that would benefit the community and benefiting young people and elderly people and children  in the area.  They thought we were imagining all this, they wanted us to give a 50,000 deposit within  seven days.  
**[0:29:18-0:29:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:29:18):**  They put that as a challenge to us but we raised it and when we brought the money to  the council office they didn't know what to do, they said we don't need it.  Then they took it off auction but still had bids in.  We had a funder to support us and we were the highest bidder and we bought it.  The funder at the time withdrew because the council wanted to put place an overage on  
**[0:29:51-0:29:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:29:51):**  the farm.  An overage is a legislation, a sort of tax, whatever you invest into this and improve  the buildings on this farm.  It ranges over 25 years.  The increase in value, we will have to pay 30% of that increase of value to the council.  
**[0:30:16-0:30:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:30:16):**  At that time we bought it we were disputing this.  They wouldn't manoeuvre at all or be helpful about this so our funders pulled out of it.  Then we sent an email to the council requesting a meeting.  The next email we had in return, the council stated that it's going back on auction and  if we wanted to place a bid in we had four days to do it.  
**[0:30:44-0:30:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:30:44):**  We did that and we managed to actually accomplish to win the bid on the second round and we  had a funder to cover this.  At this moment in time now we are faced with a decision because the council have just told  us that they're guzzompting us.  They've got another higher bidder to come in for the farm because of a report in the  
**[0:31:12-0:31:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:31:12):**  local paper that stated the price that was paid for the farm.  But that report was of the previous, the first time bidding round.  So this is what we're faced with.  We're faced with a council that are employed by us.  They're supposed to work for us and help us.  
**[0:31:40-0:31:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:31:40):**  Their role should be to help us create a community farm.  Not to really try to manipulate to get the best price out of it.  This is a lovely farm.  It was built back in the 14th century.  Two families lived there and farmed there.  
**[0:32:01-0:32:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:32:01):**  Instead it's going to be sold as an asset and it's going to be turned into another holiday  complex.  People will stay there and not really care for the buildings, for what they are and what  they were meant to be.  They've taken 70 acres away from the farm so it isn't holding as it was anymore.  
**[0:32:23-0:32:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:32:23):**  They've rented that to another bigger farm.  They've left this holding farm with only 11 acres.  It's left to be developed and turned into a sort of housing holiday complex.  We're in the situation now where we're going to get as much media coverage to get media  pressure as well.  
**[0:32:49-0:32:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:32:49):**  We're going to try to get political support from the Welsh Assembly because it's more  than our local farm.  It's all council farms in Wales.  It's all council farms all over the UK.  And if you're talking about climate change and you're concerned about food security and  
**[0:33:12-0:33:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:33:12):**  you're concerned about community, it's common sense that we should invest in the community.  There was a young friend of mine who I was talking to last night and their farm where  he's working is for sale and his nine-year-old son works with him growing the vegetables.  They were talking about this and the son had heard them and this nine-year-old boy said,  what right have we got to own the soil when we're living here?  
**[0:33:52-0:33:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:33:52):**  We don't cherish it.  It's an asset instead of without it we won't have food.  Farmarama is made by Jo Barrett, Abby Rose and me, Katie Revel.  In this episode there were interviews by Darla Eno and editing by Louis Hudson.  Community support is provided by Hannah Sutherland, Fran Bailey, Annie Landless, Eliza Jenkins  
**[0:34:23-0:34:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:34:23):**  and Olivia Oldham.  Our theme music is by Owen Barrett.  We also heard some music recorded at this year's ORFC from a session led by Robin Gray  at St Aldake's Church.  Toodle-loo!  
**[0:34:54-0:35:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/53-storytelling-nutrient-density-fashion-and-community-farms#t=0:34:54):** 'm  