---
title: 54: Land reform, stewardship, community ownership and land justice
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.

---

### Farmerama  (2020-03-29)  
### Author(s): Farmerama  

**[0:00:00-0:00:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:00:00):**  Welcome to episode 54 of Farmerama.  We're recording this on the 25th of March. Here in the UK, the coronavirus outbreak has  upended supermarket supply chains. And around the world, farmers are finding themselves  
**[0:00:23-0:00:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:00:23):**  forced to adjust to a rapidly changing marketplace and a lot of uncertainty. With drastic measures  now in place to control the pandemic, it already feels like a kind of new normal is forming.  And that people who are used to taking our food systems for granted are starting to realize how  
**[0:00:40-0:00:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:00:40):**  fragile they can actually be. It's a difficult and distressing time for everyone. And our thoughts  are with all of you. If there's anything we at Farmerama can do to help you, then please do let  us know. At the same time, we're cautiously hopeful that this experience will highlight  
**[0:00:58-0:01:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:00:58):**  just how vital farming and farmers are to everyone's lives. For now, we're not out in  the fields reporting, but we do have a lot of interviews stashed away in the hopper.  So we'll still be bringing you stories from the front line of regenerative farming.  
**[0:01:15-0:01:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:01:15):**  The farming community is incredibly resilient. And around the world, we've seen many fantastic  examples of farmers and growers coming together with the food and hospitality industry, as well  as the charitable sector, to create and strengthen local supply chains and ensure no one goes without  
**[0:01:32-0:01:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:01:32):**  food. Here are just a few we've got in touch in the last few days. Hello, Farmerama listeners.  This is Gala. I work at Plour Hatch Farm on the East Sussex, West Sussex border. Hello, it's Fred  from Gothany Farm. It's a beautiful sunny morning in Somerset. My name is Monica Acrest and we farm  
**[0:01:51-0:01:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:01:51):**  in the East Sussex. The sun is shining, the ground is beginning to dry up. I've got that kind of  real sense that spring's in the air now. Peas have stopped rooting. They're much, much more grazing  now and before long we'll be putting them back on the herbal lace. That is my absolute favourite time  
**[0:02:08-0:02:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:02:08):**  of the year. Something to look forward to. And the fields are finally starting to dry out, which means  we might be able to get some crops in. We didn't manage to get our autumn crops in.  And we're about to head into lambing. Last week or so's flown by, I guess, since I heard the restaurants  
**[0:02:24-0:02:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:02:24):**  in London would be shutting their doors. And initially, I guess, fairly selfish stresses about  flows of cash and pigs. On the shop side, on the selling side, it's all been really, really hectic.  And having to adapt very fast to this new place we find ourselves in. You know, we've been absolutely  
**[0:02:43-0:02:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:02:43):**  at capacity just trying to serve people and keep the shelves stocked. We need to figure out how we can  best serve our community, whilst being realistic about it. I think farmers are a fairly sensible  breed anyway. When you're out on your farm interacting with animals rather than humans,  
**[0:03:02-0:03:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:03:02):**  you're not quite the same risk as if you're travelling on the underground in London, are you?  So it's maybe an advantage to be part of a rural community. We need to make sure, first and foremost,  that our staff are healthy so that they continue to work. Otherwise, nobody's getting any food.  
**[0:03:24-0:03:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:03:24):**  Although the farming calendar waits for no one, let's all take these social distancing measures seriously.  Hello!  So we can protect our loved ones and get back to normal as quickly as possible.  
**[0:03:40-0:03:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:03:40):**  What I find extraordinary is how the value of food has changed overnight.  You know, people are suddenly desperate to have their eggs. And yeah, we keep trying to sort of  impress upon our customers that the cows are milked every day and the chickens lay eggs every day.  
**[0:03:58-0:04:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:03:58):**  And they're not going to stop. Already people are beginning to rally around. The bakeries that we  usually supply grain to, like Landrace in Bath, Rye Bakery in Frome, Coombshead Farm, Farrow in Bristol,  they've all been so quick to fill their customers' baskets with all manner of locally farmed goodies.  
**[0:04:15-0:04:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:04:15):**  We're very lucky that this crisis is hitting now and we're going into the summer and there's going  to be so many lovely things to eat. And I guess that's the strength of these small supply chains.  And manned by friendships and we're all in it together, we've got each other's interests so  
**[0:04:31-0:04:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:04:31):**  close to our hearts. And we're agile. We're able to adapt quickly.  In a way to be hit with this realisation that supermarkets aren't the be-all and end-all is good for us smaller farmers.  People realise that localised food systems are more resilient, I suppose, in these strange times.  
**[0:04:55-0:05:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:04:55):**  And the coming days and weeks will give me and my customers more space to be creative and innovative  and get our food out there in new ways.  I think we're all very grateful here to have the rhythm of the farm and all the day-to-day  
**[0:05:13-0:05:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:05:13):**  things we have to do to look after the animals and the plants and soil, of course.  The reassuring routines of farm work and life have been the tonic.  Yeah, I mean, the sun's shining. I think a lot of us could cry with gratitude that the sun is shining  
**[0:05:30-0:05:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:05:30):**  because it was a really, really challenging winter.  The sun's shining. Carry on farming.  This is our second episode digging deeper into stories from the Oxford Real Farming Conference,  
**[0:05:52-0:05:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:05:52):**  where we were the official media partners.  This month, we're exploring what it means to own or to steward land as part of a regenerative farming future.  We're fascinated and encouraged by the many different ways people are approaching this issue.  
**[0:06:06-0:06:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:06:06):**  And at the end of the show, we'll share an exciting new opportunity for you to get involved in a shared land ownership model.  Land reform is an emotive subject, but in the last few years there seems to have been more and more  talk about how we might innovate.  
**[0:06:24-0:06:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:06:24):**  In the farming community, we all know that land justice underpins everything.  Those who have land wield more power and of course also have more responsibility.  Neither feels quite right on either side.  
**[0:06:38-0:06:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:06:38):**  We're going to hear from current and aspiring land stewards about their approaches to land reform.  First, here's Molly Scott Cato.  Until recently, Molly was a Green MEP for South East England.  
**[0:06:51-0:06:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:06:51):**  You might have seen her rather tearful goodbye to the EU when the UK left at the start of this year.  When we spoke to Molly, she'd just come out of a session with other political parties.  They were discussing how they might approach land reform in a way that both ensures the land is well cared for  
**[0:07:07-0:07:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:07:07):**  and addresses long-standing injustices around its ownership.  As a Green, I think of land as a commonwealth and I don't think it's appropriate really for anybody to own land  rather than have certain rights over land for a certain time.  
**[0:07:23-0:07:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:07:23):**  And particularly it's not right that we have vast amounts of our land controlled by private estates.  Really an aristocratic land regime and that's keeping a lot of people out of farming  who could otherwise gain access to that land.  
**[0:07:36-0:07:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:07:36):**  So it's a sort of massive source of injustice that we tend to take for granted.  Land is a common treasury and that's an old idea.  And we've challenged the enclosures that happened in the 16th century onwards  
**[0:07:49-0:07:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:07:49):**  whereby the right that everybody has to grow food and to graze animals on land  was sort of taken away and major and large estates were created.  Vast swathes of our countryside has just been passed down from generation to generation of aristocratic families.  
**[0:08:05-0:08:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:08:05):**  And now we also see people who've made wealth in their own lifetimes whether through banking or,  I mean, James Dyson's the most notorious example,  those people put their money into land so that they can then pass it on tax-free to their descendants.  
**[0:08:18-0:08:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:08:18):**  So we're seeing, you know, long-term concentration of land for perhaps a thousand years  but also now more land being taken up and concentrated.  And then people who want to actually farm that land and produce food for us all,  
**[0:08:31-0:08:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:08:31):**  they now have to pay rent to people who are not paying tax.  So the whole kind of economics of land is skewed in favour of a small number of people.  These have seemed like radical ideas but they've been radical ideas that have always been part of our  
**[0:08:44-0:08:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:08:44):**  intellectual discussion and our political discussion and I think it's really good to see them being revived.  And I think the reason that's happening is that with climate change  we know that the most important role that land can play is as a carbon sink  
**[0:08:57-0:09:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:08:57):**  and we need to find ways of making sure that happens whatever the individual landowner might think.  And so it kind of revives that suggestion that we need to have more of a say as the public  over how land is used and also have a land reform so more people have access to land.  
**[0:09:23-0:09:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:09:23):**  Ninian Stewart is co-founder of the Centre for Stewardship  and comes from a very long line of landowners in Scotland.  There have been significant land reforms this century in Scotland  
**[0:09:34-0:09:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:09:34):**  including the introduction of Right to Rome but Scotland also has very large swathes of land  owned by a small number of individuals. Ninian is one of a number of people  looking to move the idea of ownership towards one of stewardship.  
**[0:09:50-0:09:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:09:50):**  By chance at Falkland we are living and working in what was an ancient seat of the Stewart kings  for 200 years and the Stewart kings before they became kings and queens were in fact stewards.  So the notion and the word stewardship is an Anglo-Saxon word which originally meant  
**[0:10:13-0:10:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:10:13):**  kind of keeper of the hall but in a sense it was the hall at the heart of a community  and stewardship has been moved to being I suppose the idea of looking after things for others  and for the long term. The farm at Falkland has been in Ninian's family for hundreds of years  
**[0:10:31-0:10:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:10:31):**  but ever since he took it over Ninian hasn't quite managed to wrap his head around the idea of  owning land. As a teenager my dad had been I suppose what you would call in Scotland a benevolent  layered and I kind of thought I don't know if I want to be you know just didn't feel right.  
**[0:10:47-0:10:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:10:47):**  I've struggled for a long time as to how can you own land, how can you own a hill,  how can you own a forest you know it's a funny concept that we've come up with.  So I've been working with my two children I didn't want to disinherit my children without them being  
**[0:11:03-0:11:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:11:03):**  involved in that so between the three of us we absolutely consciously want to move it on  into a different form of ownership. So at the moment we're exploring what that wider sense  of ownership might look like and I suppose over the last probably gosh it's probably the  
**[0:11:19-0:11:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:11:19):**  charitable trust was set up 25 years ago. We had initially entered into a lease on the estate with  a guy called Bruce Bennett who initially took on two acres of land and started a small holding.  He now has 20 acres of land and employs 30 people and has a farm shop and a cafe and yeah the first  
**[0:11:42-0:11:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:11:42):**  organic farm cafe in Scotland. About five and a half years ago we set up a new farmer scheme when  the first publicity went out we had about 24 people in the room who wanted to do that.  And in practice four people came on board pretty quickly in fact there happened to be two couples  
**[0:11:59-0:12:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:11:59):**  and there is now a third unit so people who have up to two hectares of land.  So one is called Falkland Kitchen Farm Nat and Brydie and what they do is they grow vegetables  but they also Nat is also a cook and so they kind of add value by also doing kind of catering  
**[0:12:18-0:12:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:12:18):**  and all of that. And the other one Medusweet Organics they do a range of vegetables but also  herbs and the initiator the sort of co-founder of that Rosie is a herbalist. So in a sense they're  still there five years on and we've now entered into a second five years with both of those  
**[0:12:40-0:12:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:12:40):**  entities and that's been really exciting it's kind of been just lovely what happens when you open  the gate to people to be able to kind of come in and give them enough space to take ownership really.  But the challenge now is to say and how can we really long term sustain that and what does that  
**[0:12:58-0:13:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:12:58):**  mean how does how to widen that circle of not just widening the circle of stewardship but also widening  the circle of ownership. Partly when you're considering of moving on the ownership there's  something about how much of a vision you can bring to it and how much you need to enable and allow  
**[0:13:15-0:13:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:13:15):**  that vision to evolve. But I think we've been working for a number of years with a number of  stakeholders around the estate as to what it might look like. So I think in some ways the estate is  moving in a direction where it's going to be quite diverse. We've been focusing not just on farming  
**[0:13:31-0:13:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:13:31):**  but also on forestry so we have a thousand acres of forest within a four thousand acre estate.  We are doing a lot of things so on the farm for instance we have a wood miser a mobile sawmill  so we kind of use that for doing some fencing but also for building huts and all of those things.  
**[0:13:50-0:13:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:13:50):**  So there's that layer. There is horticultural growing we have some land which is good enough  for horticultural growing. A lot of the land is hill land and not that great and so we have  a beef herd we have Aberdeen Angus and Belted Galloways and so we've been developing those  
**[0:14:08-0:14:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:14:08):**  breeds and to a point where yeah we can kind of develop and sell food for people. And I think what  we don't quite know is for instance beyond the new farmers as they were and who will have kind of  had 10-year leases is where we go with that. So I think at the moment one of the things we are  
**[0:14:28-0:14:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:14:28):**  looking at is for instance joint ventures. Sometimes it makes sense that for instance  the home farm might be able to get more kids so then can you do joint ventures with different  people who come in and do different things. I think what was coming up yesterday what I do  
**[0:14:42-0:14:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:14:42):**  think is valid and needed is how when you're trying to go a little bit against the tide try to  go in a different way where can you get support to do that because I suppose from where I am there's  been a real there's a need for change as we make these changes. For me I think there's probably a  
**[0:15:02-0:15:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:15:02):**  need for some kind of peer support and you know I think in Scotland Scottish Land Commission have  been very helpful in advisory and you know there are bodies who can offer you that support if you're  trying to take things in a slightly different way.  
**[0:15:15-0:15:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:15:15):**  Sebastian Parsons of the Stockwood Community Benefits Society is also a landowner doing things  differently. He's been working with a number of organisations to take his own family farm into  community ownership in a way that's working for both his family and for the farm's new investors.  
**[0:15:32-0:15:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:15:32):**  So my story goes back 35 years. My grandfather was selling his farm. He had my mum and then three  sons and he'd offered each son a partnership and he hadn't got on with them and bought a farm.  So he had a very good relationship with his family and he was very good at it. He was very  
**[0:15:57-0:16:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:15:57):**  good at it and he'd offered each son a partnership and he hadn't got on with them and bought them out.  It never occurred to him that my mum was the farmer. Anyway after he bought the last one out  he was old enough to retire and he said since none of you are going to take it on I'm going to sell  
**[0:16:12-0:16:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:16:12):**  it but you've got a chance now to put something to me and they didn't manage to put something  together. I think the siblings would have done but not with the partners taken into account.  The land was worth so much money and everybody had different plans and different ideas and  
**[0:16:31-0:16:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:16:31):**  different visions and they couldn't agree. It was one of the first two biodynamic farms in the UK  and there was when my grandfather said he was going to sell it there was a big fundraising  campaign and they raised over 400,000 pounds to buy it and in fact it was sold to an oil magnet  
**[0:16:50-0:16:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:16:50):**  for 650. But the fact that there was such an effort to raise money to save it signaled to me  that it was an important farm and that something really awful had happened when it was sold.  My sisters and I didn't talk about it but when we grew up we all carried the same sadness  
**[0:17:10-0:17:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:17:10):**  and we ended up in business together and we ended up being successful and what we did with our  success if you like was we bought a farm. What we realized was we'd bought a farm so we sort of like  retrieved the balance you know there was another biodynamic farm in the world now but what would  
**[0:17:29-0:17:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:17:29):**  happen to it? Why wouldn't the same thing happen? Why wouldn't we fall out and if we didn't fall out  why wouldn't our kids fall out? And we basically we hatched this plan to put the farm into a  community trust and to be the farmers as tenants so as long as we wanted to be the farmers we would be  
**[0:17:52-0:17:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:17:52):**  and if we didn't want to be the farmers we just walked away the trust would handle it we wouldn't  have to have a row. So there's a farm business which my family still owns and a farm that my  family still runs owned by 400 people who have bought shares because they believe in what we're  
**[0:18:10-0:18:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:18:10):**  doing they want us to do it. It's something that people get more than just money out of  and from our perspective we are still a family farm and we've just got a lot more people around  us who are interested so it's we think of it as a warmth body you know it's like the community that  
**[0:18:32-0:18:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:18:32):**  supports us. This question about power and land and autonomy and so on is very difficult because  farmers are very autonomous you know they're their own men or their own women they walk about  in their on their own kingdom but with that ownership comes this huge asset value which  
**[0:18:53-0:18:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:18:53):**  makes everything go twisted and wrong so as a family what we had to decide was what's our most  important thing and our most important thing is that we can farm you know that the land is respected  that the land carries on and nobody's going to chew it up and change it you know and that river  
**[0:19:11-0:19:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:19:11):**  is going to babble through this land unpoisoned by our land forever you know the kingfisher isn't  going to be driven off the land we're going to have this ecosystem it belongs to this land  nobody's going to take it away from the land so all of these things are important to us  
**[0:19:27-0:19:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:19:27):**  so a tenancy means that the owners of the land don't control the farming  the farming is controlled by the farmer that's the autonomy we need we need to be allowed to farm  the autonomy that we don't need is we don't need to be able to sell it  
**[0:19:46-0:19:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:19:46):**  and we don't need to be able to build houses on it what we need is to have land that we look after  that we bring our children up on that we farm  by creating different models of land ownership we've got an opportunity to address historical  
**[0:20:01-0:20:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:20:01):**  and ongoing injustices and to make land ownership and stewardship serve all communities  hi i'm ola i'm co-founder of lion land in our names and i'm leah penniman founding co-director  of soul fire farm in new york in united states leah is a co-founder of the lion land in our  
**[0:20:25-0:20:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:20:25):**  names leah's been on the show a few times she's doing important work to tackle racism and injustice  in the food system over in the united states there are very few black farmers and rural landowners  in britain ola is part of a group called lion or land in our name who are working to change this  
**[0:20:44-0:20:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:20:44):**  listen back to episode 52 to hear our interview with fellow lion co-founder jessina callous to  talk about their work inspired by experiences as a landowner in rural england and southwestern  nigeria ola's work actively encourages people to think about their relationship to the land  
**[0:21:03-0:21:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:21:03):**  in radical and imaginative ways leah and ola are in conversation here sharing their thoughts on  land justice and the future of land ownership in the uk and beyond my understanding is that the  first big spike in co2 was in the 1800s when colonizers plowed the great plains and released  
**[0:21:25-0:21:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:21:25):**  half of the carbon from the soil into the atmosphere you know a couple generations before  the industrial revolution put that next big spike and so if we were to actually convert like all of  the lands that are currently cultivated into afro-indigenous farming practices if we you know  
**[0:21:42-0:21:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:21:42):**  land in permanent silvopasture do perennial rich polyculture agriculture make african dark earth  and vermi compost like we've been taught terracing all of those technologies which have existed for  thousands of years and have been continued to be approved upon we actually can sequester the carbon  
**[0:22:00-0:22:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:22:00):**  that we need and restore the atmosphere to health the angle at which i come out from is the work  that we're doing is seeking to restore those practices that leah's talked about in terms of  looking at engaging with the land in a new and different way in ways that do not degrade the  
**[0:22:16-0:22:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:22:16):**  land but in terms of reverence for the land and in reverence we we we take care and we  hold it dear to us and widely climate justice could start to consider these sort of things  like the wider dynamics of like our society so not just in terms of the things that we identify  
**[0:22:36-0:22:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:22:36):**  as scientific issues but also you know the racial element and like the politics and the gender the  redistribution of of land from the commons to the wealthy i think there's a social element that we  have to consider of like why is it that these dynamics are so such that we're in a crisis  
**[0:22:54-0:23:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:22:54):**  the thing with british colonialism is like it was very insidiously violent in the sense that  it didn't occur on this land like we don't have necessarily a direct claim my great great great  grandfather farmed here but the disruption that occurred in the land that we do come from  
**[0:23:12-0:23:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:23:12):**  therefore gives me that right to this land we didn't come here by mistake we were forced here  by a displacement that sort of the angle which we now start to look at are sort of right here  like this is our home many of us can't go back to places that we've been and i think the ancestry  
**[0:23:32-0:23:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:23:32):**  or the roots begins now obviously it's very different in the united states because a lot  of the bloodshed happened right there you know and the you know the bodies of our ancestors  came from nigeria and from ghana togo and benin and came there and so i can trace a lineage back  
**[0:23:48-0:23:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:23:48):**  and i know that my grandmother brownlee mccullough was the last to be able to farm the land in rock  hill south carolina because of air property exploitation and so i can trace back that land  loss and so there's also there's a a source of belonging in that but also the pain is right in  
**[0:24:06-0:24:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:24:06):**  front of us and so i think the particular way that trauma impacts the black community in the united  states is very related to to that recent story like my grandmother my great grandmother was  a sharecropper was picking cotton or was you know beats in at this tree and so that um  
**[0:24:22-0:24:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:24:22):**  um egophobia and that um sense that the land really was the criminal in some way is is quite  clear and present in the black community you know people that feel a certain stigma with the land  if we're trying to introduce them back to the land it's like we need to do in ways that are  
**[0:24:40-0:24:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:24:40):**  culturally relevant in ways that remind them of a sense of remind them of a time that they  felt happy so for instance if they as a kid used to farm somewhere in nigeria you know they've long  been removed from that and there's a lot of trauma of i don't want to get my hands dirty  
**[0:24:55-0:25:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:24:55):**  that's poor people's work i don't want to do that etc what are the ways in which we can then you  know reconnect them with that and there's like there's song song is a very useful way of doing  and i think also connecting people to the foods that they eat culturally and that's just one way  
**[0:25:10-0:25:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:25:10):**  one of many ways which we can end stigma and really like get people to just open themselves  up to the land there is a clamoring to come back to the land which surprised even me for those who  do have resistance which is totally understandable it's usually one of two things that work like one  
**[0:25:26-0:25:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:25:26):**  is being exposed to a different narrative about our connection to land not being circumscribed  by slavery but really be extending thousands of years you know before that and all the contributions  and this pride that can come but then also for a lot of young people there's this like almost  
**[0:25:42-0:25:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:25:42):**  spiteful resistance when they realize that corporations are just out to kill them by pumping  their bodies full of these you know corporatized highly processed foods that sense of so that  survival instinct comes up and they're like i'm not going to let them destroy my life they've  
**[0:25:58-0:26:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:25:58):**  already you know taken all these things from me i'm not going to let them take my life and so we  need to reclaim our connection to food i will say that the land does most of the work you know if we  can get folks to a place where they're over the hump of fear and they get to make that introduction  
**[0:26:11-0:26:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:26:11):**  to the land as soon as the barefeet her hands touch the earth she like claims her children home  but honestly like folks want it it's just that the resources aren't always there you know at oofc lion  held their first caucus the activity we did we basically asked people in the room to think about  
**[0:26:27-0:26:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:26:27):**  the resources that they could possibly offer to aspiring land stewards in people of color in the  uk um also what kind of legacy do they want to leave and in terms of succession it was powerful  because i think we have inside of us this this desire to give but not until we're asked but there  
**[0:26:46-0:26:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:26:46):**  was this buzz at the end and i think people felt inspired and people felt like they did come and  you know make a difference or something or they did show up in some way i felt inspired in many  ways by the conversation i think most notably uh you know this conference was open by reminding us  
**[0:27:04-0:27:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:27:04):**  that the empire wins by making us feel that we're alone and that's certainly the case in the uk with  black farmers and farmers of color who you can probably count you know on the official record on  two hands if that right so it was really in maybe less right so it was really inspiring to me i feel  
**[0:27:20-0:27:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:27:20):**  like in that room we were witnessing part of the birth of a movement i feel like this moment i'm  getting to witness like the birth of the uk black and brown farming movement um which is very exciting  so  
**[0:27:38-0:27:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:27:38):**  if you want to find out more about land reform in the uk then we recommend checking out the land  justice network there's no doubt that conversations around land can often be highly emotive but we  recognize that it's vital to have them if we want to build a food and farming system that's fit for  
**[0:27:54-0:27:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:27:54):**  all  so  hello abby here just wanted to add a little message at the end of the show if you want to  
**[0:28:08-0:28:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:28:08):**  be actively involved in a shared land ownership model then there's a great opportunity to become  an investor member of the ecological land co-op or elc right now the elc purchased plots of land  around the uk and then make them available for small low impact ecological farmers they already  
**[0:28:28-0:28:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:28:28):**  have a number of sites and they're currently looking to raise 400 000 pounds with their new  community share investment offer that will allow them to double their number of sites  you can invest anything from 500 pounds upwards if you do have the money available then it is a  
**[0:28:47-0:28:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:28:47):**  brilliant way to be part of transforming the uk farming landscape to more ecological farming  whether you farm or not and we understand not everyone has that kind of money available and so  there's many other ways to get involved i was able to become an investor member in the last round  
**[0:29:04-0:29:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:29:04):**  and feel really proud to be part of this amazing initiative and to be supporting the farmers who  are on the different plots currently to find out more head to the ecological land co-op website  or message us on social and we can help answer any questions the investment offer closes in a few  
**[0:29:21-0:29:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:29:21):**  weeks so check it out sooner rather than later if you are interested  this episode of farmerama was written and edited by susie mccarthy and hannah sodaland  with the usual suspects abby rose katie revel who's been presenting with me jovarratt  
**[0:29:41-0:29:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:29:41):**  jovarratt this episode featured interviews recorded by darla ino and kathy sin german  at the oxford real farming conference 2020 community support for farmerama is provided by  hannah sodaland fran bailey annie landless eliza jenkins and olivia oldham our theme music is by  
**[0:30:03-0:30:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/54-land-reform-stewardship-community-ownership-and-land-justice#t=0:30:03):**  owen barrett we are extremely grateful to our patreon supporters who help us make the show  if you'd like to support farmerama visit patreon.com forward slash farmerama  