---
title: 55 Enlightened Agriculture Sustainable Economies And Regenerative Businesses
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### Farmerama  (2020-04-26)  
### Author(s): Farmerama  

**[0:00:00-0:00:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:00:00):**  Welcome to Farmer Armour. As we hit the hungry gap, we know many of the farmers and growers  out there are under more pressure than ever to provide food for your local communities  and to rapidly find new markets for your produce, all whilst being concerned with the health  
**[0:00:17-0:00:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:00:17):**  of those around you. So we wanted to take a moment to say, as ever, we and so many others  are grateful for the work you do. Sowing seeds, nurturing the soil, caring for animals and  managing the land so that everyone can eat. Thank you. Farmer Armour is made for you.  
**[0:00:38-0:00:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:00:38):**  This month we bring you the final deep dive episode from a session at the Oxford Real  Farming Conference, which took place in January. This year we were delighted to be ROFC's  official media partner.  
**[0:00:53-0:01:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:00:53):**  With life as we know it having ground to a halt, many of us are shell shocked. Food,  health and the wellbeing of the people we love, work with and live alongside have become  our top priorities. It's as if we always knew deep down these are the most important  
**[0:01:10-0:01:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:01:10):**  things in life, but somehow this wasn't clear to us before. Maybe, just maybe, the  economic system was pulling us in the wrong direction. The economy is a construct created  to support society, so if it feels like it's not serving us, then maybe it's time to  
**[0:01:30-0:01:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:01:30):**  take another look. What form does our economy need to take if we want to support a regenerative  farming future? We hear from a biologist philosopher and then an economist with their visions of  what a new economy might look like. And we get some very practical on the ground accounts  
**[0:01:50-0:02:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:01:50):**  from food producers who are experimenting with regenerative economic models.  The dominant economic paradigm of today is often described as neoliberalism. Firstly,  we hear from biologist, author and co-founder of ROFC, Colin Tudge. He helps us to define  
**[0:02:10-0:02:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:02:10):**  what this means and shares his vision for an economy that supports regenerative farming.  The present economic model is that of neoliberalism. And the point about neoliberalism is not simply  that it is capitalist, it is capitalist, but that's not the point. The point is that neoliberalism  
**[0:02:30-0:02:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:02:30):**  is a specific form of capitalism based on the idea that A, you must at all costs maximise  your profits. B, that you must do so in competition with everybody else. C, that competition somehow  leads to efficiency. D, that you have this thing called the hypothetical global free  
**[0:02:54-0:03:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:02:54):**  market, which basically means that everyone should compete in a kind of no rules free  for all. And somehow out of that melee is supposed to come a world that's tolerable  to live in. Except of course that the real neoliberal doesn't have a conception of what  
**[0:03:13-0:03:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:03:13):**  a world that's good to live in actually looks like. The real neoliberalism simply says that  whatever turns out as a result of this melee is reality. So as they say, get used to it.  And that is frankly insane. There's basically two models of farming out there in the modern  
**[0:03:32-0:03:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:03:32):**  world. And one that is prevails, which is the one that's kind of part of the neoliberal  economy says that, and this is a quote really, agriculture is just a business like any other.  And in the neoliberal economy, all businesses are conceived as enterprises that are there  
**[0:03:54-0:04:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:03:54):**  to maximise profit, maximise wealth. So the neoliberal model of agriculture says that  agriculture is there to maximise wealth. Whereas the second model says, no, actually the real  point of farming is to provide everybody with good food and provide good jobs and look after  
**[0:04:14-0:04:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:04:14):**  the biosphere, duty of care. Ask the question then, what kind of farming do we really need?  I came up with a concept about 12 years ago, something like that, of enlightened agriculture.  Enlightened agriculture is based on two very big established principles. One of which is  
**[0:04:33-0:04:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:04:33):**  agroecology, which says you should treat farms as ecosystems. And the other is food sovereignty,  which says that all societies should have control of their own food supply. Now, if  you follow both those things through, you finish up by saying, look, we need farming  
**[0:04:51-0:05:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:04:51):**  that is very diverse, ecologically sound, et cetera, et cetera. We need low input. In  other words, it shouldn't be this big oil dependent thing. Low input actually in the  end means be as organic as possible. If you've got those two things, it's going to be a very  
**[0:05:08-0:05:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:05:08):**  complex system. If you've got a very complex system, it's got to be skills intensive, plenty  of good farmers. It doesn't mean plenty of slaves, it means plenty of skilled farmers.  And if you put all those things together, you say there is no real advantage in scale  
**[0:05:21-0:05:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:05:21):**  up, not if it's complicated and lots of people working together. So you really need the farms  and the units to be on the whole small to medium sized. That model of a farm is the  complete opposite of what we actually have, which is based on the sort of neoliberal model.  
**[0:05:40-0:05:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:05:40):**  Because what we have is farming that is trying to be as productive as possible, but at the  same time as cheap as possible, given that oil prices are adjusted to make sure that  it's affordable, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. So you have a maximization of machinery,  
**[0:05:58-0:06:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:05:58):**  maximum use of industrial chemicals because they're very profitable. And the big machines  don't do complexity, so you have a very simple system. And they like to be used on the large  scale, that's the most economic. So you finish up with farms which are monocultural on the  
**[0:06:17-0:06:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:06:17):**  largest possible scale, very high input, a complete opposite of what you should be doing  if you're really interested in keeping the world in good heart and providing everybody  with good food, the complete opposite. So what kind of economy would deliver enlightened  
**[0:06:35-0:06:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:06:35):**  agriculture, small mix units, et cetera? I think, and lots of other beginning people  are beginning to think or do think, that you really need what I'm calling a tripartite  mixed economy where you have private ownership and you have some public ownership where it's  
**[0:06:51-0:07:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:06:51):**  appropriate and you have community ownership. And whereas, well, community ownership does  exist, but it's not drawn attention to, more and more people are saying community ownership  is the way forward, community owned farms, community owned everything basically. Of course,  
**[0:07:10-0:07:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:07:10):**  the community is a wonderful compromise between personal gain and all that, and it can work  democratically. So that's what we should be going for, the tripartite mixed economy.  The second great principle is that every enterprise, however it's owned, should be conceived as  
**[0:07:29-0:07:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:07:29):**  a social enterprise. In other words, its agenda, its purpose is not simply to maximise profit.  Its agenda, its purpose is to, well, make the world a better place, which I would say  contribute towards the convivial society, contribute towards the wellbeing of the biosphere.  
**[0:07:48-0:08:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:07:48):**  Then it's a social enterprise, that's good. When it comes to things that are privately  owned, just investing in things because they're maximally profitable is not helpful. It doesn't  make for a good world. So what one should practise is what a good friend of ours who's  
**[0:08:04-0:08:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:08:04):**  at this conference calls the positive investment. And positive investment is an extension of  the original idea of ethical investment. Ethical investment tends to mean that you don't invest  in things you don't like, whereas positive investment means that you only invest in things  
**[0:08:23-0:08:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:08:23):**  that you definitely do like. And I think if everybody that had spare money invested only  in things that they really think are good and had good reasons for thinking that they're  good, then I think you're well on the way to creating a better world.  
**[0:08:37-0:08:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:08:37):**  There are critics of this kind of general view who say you're a communist. That criticism  simply doesn't make sense. Private ownership definitely has a role. There are other people  who I know quite well, good Marxists, who hate the mixed economy for the totally opposite  
**[0:08:53-0:09:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:08:53):**  reason. You shouldn't have any private ownership in there at all. Well, this in both cases  is treating the economy, which is merely a tool, means to an end, as if it were not simply  an ideology, which it is, but as if it was some kind of fundamental moral principle,  
**[0:09:10-0:09:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:09:10):**  which it absolutely is not. The other kind of criticism that's aimed at the kind of things  I'm saying, and I've had it thrown at me hundreds of times over the years, is that what you're  proposing is unrealistic. The bigger point is that the present course of action, the  
**[0:09:26-0:09:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:09:26):**  present where the world is run, is wrecking the entire world in all ways. You know, the  biosphere, the climate, societies. It's the prime cause of all the unrest and misery.  How could that be realistic? How can we prefer that to a system that could deliver conviviality,  
**[0:09:47-0:10:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:09:47):**  could look after our fellow creatures? There's a lot of people, including a lot of small  farmers, who are already demonstrating what can and should be done, I mean, over the whole  world. And what most of them need is not to do things differently, but a sympathetic society,  
**[0:10:10-0:10:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:10:10):**  people who will actually appreciate what they do and buy what they do. If we seriously care  about the world, which most of us do probably, we cannot afford to leave farming in the hands  of the present, what you might call oligarchy. We cannot afford to leave it in the hands  
**[0:10:28-0:10:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:10:28):**  of present day governments, or of the corporates with whom they work very closely, or of the  financiers with whom they all work very closely. In other words, I think we have to take food  and farming into our own hands.  
**[0:10:41-0:11:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:10:41):**  Tony Greenham is a finance professional, economist, sustainability consultant and executive director  at Southwest Mutual. He explains how, in his view, the economy has failed us, and what  he thinks a more sustainable economy might look like.  
**[0:11:02-0:11:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:11:02):**  I'm Tony Greenham and I'm the executive director of Southwest Mutual, who are aiming to set  up the Southwest's first regional mutual bank. The first part of my career was working in  the City of London as an accountant and a banker, but I left that career after 10 years  
**[0:11:20-0:11:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:11:20):**  during the dot-com bubble when it burst, because I'd become completely disillusioned with the  ethics and the lack of any real positive social purpose. And then I spent the next 10 years  actually in business, working on sustainable businesses of various kinds. And then from  
**[0:11:39-0:11:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:11:39):**  there I became an economist specializing in how we can change the system to become more  sustainable. And this leads me to career number four, which is to try and set up a regional  mutual bank that actually is a sustainable new economy bank.  
**[0:11:53-0:12:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:11:53):**  We've had a 40-year experiment of this highly market-based, deregulated, finance-driven  economy and it has led us towards an ecological collapse, huge levels of social inequality,  and actually even economies that are not even in their own terms performing very well. So  
**[0:12:14-0:12:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:12:14):**  it is absolutely time to re-examine that system and to try something new.  So I guess one of the biggest failings of neoliberalism, and one that's recognized to  be fair by plenty of establishment figures and economists and politicians, is that it  
**[0:12:31-0:12:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:12:31):**  does really badly in understanding environmental and social impacts, whether positive or negative.  It's really hard to get those priced into a market in a way that means that we fully  account for all of the environmental and social impacts of the way the economy works. Neoliberalism  
**[0:12:48-0:13:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:12:48):**  has basically failed on that question. And Professor Stern, Nicholas Stern, who ran a  review for the government in the UK, described climate change as the biggest market failure  the world has ever seen. But it's not just about climate, of course, it's about biodiversity  
**[0:13:08-0:13:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:13:08):**  and we're in the sixth mass extinction, it's about the loss of habitats, it's about water,  it's about soil, it's about everything, right? It's about our interaction with nature and  we've really messed it up disastrously. I think food and farming and anything to do  
**[0:13:24-0:13:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:13:24):**  with our interactions with nature are absolutely at the frontier of where neoliberalism has  gone wrong. So I think that farmers and growers and producers and people who are looking after  habitats, they know this and they feel it and they understand how the system is absolutely  
**[0:13:43-0:13:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:13:43):**  getting in the way of them doing the right thing. Economics is not natural sciences.  Economics is about humans and how we interact with each other, nothing more, nothing less.  And therefore it's a social science. It is not a natural phenomenon. All markets are  
**[0:13:59-0:14:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:13:59):**  ultimately designed by society. We set the rules and so if we don't think we're getting  good outcomes then it is up to us and it's within our power to set new rules for those  markets and that's what we need to do. I think possibly some of the ingredients that we'd  
**[0:14:14-0:14:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:14:14):**  need to change this system include having a plan, which is a national plan. And I don't  mean central planning by that, I just mean an understanding that says well if we have  to currently import so much of our fruit and veg but actually we could grow that here,  
**[0:14:30-0:14:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:14:30):**  then what is a sort of planning strategy, what is our land use strategy, how do subsidies  work? There needs to be a national plan that coordinates the food that we produce in total  in relation to what people need to eat. Now that's not my area of expertise but I'm pleased  
**[0:14:45-0:15:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:14:45):**  to see at this conference that people are talking about that and indeed the government  is talking about it. I think another ingredient is the right kind of finance. Now that is  my area of expertise and for this the RSA Food and Farming Commission has been looking  
**[0:15:00-0:15:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:15:00):**  at whether we need a national agroecology development bank that is there to provide  the right kinds of finance to allow people to change, to transform their farming methods  because existing banks find that a little bit hard to finance. They're very good at  
**[0:15:16-0:15:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:15:16):**  financing what they know and carrying on as usual but carrying on as usual is not an option.  So we need the right kind of finance to be able to transform how we farm. The third ingredient  I guess is know-how and of course how to spread that so increasingly I hear people who are  
**[0:15:33-0:15:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:15:33):**  growers, producers, farmers who want to change but don't necessarily know how to set about  it. So I think connecting people and giving them access to know-how is really important.  And I think the fourth thing is the involvement of everyone, you know, citizens. I don't like  
**[0:15:51-0:16:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:15:51):**  the word consumer but citizens, we all eat food and that's one of the reasons why I love  the growth of cooperative forms of ownership, of community supported agriculture, other  forms of community enterprise because it's a way of the people who are ultimately consuming  
**[0:16:10-0:16:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:16:10):**  the food participate more actively with the people who are producing the food and that's  healthy for all sorts of reasons. So I think after many years in big business and small  business I am a real believer in Schumacher's doctrine that small is beautiful and actually  
**[0:16:27-0:16:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:16:27):**  he didn't say small is beautiful originally, he said that it was important to have the  appropriate scale but the problem is in a world where everybody tends towards things  being big, what we need is a counterweight which is to champion small. Now why is small  
**[0:16:41-0:16:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:16:41):**  business a great thing and why do I think a smaller regional bank is a great thing?  Because it's that closeness to your customers and to the place as well, you know, the actual  place where you're operating. Even in a country that is geographically quite small like the  
**[0:16:58-0:17:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:16:58):**  UK, there's huge variety in the regions as you go around from, you know, what people  like even as well as the climatic conditions and what grows well and everything. So understanding  local markets, being really closely embedded in communities makes it easier to do better  
**[0:17:15-0:17:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:17:15):**  business and better banking. So that's the regional part, the mutual part sort of goes  alongside it so if your customers are also your owners and they're the ones that control  the business and that the bankers are basically accountable to them, then we believe that  
**[0:17:29-0:17:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:17:29):**  we can restore trust in banking which has really been lost. But I think it's possible  to put back the idea of local managers and decision making that has diversity or inclusivity  at its core and I think that's the other reason why mutuality is a good check on that and  
**[0:17:48-0:18:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:17:48):**  that it enables the business also to operate better because you've got perfect feedback  then between, you know, understanding what your customers need, you're closely connected  to them because they are also the guys who run the business effectively, you work for  
**[0:18:02-0:18:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:18:02):**  them. So I always tend to try to look at what is good about a model that I might be rejecting.  I guess starting a smaller scale regional mutual bank begs the question, what does that  mean that you don't need large corporate banks anymore? And actually I'm not sure that it  
**[0:18:20-0:18:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:18:20):**  does. One thing I think it's important to note is that one of the ways that smaller  scale businesses can be successful is to collaborate with each other in networks because that way  you can achieve some of the benefits of being big, some of the economies of scale as an  
**[0:18:36-0:18:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:18:36):**  economist would call it and that's one of the things we're aiming to do with South West  Mutual because the plan is to have a whole network of regional banks across the UK that  work together and so where we can share costs and be more effective working together as  
**[0:18:49-0:19:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:18:49):**  businesses we can do that. So in that way you remove one of the needs, one of the driving  forces towards becoming really big as a corporation. There's a second part to that question though  which is about the traditional shareholder owned corporation where the shareholders are  
**[0:19:04-0:19:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:19:04):**  sort of privileged as the preeminent stakeholder and their interests must be served above all  others and their dominance in the economy at the moment is unhealthy and unnecessary.  So I would hope for a gradual decline in the amount of our economic activity that's organised  
**[0:19:23-0:19:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:19:23):**  through giant unaccountable shareholder owned corporations and much more of our economic  activity that's organised through democratically controlled smaller scale cooperatives, community  enterprises. Hopefully many of you have listened to Serial,  
**[0:19:43-0:20:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:19:43):**  the six part series we released at the end of last year that explores the current food  and farming system by uncovering the myths about our bread and stories from the pioneering  new grains movement and we'll be releasing our first bonus short episode later this month.  
**[0:20:01-0:20:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:20:01):**  We wanted to share some of the final episode of Serial now to illustrate how everything  Colin and Tony spoke about is embedded in our food systems including in our bread. The  principles of the economy are the principles of industrial bread.  
**[0:20:18-0:20:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:20:18):**  I think it's fair to say there's a general feeling that the industrial bread system is  underpinned by a flawed logic, a logic that's damaging to people and planet. As we've heard,  it's a logic of alienation. It relies on creating barriers between people in the system and  
**[0:20:36-0:20:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:20:36):**  between people and food. It's a logic of uniformity. It can't cope with diversity, let alone strive  to promote it. It's a logic that implicitly assumes that automation is synonymous with  progress and that bigger necessarily equals better. At every stage from soil to seed to  
**[0:20:56-0:21:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:20:56):**  flower to loaf, this logic is undermining the natural systems we depend on, our health,  both physical and mental, the fabric of our communities and the value of people's work.  In this series, we've heard about a new grains movement, a movement with a different logic  
**[0:21:17-0:21:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:21:17):**  and a different set of aspirations. It aspires to diversity instead of uniformity, from the  life in the soil to the life in our guts, from the genetics of our seeds to the backgrounds  of the people baking our bread. Resilience as opposed to infinite expansion, collaboration  
**[0:21:35-0:21:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:21:35):**  rather than competition, working on a human scale, not an industrial scale. And at every  stage getting people back into the system, into the mills, onto the farms, into the bakeries  and around the tables, encouraging bakers and farmers and millers and breeders and consumers  
**[0:21:56-0:22:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:21:56):**  to talk to each other. This is about creating a more efficient bread system, a system that  generates a lot less waste and takes responsibility for any waste it does create, a system that  operates as more of a closed loop than a linear production line, a system that accounts for  
**[0:22:15-0:22:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:22:15):**  all of its impacts, including everything from people's wages and their job satisfaction  to the carbon footprint of distribution networks to the health of our soils and the health  of our bodies. We are the bread system. Even those of us who interact with it primarily  
**[0:22:32-0:22:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:22:32):**  as consumers, if you eat bread, you're part of it. But the current system tells us otherwise.  It encourages us to be passive consumers and it encourages farmers and millers and bakers  to be passive producers. So creating a better system is about moving from passivity to agency.  
**[0:22:52-0:23:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:22:52):**  In other words, it's about reclaiming food sovereignty.  Two of the key characters in the series, baker and regenerative retailer Kimberly Bell and  farmer Fred Price, have both been using their businesses to explore and demonstrate different  
**[0:23:06-0:23:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:23:06):**  ways of building an economy. An economy that's quite the opposite of the neoliberal one.  Both are running regenerative businesses that produce food to nourish people. They bring  joy. They promote healthy lifestyles and build communities. We asked them what shifting towards  
**[0:23:22-0:23:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:23:22):**  a regenerative business and regenerative economy means to them.  Thinking back to the company that I used to run, which was essentially a shop fitting  firm. We used to work for big retail clients like BP Oil, Starbucks, Hainsbury's. And we  
**[0:23:39-0:23:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:23:39):**  offered a service. It was a very high octane kind of project management service where we  would build these retail units very quickly. The client's attitude towards us is probably  one of the things I think about when asked to define what it was like to run that business.  
**[0:23:56-0:24:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:23:56):**  The sentiment was very much that it should be our privilege to work for these blue chip  clients. It was very much about being awarded opportunity. We used to use language like  winning work. And really that's just a spin I think for describing a very inequitable  
**[0:24:15-0:24:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:24:15):**  economy where the power was very top down. We had very little self-worth I think as people.  Even though we could be proud of the work that we did, we were very good at it. It felt  like the client was our boss, if you like. Even though I was running a small business,  
**[0:24:33-0:24:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:24:33):**  I didn't feel like I was working for myself. Generally the work that we were doing, although  it was very creative to build these shops very quickly and lots of problem solving,  it was actually, you know, it had no real value. We spent as much time ripping shops  
**[0:24:47-0:25:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:24:47):**  out as we did building them. It was very extractive and wasteful. It never felt like we were achieving  anything for the greater good or really providing anything that was going to benefit society  at all in the long term. When I started Small Food six years ago, it was intended to be  
**[0:25:04-0:25:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:25:04):**  an experiment. I'd been working for large food retailers and reading a lot about the  big global food economy, the big industry as it were, and I just felt that everything  about it was wrong intuitively. Perhaps I didn't really understand or wasn't able  
**[0:25:18-0:25:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:25:18):**  to articulate why. So I started Small Food Bakery as an experiment to see whether we  could somehow illustrate very practically what the opposite might be. The sorts of things  that we've explored quite successfully are hierarchies within the team, but also across  
**[0:25:37-0:25:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:25:37):**  wider society. So how can we work equitably with everybody, all the stakeholders required  to deliver food to people, including the customers? And I think one of the things that defines  the way we work now is it's human scale and we deal in relationships. It's person to person.  
**[0:25:55-0:26:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:25:55):**  So a lot of the way we've designed the business is to make sure that those barriers that are  commonly found in bigger businesses or let's call them the more prevalent business models  of today are removed. So we work from an open kitchen. We don't have sort of shop fitting  
**[0:26:12-0:26:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:26:12):**  counters and glass barriers. We're very open about letting people come in, spending time  talking. Our customer relationships are often two way. They become friends. We barter vegetables.  They bring ingredients in. We turn them into something and often send them back. So there's  
**[0:26:29-0:26:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:26:29):**  a lot of reciprocity, I suppose, is an important word. I guess the other thing that's really  worth mentioning is that our business doesn't entirely work on a monetary economy. There's  a lot of other values at play. And I think particularly in light of what's been happening  
**[0:26:47-0:27:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:26:47):**  the last few weeks, which has been a very stressful time with the pandemic, I think  it's really put us to the test. It's put our relationships to the test. And what small  food has always been is really about investing in people. And if you took an old traditional  
**[0:27:01-0:27:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:27:01):**  business model, you look at building value on a balance sheet and it's always about fixed  assets and cash in the bank and buildings and equity and those kinds of solid investments.  But really for small food, it's about investing in people and it's about building knowledge  
**[0:27:16-0:27:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:27:16):**  and skills and relationships. I feel that that's where we've really been able to be  quite dynamic in the last few weeks and perhaps keep trading at the same level or even slightly  above where we were before, even in the face of some very difficult conditions. It's all  
**[0:27:33-0:27:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:27:33):**  become really important, this issue in the last few weeks with the pandemic, because  the way that we work now really gives us a sense of value as bakers. And it really has  placed us within the community in a way that we understand our role and we don't feel like  
**[0:27:49-0:28:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:27:49):**  commodities that are expendable. We actually feel responsible. And I think that's one of  the most significant changes that a new kind of economics, a smaller scale or human scale  economics could bring is a kind of reciprocal sense of both having a sense of value and  
**[0:28:05-0:28:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:28:05):**  self worth, which is great for our own sort of morale and mental health, but also feeling  responsible and taking responsibility and seeing how our actions can really directly  influence the outcome of situations like the current pandemic for everyone. It needs to  
**[0:28:23-0:28:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:28:23):**  be acknowledged that we've all grown up and the only kind of economics we've known is  the prevalent one. And that's really informed our sense of values. People judge businesses  success based on how big they can get, how successful they are, how many people you employ,  
**[0:28:40-0:28:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:28:40):**  maybe even what car the owner of the business drives. And these ways of measuring success  are totally ingrained in us and in our culture and in our society. And we still get people  ask us questions that kind of pitch us against those yardsticks. And I find them really puzzling.  
**[0:28:56-0:29:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:28:56):**  The biggest barrier to this kind of economy being adopted is the fact that more people  really need to believe in themselves and they need to get involved. They need to realize  that the food system or changing the food system or changing our economic system is  
**[0:29:10-0:29:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:29:10):**  not something that's going to happen to them. It's only something that's going to happen  if they actually do it. So I think building confidence in individuals and trying to illustrate  that it is within our power to design the system within which we live is probably one  
**[0:29:26-0:29:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:29:26):**  of the most important things to focus on if we want to try to change the prevalent economic  system. What we really need is lots of people working in the way that we are. We can't really  scale up if more of this type of business is adopted by more people, particularly in  
**[0:29:44-0:30:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:29:44):**  the food industry or in the food sector. I just think life will be more delicious. I  think there'll be a lot more joy and a lot more pleasure. And I think alongside that  and more importantly, potentially, is that we will see better and more equitable society  
**[0:30:05-0:30:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:30:05):**  where more people have access to good food and there isn't such a divide between what  certain types of people eat. I think that just will be a great leveler and probably  ripple out and influence all sorts of other aspects of life.  
**[0:30:20-0:30:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:30:20):**  Well I suppose when I took on the farm a decade or so ago, we were just a small arable farm  trying to keep up producing commodities, wheat, barley or seed rape. We had no control over  the price and so my entire focus was on yield. And what came with that is a focus on a whole  
**[0:30:39-0:30:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:30:39):**  host of synthetic inputs to achieve it. I guess the problem was on farm we were experiencing  a kind of yield plateau. Year on year we're pushing crops harder just to stand still.  And so I guess the beginning of my journey started here, a kind of interrogation of that  
**[0:30:58-0:31:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:30:58):**  yield plateau. And the answer lay in the fact that the soil health was way more complex  than my agronomist or seed company would have me believe. The inputs we were hooked on,  nitrogen insecticides, fungicides, they all have negative impacts on the kind of natural  
**[0:31:15-0:31:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:31:15):**  cycles and dynamics that really underpin soil health. Since then, I guess seven or eight  years, I've just been exploring how far the farm can acknowledge and really enhance those  natural cycles. It's been really eye opening and frankly pretty addictive. The thing is  
**[0:31:35-0:31:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:31:35):**  this is only half the story and it's the old commodity model that we were selling into,  with no way of rewarding or attaching value to these kind of new agroecological principles  that was the real problem. So the new model is really based around relationships, I guess  
**[0:31:51-0:32:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:31:51):**  authenticity and a huge amount of openness and collaboration. By engaging with bakers,  millers, chefs, consumers directly, we've earned the right to start from the perspective,  how do I want to farm and work backwards, which before we were starting from a commodity  
**[0:32:08-0:32:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:32:08):**  framework and working forwards, i.e. ending up with a grow more strategy with all those  negative inputs. I guess you'd describe it as a small food economy. It seems to encapsulate  the idea that it's human scale and about food, not commodities. The general interest in and  
**[0:32:26-0:32:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:32:26):**  around the farm from customers and our little community on social media is really heartening.  The thought that bakers can stand in a field of emmer or wheat or chefs amongst a load  of pigs that they're going to be handling at some point in the future and decide that  
**[0:32:42-0:32:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:32:42):**  they have an appetite for what we're growing is actually a really special feeling. Just  at the moment, restaurants being shut has been a real shock to the system. I guess the  challenge going forward is to adjust how we work to reach people more directly. But in  
**[0:32:57-0:33:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:32:57):**  a way that's got to be sustainable long term, we don't want just a knee jerk reaction that  wears me out doing deliveries and packing. I mean, I'm just a farmer. The other side  of this coin, though, I guess, is right now in this crisis, it's really reinforced to  
**[0:33:12-0:33:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:33:12):**  me that people still do have a capacity to value food in ways that's not just price and  quantity. I guess at the moment, it feels a kind of negative feeling, but it does demonstrate  that that kind of close connection to food is possible and that actually huge fundamental  
**[0:33:30-0:33:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:33:30):**  shifts in our food system can happen and can happen quite quickly. I guess the whole principle  of what we're doing is not to create a product or protect a kind of niche product, somehow  corner the market in heritage grains or pastured pork. Far from it. First of all, our farm  
**[0:33:46-0:34:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:33:46):**  has a certain carrying capacity for stock, and the nature of our rotation means we're  only growing cereals two years and five. The work we're doing exploring diversity in cereal  production, specifically for low input agricultural systems, actually has to be shared. That means  
**[0:34:00-0:34:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:34:00):**  seed, ideas, and support. Me having seed in the ground and establishing a network of bakers  and millers here in the Southwest is just the first step. There are big logistical and  legal barriers to enable the kind of work we're doing here to reach more people. The  
**[0:34:18-0:34:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:34:18):**  whole point is to be as collaborative and open source as possible. When those buying  your produce are your friends and the relationships that underpin the supply chain are all about  shared values, it really enables you to be released from that kind of idea of competition  
**[0:34:35-0:34:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:34:35):**  and that kind of individualism and protectionism that is associated with the old model. And  it's really liberating. The COVID-19 pandemic has made it clearer than ever just how vulnerable  industrial food systems are. Actually, there's a very different type of efficiency and resilience  
**[0:34:57-0:35:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:34:57):**  in smaller food networks. They're much more nimble and able to adapt to the ever evolving  situation to ensure that their local communities are fed. These more direct human scale networks  are what Colin, Tony, Kim, and Fred were all talking about. I have no background in economics  
**[0:35:16-0:35:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:35:16):**  and really my heart is in the soil. But as we have been bringing you the voices behind  regenerative farming over the last five years, it's become clear that in order to build  ecological farming futures and to rejuvenate respect for farmers and rural communities,  
**[0:35:34-0:35:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:35:34):**  we need to look beyond the farming system itself. If we look at why most farmers are  still doing chemical or conventional farming, it's in part due to debt traps and the need  to meet the demands of the commodity market. It's all connected. Sometimes I find that  
**[0:35:50-0:36:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:35:50):**  thought overwhelming, but then I hear the stories of people already living a new reality,  experimenting with different forms of business that better serve regenerative farming and  humanity as a whole. And I'm filled with hope. Let's work together to build a new normal  
**[0:36:07-0:36:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:36:07):**  based on diversity, food sovereignty, care, collaboration, and of course, healthy soils.  This episode of Farmerama was made by Abbey Rose, Louis Hudson, and Hannah Sutherland  with me, Joe Barrett, and Katie Revel. We're extremely grateful to our Patreon supporters  
**[0:36:31-0:36:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:36:31):**  who help us make the show. And if you'd like to support Farmerama, please visit patreon.com  and learn a bit more about it there. Community support is provided by Hannah Sutherland,  Fran Bailey, Annie Landeless, Eliza Jenkins, and Olivia Oldham. And our theme music is  
**[0:36:50-0:37:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/55-enlightened-agriculture-sustainable-economies-and-regenerative-businesses#t=0:36:50):**  by Owen Barrett.  