### Farmerama  (2020-42-28)
**[0:00:00-0:00:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to Farmerama.  Here in the Northern Hemisphere, we've just passed the summer solstice, and around us  things are in full bloom and beginning to share their fruits.  But the past few months have been challenging for many as the COVID crisis continues, and  as the Black Lives Matter movement highlights the many manifestations of systemic racial  
**[0:00:23-0:00:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:00:23):**  injustice in the world.  This month, we're back to our regular format, and we're bringing you a mix of voices from  the regenerative farming movement.  We start with an inspirational farmer who is part of a group of people building a more  resilient local textile economy through Fibershed UK.  
**[0:00:47-0:00:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:00:47):**  We then hear about a project reintroducing a one-time staple crop, chestnuts, into the  southern United States.  We learn how the edible classroom is bringing regenerative agriculture into schools, cafeterias,  and community kitchens.  And we finish in Wales with a poem that speaks to the heart of rewilding.  
**[0:01:14-0:01:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:01:14):**  Gala Bailey Barker is a first-generation farmer at Plaw Hatch Farm, a mixed 500-acre,  biodynamic community-owned farm.  In her eight years there, Gala has been involved with most aspects of the farm, but her focus  is on her sheep.  She's increased the flock from 30 to 90 and has developed a wool enterprise.  
**[0:01:34-0:01:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:01:34):**  Gala and others, including her mother, natural dyer Deborah Barker, are establishing Fibershed  UK.  Fibershed is about bringing together all the people involved in a garment's lifecycle,  from farmers to dyers to designers.  As we mentioned back in episode 53, we're supporting the Fibershed UK team to get going.  
**[0:01:57-0:02:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:01:57):**  So late last summer, we worked with fashion journalist Sarah Mower to bring young designers  from London on a visit to Plaw Hatch Farm.  It was a brilliant day of sheep herding, dying wool, rethinking textile supply networks,  and we all got to learn about biodynamic growing.  Yeah, so I guess I've been developing a bit of a wool enterprise with the flock I look  
**[0:02:22-0:02:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:02:22):**  after for the whole time that I've been at Plaw Hatch.  But it's actually very difficult to get wool processed organically.  Natural fibre company, the only company that do it.  And it's been quite difficult trying to coordinate when shearing is happening and when the wool  can be processed.  
**[0:02:38-0:02:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:02:38):**  And I often don't know when the next processing is happening.  So that's all been quite challenging.  I think probably when mum came to me and said, oh, there's this thing called Fibershed.  It's quite an exciting idea to create localised fibre systems in the way that we are creating  or have created local food systems.  
**[0:02:58-0:03:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:02:58):**  I think it's a really exciting thing as well as to bring people together who are trying  to do this.  I feel like there's a lot of people who have been really interested in creating better  fabrics or having more regenerative wool and getting good quality things that are made  locally.  
**[0:03:15-0:03:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:03:15):**  But everyone's felt a bit on their own and not really known who to talk to.  At the moment, our idea with the South East England Fibershed is to create a directory  so that people know who to talk to, basically.  We can save each other so much time if we know who to talk to.  You can often have a problem and you keep thinking, oh, I just don't know who to ask.  
**[0:03:39-0:03:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:03:39):**  And actually to have a network and get designers who want to find good wool and farmers who  want to provide good wool together is a really exciting thing.  They came down and they brought Patrick McDowell and a few other really great young designers.  And they're becoming so disillusioned with it.  I mean, all of them are saying they've done internships with big companies and they're  
**[0:04:07-0:04:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:04:07):**  just horrified by the waste and the kinds of materials that are getting used and wanting  something different, but maybe also not knowing where to look for it.  And I think it's just amazing for them to actually come to a farm and see how the decisions  they're making about what materials they're using can actually impact the land and can  impact the animals' welfare.  
**[0:04:28-0:04:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:04:28):**  It is possible to produce wool potentially that is carbon neutral.  It can actually improve the land, not just kind of be all right or a bit good for it.  It can actually be a helpful way to improve the land and another way to support farmers,  I suppose.  Because it is so dire, the situation with wool at the moment.  
**[0:04:51-0:04:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:04:51):**  I mean, we don't sell wool to the Wishes Wool Board, but if we did, it probably wouldn't  even cover the cost of us having the animals sheared.  And we have the animals sheared because they need to be, but that's also been a bit of  a strange thing that people can't against shearing in the fashion industry, which is  very strange because as we all know, you have to shear sheep.  
**[0:05:14-0:05:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:05:14):**  It's necessary.  It's a very big commitment to have wool spun.  It's a very expensive thing to do.  And I think that's one of the big things about getting designers involved early on in the  process is actually you need them to come, they need to be in there right at the beginning  
**[0:05:30-0:05:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:05:30):**  to say, actually, this is what I want because otherwise you're laying out, like, I'm lucky  I'm part of this big mix farm.  There's all these different enterprises.  So there is always money that I could invest in having the wool processed.  But if you're just a shepherd, I think it must be really challenging to, you're making  
**[0:05:50-0:05:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:05:50):**  a sort of leap of faith in spending all this money on having the wool processed and being  unsure about if you can actually sell it.  And I think that's partly what this Fibre Shed idea is about and about getting the designers  involved is if someone can come to you and say, I really would love to have this spec  of wool and it's have this staple length, it needs to be this particular colour.  
**[0:06:14-0:06:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:06:14):**  And then even if they can't put the money in upfront, at least you know you can sell  it.  Otherwise getting, you know, a load of knitting all done and also having an outlet, it is  another, it's another thing to do really.  And it's not directly to do with looking after sheep.  
**[0:06:32-0:06:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:06:32):**  Yeah, it's interesting actually because this cereal series that has just been done on Farmerama,  that was really fascinating about cereals, but I thought so much of it applies to wool.  There is just this lack of processes, you know, that's really, really essential that  we have processes, people who actually are milling wool, not just milling wheat.  And yeah, I think that we've lost so much of that, but it's amazing that it's coming  
**[0:06:58-0:07:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:06:58):**  back and I think it's great just having all these, we had a little meeting last night  with the South West Fibre Shed and I was there and a few other people came who were shepherds  or interested in it.  And yeah, it's just great to have those conversations and make those connections and yeah, it feels  like it's going to take off.  
**[0:07:18-0:07:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:07:18):**  Yeah I guess with the sheep enterprise, by processing wool and sheepskins, I sort of  add a third onto my turnover.  And I think my idea with sheep, it's actually, it can be better to have less sheep and get  more value from each sheep than to have just lots of sheep.  And having less sheep maybe allows you that time to go to the abattoir and get the sheepskins  
**[0:07:45-0:07:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:07:45):**  and salt them and send them off and sell them.  And that actually is a big added income.  For me, I really want to use every bit of our sheep.  I feel like that's kind of our responsibility as people that are raising animals for meat,  that actually there shouldn't be any waste.  
**[0:08:05-0:08:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:08:05):**  And we're very lucky because we have two local abattoirs.  Our sheep always go through the same one.  And it is an hour round trip for me to go and get the sheepskins.  So I take the sheep in the morning and I go back at lunchtime and get them and bring them  home and salt them and then post them off to the Welsh Organic Tannery.  
**[0:08:24-0:08:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:08:24):**  But we can make enough of a margin on them that it's worthwhile to do that.  And we also have our own butchery, so the animals will come back to the butchery.  And I think Jane once took a picture for me of the waste.  And I mean, it's not even waste because she gives the dog, but it's like just a handful  of meat because we sell all the bones and all of the meat and even do stuff with any  
**[0:08:49-0:08:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:08:49):**  excess fat from the use.  That's the advantage of having small farms and having internal production because we've  got the dairy and the butchery is that actually the waste is very little.  Renan Sokolov is the vegetable and agroforestry manager at Caney Fork Farms in Carthage, Tennessee.  It's a 400 acre organic, 100% grass-fed mixed farm owned by environmentalist and former  
**[0:09:29-0:09:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:09:29):**  US Vice President Al Gore.  Last year, the farm hosted the Climate Underground, a conference that brought together farmers,  scientists, investors, community organizers, activists and chefs to explore what it takes  to raise food, sink carbon and work towards healthier communities.  One of the experiments taking place on the farm involves planting many different varieties  
**[0:09:54-0:09:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:09:54):**  of chestnut trees.  The goal is to see which varieties might thrive best in the area's climate.  It seems to be one of those moments where the whole regenerative agricultural world  has started to coalesce around chestnuts as a crop right now.  So our oldest trees are three years old that we've planted here on the property.  
**[0:10:19-0:10:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:10:19):**  And we just planted another about 1500 trees this year.  From both from a carbon standpoint, switching away from annual grain production to a staple  crop that has deep roots, you're not tilling the soil, we're bringing in a lot of acreage  that isn't suitable for tillage in the first place and can't grow annuals and trying to  switch our eating habits and staple crops to a perennial agricultural system as much  
**[0:10:45-0:10:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:10:45):**  as possible.  The reason why chestnuts are not already part of our main diet is in the US, they were really  decimated by a blight that came through and started in the late 1800s, early 1900s, and  really by the mid 1920s had decimated the majority of the chestnut trees on the eastern  seaboard.  
**[0:11:05-0:11:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:11:05):**  They used to be extremely prevalent, about one in every four trees was a chestnut in  our area.  It was, they were just down the road from a town called Chestnut Mound to show just  how sort of ingrained this tree was in everyday life.  And going back, there's records of indigenous peoples really turning to the chestnut as  
**[0:11:23-0:11:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:11:23):**  a main staple food crop, as well as all sorts of wildlife that really lived off of this.  So the fact it was kind of a double whammy when the chestnut left, it was very difficult  for people.  And then of course, the Great Depression came in the end of the 1920s.  And at that same time that this wild food source disappeared from the landscape, the  
**[0:11:43-0:11:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:11:43):**  national economy really collapsed and people were not able to get food and really exacerbated  a lot of the hunger that was experienced in some areas.  All the chestnuts that we have are either pure Chinese genetics and the Chinese trees  have some genetic traits that enable them to be, to not be susceptible to the blight  so they're able to survive.  
**[0:12:03-0:12:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:12:03):**  Some are purely Chinese varieties, some have been crossed with American varieties.  On the property we have about 17 to 20 different varieties that have been planted.  However, their chestnuts are not particularly true to type.  So while they are, we know the families from which they came from, but they might not be  exactly, these aren't grafted trees.  
**[0:12:26-0:12:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:12:26):**  It's not like an apple where every golden delicious is actually a clone of itself.  There are grafted chestnuts out there, but we really want it because we're trying to  reintroduce this crop in this region and in the country, we felt it important to plant  trees from seedlings to really allow these trees to express all their genetic potential,  especially bringing them back into this region where there aren't too many chestnut growers.  
**[0:12:50-0:12:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:12:50):**  We really want to be able to identify all the different types of trees that we could  have and really potentially start breeding our own trees that will produce as much as  possible here.  We're just at this point where the last generation that had any experience with chestnuts is  reaching older age.  
**[0:13:08-0:13:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:13:08):**  At farmers markets we've been selling, we've been having some customers who come up who  are in their 80s or 90s and they are just filled with joy because they haven't seen  chestnuts since they were little kids.  They remember the stories that their parents and their grandparents used to tell them about  going out and collecting nuts and roasting them over an open fire.  
**[0:13:27-0:13:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:13:27):**  Their grandchildren are with them and have honestly never heard of a chestnut before.  They've never eaten one, they've never had one before, so it's kind of amazing to see  to bring back this thing that came from a certain generation's childhood that went missing  and we're bringing it back just in time for some people to witness their grandchildren  rediscover this.  
**[0:13:44-0:13:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:13:44):**  It's kind of a really beautiful moment to be bringing the chestnut back.  In terms of the large scaling possibility of chestnuts, you can produce about 2 million  to 2.5 million calories per acre, which for reference wheat produces about 4 million calories  per acre.  We're not talking on a one to one replacement level of chestnuts to wheat for instance,  
**[0:14:11-0:14:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:14:11):**  but we're also grazing our sheep through them.  We have a silvopastoral system that is really beneficial for the sheep.  Because of USDA regulations we can't graze them in the chestnut fields for 120 days before  nut fall, but we're able to actually hay those fields during the summer and feed that hay  back on that same land to the sheep during early spring, late fall, and during the winter.  
**[0:14:36-0:14:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:14:36):**  We're seeing really great results building the soil organic matter in those fields.  The sheep, chestnuts are sensitive to compaction, so we're hesitant to bring the cattle in.  The trees also aren't large enough yet to handle a cow that can come in and just chomp  it down.  But the sheep have been great and even after three years we don't have to fence off the  
**[0:14:57-0:14:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:14:57):**  chestnut trees anymore from the sheep.  So we're getting the added calories of the meat that we're able to harvest off of the  sheep, which is bringing that number up a decent amount.  Then also just thinking about the inputs that go into growing chestnuts versus growing wheat.  We're not tilling every year, even in a no-till system.  
**[0:15:17-0:15:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:15:17):**  Depending on what researchers you're talking to, at the bare minimum it's very difficult  to build organic matter if you're growing wheat, even in a great complex rotation.  Planting trees is a totally different time scale.  I have primarily worked with vegetables up until the past couple of years.  I'm still working with vegetables now and I feel it's nice to go between them because  
**[0:15:41-0:15:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:15:41):**  the vegetables, everything is so urgent.  It's often very important as well, but it's very urgent.  It has to happen right then.  There's very little room for error.  Then with the trees, everything is important, but it's often not as urgent.  
**[0:15:55-0:16:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:15:55):**  Thinking about these chestnuts, they'll start producing hopefully within five to seven years,  but don't reach full maturity of production until about 25 years.  We'll have a lifespan of 60 years.  Thinking about being in my 50s when these are actually hitting peak production is just  a wild thought to me.  
**[0:16:19-0:16:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:16:19):**  It's growing up just hearing so many stories about biblical stories and fables.  I feel like every single culture has these stories of a child or a middle-aged person  walking up to someone who is in their 70s and 80s who's planting a tree and asking,  why are you planting this tree?  There's not any possibility that you will ever gain any benefit from this tree.  
**[0:16:40-0:16:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:16:40):**  You'll probably be gone before you can even sit in its shade.  Really looking at it from a generational aspect and saying, this is not even for my children  at this point.  This is for my grandchildren.  It's really that mentality that has gotten us into our agricultural predicaments that  
**[0:16:57-0:17:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:16:57):**  we're in right now, where it's just been about short-term production and often at the expense  of future generations.  Convincing someone to take on such a long-term project is difficult.  Most farmers do not have a ton of money to play with.  Most farmers would love to say, yeah, I'm going to be planting something that's going  
**[0:17:15-0:17:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:17:15):**  to be at its peak bearing age for my grandchildren, but that means you have to spend the money  right now, and you're not getting any of that return until later on.  It's a privileged position to be in, to be able to make that decision and to be able  to act on that foresight.  There are plenty of people who have that foresight who are just not in a position to act on it.  
**[0:17:41-0:17:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:17:41):**  We people who are able to act on that foresight now are able to not just have that be something  that they do, but push for policy changes, push for investors, push for all sorts of  different people who can help farmers who really want to be thinking about this.  If people aren't eating tons of chestnuts, it might not be chestnuts, it might be hazelnuts  or any other sort of perennial agriculture, but if this isn't a key part of our diet in  
**[0:18:05-0:18:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:18:05):**  20, 30 years, then I think we're going to be in a lot of trouble.  Angela McKee-Brown is Deputy Executive Director of the Edible Schoolyard Project, an initiative  founded by the celebrated chef, Alice Waters.  Angela designs and facilitates hands-on educational experiences in gardens, kitchens and cafeterias  that connect children to nature, food and to each other.  
**[0:18:36-0:18:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:18:36):**  Why do I care about this work?  So, first and foremost, I believe that when our children eat, they become powerful and  they become extremely wonderful advocates for what their needs are, but also needs of  their community.  And so when our children come to the garden or to the kitchen classroom, they're building  
**[0:18:53-0:18:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:18:53):**  relationships with food and healthy relationships with food and understanding of food.  So not only where food comes from, but what it means for themselves, what it means for  their communities, what it means for the environment and the world that surrounds them.  And then when we think about the cafeteria, the cafeteria is a phenomenal opportunity  that exists in pretty much all of our communities here in the United States.  
**[0:19:12-0:19:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:19:12):**  And it provides an opportunity for continued growth where we can provide our children a  meal experience that also connects them to each other, to where food comes from, to the  environment that exists around them, to other cultures, to build deep understandings of  each other, of themselves, and also a sense of belongingness to their school community,  which then also connects them to their greater community.  
**[0:19:34-0:19:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:19:34):**  We're partnering with the community of Stockton, California, to reimagine their school meal  experience.  So this partnership came about because our founder, Alice Waters, was sitting next to  the mayor of Stockton, Mayor Michael Tubbs.  He's a phenomenal guy and a funder.  
**[0:19:49-0:19:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:19:49):**  And Alice was doing what she does best, which is feeding the idea, feeding a concept to  a group of people.  And so that day she was feeding school lunch.  And Mayor Tubbs tried the meal and he said he wanted this for all of his kids in Stockton.  And so from that, we received grant funding to partner with the community of Stockton  
**[0:20:06-0:20:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:20:06):**  to reimagine the food experiences on campus in the south side of Stockton.  So when we think about the south side of Stockton, it has about 13 schools, K through 8 and high  schools, as well as I think two grocery stores, but they're on opposite ends of the region.  And the mindset is that surrounding Stockton is a rich agricultural area.  So it's in the Central Valley region where so much food for the United States and the  
**[0:20:31-0:20:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:20:31):**  world is grown, but so much of that food leaves Stockton and it never makes it back into the  community or into the schools.  So we're partnering with the community to think about how we can get that food that's  grown by organic, regenerative farms into the schools.  The mindset is that we have this opportunity to imagine together and to design a program  
**[0:20:52-0:20:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:20:52):**  where we not only procure food from local and regional farms who are taking care of  their workers and taking care of the land, but we also have an opportunity to think about  how we leverage the cafeteria as a place for learning.  So imagine if you walked into your cafeteria and it was an experience that taught you about  nourishment, about stewardship of the land.  
**[0:21:13-0:21:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:21:13):**  What if you followed the pathway of a seed on the ground as you went to get your lunch?  And what if it also just served as a place to build community?  And so that's what we're working with the community of Stockton to think about.  And we're working with them, we're not just doing it for them, and because the best ideas  exist there.  
**[0:21:29-0:21:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:21:29):**  And so we want to make sure that all the funding that we have is leveraged by the community  of Stockton.  In terms of where we're at with the project in Stockton, California, we've been hosting  a series of community dinners so we can all gather around a meal, an organic, locally  sourced meal, and talk about what the community wants and needs from not only a school lunch  
**[0:21:50-0:21:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:21:50):**  program but from a school food experience.  So we've hosted two dinners so far.  We've been attending a lot of events, a lot of church gatherings, a lot of 5K runs.  And each time we go, we bring food from a local farm so that way we can tell the story  of that food and where the food comes from.  
**[0:22:06-0:22:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:22:06):**  One of my favorite stories right now is of a young man named Caleb.  At our last community dinner, which we host at community centers that are located in the  neighborhoods which we're meant to serve.  And Caleb, he got there early and he was playing basketball with one of his friends who had  come to the first community dinner.  
**[0:22:24-0:22:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:22:24):**  And Caleb did not like to smile.  He didn't want to engage very much with me.  And I was trying to tell jokes.  I was trying to talk to him about basketball.  And he had nothing to do with me.  
**[0:22:35-0:22:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:22:35):**  And so I just paused and I realized we had grapes.  A local organic farmer from Logierre Ranches had just dropped off a harvest of Bronx grapes.  These grapes are just phenomenal in terms of flavor and taste and texture.  And she just dropped them off.  And so I knew I had them in the kitchen.  
**[0:22:52-0:22:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:22:52):**  And I just, I went up to him and I was like, do you want to try the best grape of your  life?  And he was like, I don't know.  Sure, I'll do it.  So I ran to the kitchen because I knew I only had a few moments before he left.  
**[0:23:03-0:23:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:23:03):**  And I came back with a little handful of grapes.  And so I held out the grapes and he picked one off and put it in his mouth and began  to taste it.  And as he began to taste it, he began to smile.  But it wasn't just like a sly smile.  
**[0:23:18-0:23:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:23:18):**  It was a joyful smile.  And in that moment, I knew that not only have we provided him with a wonderful experience,  a beautiful experience, but we had also provided him with an opportunity to taste a flavor  he had never tried before.  An opportunity to develop a positive food memory.  
**[0:23:35-0:23:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:23:35):**  So a moment that he's going to look back on, a moment that he's going to be able to use  to define future moments in terms of his choices that he makes around food.  In terms of the taste that he's willing to go and try and explore.  And so in that moment, it was a resounding affirmation that this work is valuable, it's  needed and a resource exists all around of our communities.  
**[0:23:57-0:23:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:23:57):**  And that resource is food.  And food that's grown well and grown with care and grown in soil that is well taken  care of.  And so I have extreme gratitude to the farmers because we're getting to talk to so many farmers.  There's actually 94 organic farms that surround the community of Stockton.  
**[0:24:15-0:24:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:24:15):**  And we actually learned that information through our partnership with Community Alliance for  Family Farmers and CCOF, which is an organic certification program in California.  And so I can see all the dots of this new system.  And our work is just meant to connect those dots to create a new system.  And one that's meaningful for our children, meaningful for our communities and meaningful  
**[0:24:37-0:24:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:24:37):**  for our farmers.  There's not a single farmer that I've spoken with who doesn't want to feed kids and doesn't  want to see their product or what they're growing or what they're producing in their  fields or on their ranches feed our children.  And that is a profound responsibility.  
**[0:24:52-0:24:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:24:52):**  And one thing I'm learning about farmers is that they are people who do their work with  dignity and with respect.  And so as I talk to these farmers, it seems like a natural fit.  It seems like the perfect resource, the perfect way to leverage all this beautiful food that  they're growing.  
**[0:25:07-0:25:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:25:07):**  Why not feed our children?  Why not give it to our schools?  And so I have a lot of excitement about that and about how we can leverage school food  procurement dollars towards that.  It's going to take time.  
**[0:25:19-0:25:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:25:19):**  It's going to take a lot of work.  It's going to take policy.  It's going to take community members.  It's going to take institutions.  But there are models out there that have shown us that this is possible, that we can be inspired  
**[0:25:30-0:25:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:25:30):**  by.  We have a Copenhagen model.  Copenhagen is actually a city that's not much bigger than Stockton.  So let's be inspired and let's try because we have to try.  The only way to do it is to do it.  
**[0:25:41-0:25:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:25:41):**  I think if I had a message to share with the young farmers and with the new farmers, one  is thank you.  We couldn't be alive without you.  So thank you for what you're doing.  Please keep doing it.  
**[0:25:51-0:25:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:25:51):**  And we want you to be an integral and known part of our community.  So let's work and find ways to connect you more deeply in.  So that way, when you go down the street, we know who you are.  So we can say thank you because you're vital.  Sam Shepherd Robinson is another first generation farmer now based in Machynlleth in Pareth,  
**[0:26:16-0:26:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:26:16):**  Wales.  The 27 year old moved from Oxford to the Welsh countryside where he joined a rugby team,  became a member of a Welsh choir, got a job at a livestock farm and became fluent in Welsh,  all in the space of 18 months.  He reads a poem called Untamed by Megan Eluned Lewis, which captures the feelings of some  
**[0:26:35-0:26:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:26:35):**  Welsh farmers and explains why they've come to be rewilding as a threat to their way of  life.  Mae'n codi o fe'r sôn sy'n lledi am aelwampio, aelwsiapio, aelwylltio ar elltydd, aelblannu 'r doner. Ar y frydd, gwelaf ddydd, fynyad a'i dad yn tai yn gwella'r tir, yn nerthu'r  nodd, cyn ei roi, yn ei dro, yn rhoi, i rai fel ni. A ben awn ar y mynydd wedyn, troi  
**[0:27:12-0:27:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:27:12):**  ar hen garntre'n ffyrdd un. Dad wisgo'r maith, dad weithio'r pridd, dad afael mewn hen  hanes. Dad neud, dad ddysgu. It raises fear, the talk that's spreading, about revamping,  reshaping, rewilding the hills, replanting the meadows. On the frydd, I see faith, my  father and his father improving the land, strengthening the sap, before giving it in  turn as a gift for those like us. And what will we do with the mountain then? Turn the  
**[0:27:59-0:28:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:27:59):**  old home into a ruin, undress the fertility, unroot the soil, unravel an old, old story,  undo, unlearn, untame. So that was a poem called Daddoddi by Megan Elyned Lewis. Daddoddi  means untame.  Hearing this poem reminded us of Rhys Roberts and Martin Peck, two upland sheep farmers  also based in Powys, who shared their perspectives on rewilding and beauty in episode 22. It's  
**[0:28:36-0:28:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:28:36):**  one of my favourite interviews and well worth another listen. The voices of Welsh farmers  whose lives and livelihoods are rooted in these landscapes are so often missing from  rewilding discussions. We mustn't forget the rich knowledge they have built up about  the land.  This episode of Farmarama was made by me, Joe Barrett, Katie Revel and Abby Rose. We're  
**[0:29:03-0:29:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerma-57-episode-57-fibreshed-uk-chestnuts-the-edible-schoolyard-and-welsh-poetry#t=0:29:03):**  extremely grateful to our Patreon supporters who help us make the show. Thanks to James  Fryer and Kathy St Germans for recording interviews featured in this episode. Community support  for Farmarama is provided by Hannah Sutherland, Fran Bailey, Annie Landless, Eliza Jenkins  and Olivia Alden. Our theme music is by Owen Barrett.  