### Farmerama  (2020-24-26)
**[0:00:00-0:00:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to Farmerama.  This month, two new farmers share their experience of getting land through the Ecological Land  Cooperative and tell us why having a stake in their land is so crucial.  Then, we hear from a farmer on a small Scottish island about moving from conventional agriculture  to a more holistic way of farming and making a living from marginal land.  
**[0:00:27-0:00:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:00:27):**  We learn how a simple system of nurturing chopped down trees back to life is restoring  soils and supporting rural communities in Uganda.  And finally, a naturalist shares his research into insect migrations and tells us why they're  so important to agriculture.  We're excited to say that this month's episode is supported by Treedom, a platform  
**[0:00:56-0:01:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:00:56):**  that makes it easy to support a farmer in Africa and South America to plant a tree.  Treedom isn't just planting any old tree.  When you buy a tree with Treedom, you're actually financing farmers who want to plant  trees as part of a small agroforestry system.  And you're providing the local know-how and support to ensure those trees have the best  
**[0:01:16-0:01:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:01:16):**  start in life and truly benefit the farmers, the community, and the soil.  Once you buy a tree with Treedom, you can also follow the tree's journey online.  It really is very cool.  So Treedom have planted over a million trees since they started in 2010.  And they've recently just launched in the UK.  
**[0:01:35-0:01:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:01:35):**  So it's definitely worth checking them out.  Sinead Fenton and Adam Smith are the couple behind Awe Side Farm in East Sussex.  Before they took it over, their four and a half acre plot was used to grow conventional  maize.  Now Sinead and Adam are producing organic heritage veg, fruit and herbs, as well as  
**[0:01:56-0:01:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:01:56):**  beautiful edible and cut flowers.  Neither of them comes from a farming background, and they've been able to access the land  thanks to the Ecological Land Cooperative.  The ELC buys land in England and Wales and makes it available for small, low impact ecological  farms.  
**[0:02:14-0:02:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:02:14):**  What's more, they secure planning permission so that farmers can build sustainable homes  on site.  The ELC retains the freehold on each smallholding to make sure it's protected for affordable,  agricultural and ecological use now and forever.  So we started off on an allotment site in Redbridge in East London.  
**[0:02:37-0:02:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:02:37):**  We've had no experience with farming whatsoever, or even growing or gardening, like anything  of that kind of sort.  I grew a bean once and that was basically about it.  It started off as just a bit of a hobby.  We'd been doing that for maybe about a year without really...  
**[0:02:57-0:02:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:02:57):**  We wasn't selling, it was just a hobby.  And then as we started putting some stuff online of what we were growing, we started  getting quite a bit of contacting from different people, lots of chefs asking how do we get  hold of your product.  We didn't really know, never even considered this as a career.  
**[0:03:20-0:03:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:03:20):**  We decided just to start sending to these chefs around and then it kind of just grew  from that.  I guess like in London, there's quite a close network of small restaurants.  So I guess one would go to the other, I've got this stuff from so and so, and then it  kind of just grew that way.  
**[0:03:37-0:03:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:03:37):**  Yeah, it just kind of grew with us not really knowing what we were doing and just completely  winning it, which I don't know, I'd probably say we still are a little bit now.  But yeah, I guess it was like we never really intended to do this.  We just knew that we wanted to be outdoors.  We knew that we wanted to do something that was a bit closer to nature and that we were  
**[0:03:56-0:04:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:03:56):**  kind of both rethinking like kind of an office-based life.  And yeah, just kind of ended up organically, I guess, like falling into it and just learning  as we go.  We're still learning, we're still making like a ridiculous amount of mistakes, but learning  from them as we go.  
**[0:04:17-0:04:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:04:17):**  Where we were growing, we didn't have a contract, we didn't have a tenancy.  So with that, we had no security.  And why would you put kind of your investment and your heart into something knowing that  it could just be taken away from you at any moment?  And there was kind of like some talks that were maybe making us think that that was kind  
**[0:04:39-0:04:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:04:39):**  of the way that things were going to head.  But this is like, this is such a rife issue within like cities in particular of like people  growing in community gardens or with social enterprises or small growing projects that  they're all on borrowed land and they're all on unsecured land.  It's just not fair that if there's a generation of farmers and growers that are, you know,  
**[0:05:01-0:05:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:05:01):**  the kind of older demographic that we often talk about who own the land and have that  security.  It's just not fair that we don't get that as well.  But we were at the Oxford Real Farming Conference and this was where we met the ELC.  But a talk that we went to before, there was a young person talking about the want for  
**[0:05:21-0:05:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:05:21):**  like land and to be able to own the land and farmer who was a lot older than us owned land  and had said like, I don't know why you guys also hung up on owning land.  And it's just like, just how dare you?  Like it's that security that we're after that knowing that we can put our energy into something  like working with the land.  
**[0:05:42-0:05:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:05:42):**  It's not just a, you know, I'm going to get set up in like a couple of months.  It's all good to go.  It's, you know, it takes time.  It takes years.  It takes a lot of energy and effort.  
**[0:05:52-0:05:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:05:52):**  So not a lot of financial reward, but you know, a lot of like inner reward.  So that was really important for us to like get that security and to know that like the  place that we were working on and the place that we were putting our hearts into wasn't  just going to be taken away from us.  Yeah.  
**[0:06:12-0:06:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:06:12):**  So then like the ELCs were kind of like a lifeline.  Like we went to one of their talks and they explained the whole setup about access to  land, you know, like the legal legwork, et cetera.  We went to the talk twice because we didn't believe it the first time.  Yeah.  
**[0:06:31-0:06:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:06:31):**  It's a bit of a surprise to find out there is actually an option out there because again,  like I remember another one of the talks we went to there, there was a young person speaking  about how they got into farming and we at first we thought that was the talk to pay  attention to, but it just turns out they inherited the land from their parents.  So it's kind of like it was a very inspirational that one.  
**[0:06:53-0:06:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:06:53):**  But yeah, the ELC one of saying like they run this scheme where they buy portions of  land, split into like affordable sizes.  And then yeah, yeah, I guess we didn't just took it on from them and started getting in  touch with the ELC and then yeah, ended up here.  Yeah.  
**[0:07:11-0:07:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:07:11):**  We actually just never thought that it would really be an option for us when we had kind  of come to terms that like the social enterprise we were running had had no future and that  we had to leave it.  But our plan was just, you know, right, well, we're going to have to go back into office  jobs.  
**[0:07:26-0:07:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:07:26):**  We're going to have to try and like earn as much money as we can.  So then maybe we can try and buy either a small patch of land and live near it because  there's no way that we're going to buy a piece of land that actually has a house on it.  So yeah, like it's just an incredible thing that the ELC are doing in like opening up  land for people that come from backgrounds that just don't have the luxury of inheriting  
**[0:07:47-0:07:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:07:47):**  it.  Yeah.  So the relationship between us and the ELC is really good.  It's very personal there and they're involved enough from a like looking out for us perspective,  but not from a they're watching over us.  
**[0:07:59-0:08:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:07:59):**  They feel like our aunties and uncles.  Yeah, I mean, they were more, more interested in our wellbeing during this time rather than,  you know, like the actual farm inside of it, which was nice.  Yeah.  Took a lot of pressure off of it.  
**[0:08:15-0:08:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:08:15):**  But I think that's like, it's really nice to know that we have someone like looking  out for us, particularly, you know, we don't come from farming backgrounds.  We don't come from countryside or rural backgrounds.  We don't really understand how things work out here.  It's a very different way of living.  
**[0:08:33-0:08:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:08:33):**  It's very different kind of, I guess, culture and there's different politics.  We just don't really know how to like navigate with that.  We've probably come in a little bit naive with like our London ways and Essex ways of  just like, but yeah, knowing that we have like ELC that have our back, that can help  us with like what our rights are here and what we are allowed to do and what we're not  
**[0:08:58-0:09:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:08:58):**  allowed to do and like kind of some of the law stuff that we just don't have any clue  about and it's all incredibly scary.  But to know that we can reach out to them and ask them those questions is like, we feel  like we're in a really fortunate position.  You know, if we had gone and done this on our own, I just realistically, I just don't  
**[0:09:15-0:09:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:09:15):**  really think we would have been able to.  Because when we moved here, when we got our caravan, we were supposed to get it put in  place in December and then it just rained every single day from like November.  But then that just held us up quite a lot in terms of being able to move here.  So we didn't actually get like our home moved until I think it was like mid February because  
**[0:09:37-0:09:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:09:37):**  the ground was just so wet and so ridiculous.  So I think that just held us back quite a lot.  Yeah, I guess it meant that we couldn't just stay here.  So it meant like having to come from London each time.  I mean, I'd say despite all of like those earlier struggles, like we were still enjoying  
**[0:10:01-0:10:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:10:01):**  it and I think it kind of like just like was like confirming that we've made the right  choice to escape the city office life.  I guess like if you used to work in an office and have a real struggle, rubbish kind of  day, you get home and you don't really feel rewarded from it.  Whereas this, like you struggle and it's a pain at the time.  
**[0:10:25-0:10:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:10:25):**  But once you've done it, you kind of, I don't know, that kind of like self-worth, you kind  of like look at it and you kind of feel more proud of what you're doing.  It's a lot more like a visual reward with this kind of lifestyle.  Just reminding yourself that you can do it and like we are capable and we are able of  doing it.  
**[0:10:45-0:10:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:10:45):**  I think for me, like as well, that I spoke about it before, but like I suffer with like  quite a lot of anxiety and depression and like I second guess myself a lot whether I  can actually do stuff and put myself down a lot.  Whereas I think being here and like doing stuff and getting on with stuff, like I'm  building up a bit more like resilience and like belief in like what I can do.  
**[0:11:10-0:11:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:11:10):**  And I'd say the same for like you as well.  I think we're both kind of feeling like we can do more and like yeah, just believe in  ourselves.  And I mean, I still have my moments where I have a meltdown, but they're less frequent  and hopefully they'll just keep on going in that trajectory of knowing that like we are  
**[0:11:37-0:11:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:11:37):**  doing all right.  But we both were just a bit like, what is the point in just most things that we were  like doing?  Like some of the jobs I used to work in, I thought, is this actually like helping the  world or is it just like, just not?  
**[0:11:53-0:11:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:11:53):**  And like, yeah, I think we both just felt like that.  Like we just didn't really have any like sense of meaning or like purpose.  Whereas like being here and like changing the landscape for the better, just like there's  just so much like reward in that, so much like, I don't know if the right word is humble.  Probably not.  
**[0:12:12-0:12:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:12:12):**  But it just feels really good.  And like, just the things that we've seen with like, insects popping up and like the  butterflies that are all in the long grasses and like seeing the birds that are coming  on the beds and like that's just like, it's just priceless.  Like, yeah, it's just a really nice feeling.  
**[0:12:34-0:12:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:12:34):**  Over the next few years, the ELC is creating several new sites for small ecological farms,  and there are plots available.  They're on the hunt for passionate land workers and ecological entrepreneurs who are ready  now or will be ready soon to build a growing business.  If that sounds like you, then visit ecologicalland.coop to find out more.  
**[0:13:02-0:13:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:13:02):**  Roger Dixon Spain farms with his wife, Gilly on Lismore, a 10 mile long island in the Inner  Hebrides, just off the west coast of Scotland.  Roger spent most of his life as a conventional farmer in Cambridgeshire before a series of  chance events led him to Lismore and to a radically different approach to farming.  Here Roger introduces us to the idea of holistic land management and explains how he and Gilly  
**[0:13:28-0:13:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:13:28):**  are creating a viable farm business on marginal land and preparing the ground for the next  generation of farmers.  Roger covered a lot of ground in his interview, so we'll also be releasing a longer version  of this as a short, including more detail about what holistic land management means  in practice.  
**[0:13:44-0:13:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:13:44):**  Do you want to just tell me where we are now?  Well, we're on the island of Lismore.  Lismore sits in the middle of the seaward end of the Great Glen, about five miles northwest  of Oban.  It sits like a ship in between two masses of mainland Scotland, and it is one of the  
**[0:14:04-0:14:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:14:04):**  only bits of limestone in Scotland.  It is relatively speaking a lot more fertile than the land on the mainland either side  of us, but it's still marginal land.  Most of the crop that we've got is rock and hill.  Good productive soil is not what we've got here, however compared with the rest of Scotland  
**[0:14:26-0:14:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:14:26):**  it's terrific.  I spent the whole life in farming, actually came to Scotland thinking that I was never  going to farm again.  That was 16 years ago.  Industrial farming, I wouldn't have called it that a few years ago, but I now realise  
**[0:14:41-0:14:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:14:41):**  that although I was very good at the job that I did, I got to the top of the ladder and  then found out that it was against the wrong wall.  Ten years ago we were watching a film by Rebecca Hosking called A Farm for the Future.  This film was extraordinary, 45 minutes and it took as long as it took to watch the film  to have my whole belief system completely reversed.  
**[0:15:07-0:15:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:15:07):**  At the end of the film I believed none of what I'd spent my whole life believing.  I'd been into ploughing the whole of my life and I thought that was a necessary part of  the business of growing food and managing land.  So oh dear, huge shock.  But we immediately got into the business of researching this whole deal in depth and we  
**[0:15:32-0:15:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:15:32):**  have met some extraordinary people around the world on this journey.  And I can now say that I'm a holistic land manager, I'm a regenerative farmer, I'm really,  really excited about what we're doing here.  It's earth-shattering stuff, the realisation that as a species we've got ourselves horribly  wrong.  
**[0:15:52-0:15:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:15:52):**  We got into looking at holistic management because we watched Alan Saver's TED Talk,  which I found totally inspiring.  He was saying that as a species we've always managed our lives in pretty much the same  way for time immemorial.  But we're always firefighting, we're always dealing with today's challenge, today's problem.  
**[0:16:20-0:16:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:16:20):**  But what we haven't ever realised is that there are always unintended consequences that  flow from something that is dealt with in isolation rather than in the round.  The whole of what you're dealing with has to be considered in whatever situation you  find yourself in.  Alan's always saying that if the universe is a piece of string and you pull the string,  
**[0:16:47-0:16:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:16:47):**  everything moves.  The H word actually has some connotations with people, which means long hair and sandals  and flowers on your hair, but it's not that at all.  What does it mean in practice?  I think it's the depth of the thinking that goes into absolutely everything that we do  
**[0:17:09-0:17:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:17:09):**  now.  Everything that we do here is contextual.  So when we're making decisions here now, every decision that we make, whether it's our personal  life, whether it's to do with the farm, the croft, whether it's to do with the lives of  our children, all the challenges that we meet and the decisions we have to make have to  
**[0:17:30-0:17:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:17:30):**  be filtered through that settled, holistic context.  Alan Savery has put together a decision-making framework.  Every decision is put through seven testing questions, but the whole thing is really filtered  through this holistic context that we spent months and months and months writing down  on paper.  
**[0:17:53-0:18:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:17:53):**  So really, really thoughtfully designed view of where we're headed.  And we're not talking five, 10 years from now, talking 50, 100, 150 years from now.  So that we're dealing with land and with a business that will benefit people down the  generations in perpetuity if we get it right.  How many livestock have you got?  
**[0:18:20-0:18:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:18:20):**  We've got 10 Highland cattle, 10 Texel, crossed blackface hoggets.  So in terms of livestock units, about 20 livestock units, something like that, because we have  our animals out all year round, they're not housed.  The winter time is a bit of a problem if we've got too many feet on the ground because it  just make a horrible mess.  
**[0:18:42-0:18:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:18:42):**  On top of which we recognise that the living that we would help other people to make here  is not going to be based on cattle and sheep.  They're a management tool, they make a profit, but realistically, we're not going to be making  enough money to support somebody's living here if it's just cattle and sheep.  So how do you make a living of 74 acres on an island in Scotland without having to rely  
**[0:19:11-0:19:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:19:11):**  on subsidies and government handouts?  That is the purpose of doing what we're doing because other than returning land soil to  being healthy, learning to grow topsoil, learning to grow soil biology, sequestering carbon  and being able to show people that we have the answer to climate change, we also want  to have the answer to rural communities being able to support themselves financially without  
**[0:19:41-0:19:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:19:41):**  government help because we're all going to have to do that at some point.  So if we can learn to do that, then we're going to be ahead of the curve and then we'll  be able to teach other people to do the same.  So how are you going to make a living from this other than livestock?  It's likely to come from a mixture of the animals that we've got at the moment because  
**[0:20:02-0:20:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:20:02):**  we supply our regular customers with meat and they've been continuously asking us for  chicken.  Gillie and I have spent two and a half years getting ourselves to be qualified to slaughter  chickens here and Gillie on her own got legislation rewritten to allow us to do that because we  were told that we couldn't.  
**[0:20:27-0:20:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:20:27):**  The profitability of it looks really good.  We would be producing pasture raised chicken, pasture raised eggs.  The rest of the income would come from education and a tourism offer and it could be either  tourism in the sense that everybody knows tourism, in other words, people on holiday  or it's going to be the business of educating people into this new way of looking at farming,  
**[0:20:52-0:20:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:20:52):**  land management and food production, human health, animal health, the whole nine yards  because once we start down this path, everything changes.  Basically everything.  My job, I guess in the future and that of my wife Gillie will be helping to educate  people to know how to do what we're doing here and what the benefits are, but also to  
**[0:21:19-0:21:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:21:19):**  help young people to get into farming, people who have never been in farming before.  Farmers are so invested in what they've learned to do over a lifetime, they're virtually impossible  to persuade.  So we're either looking for low hanging fruit, those people who know there needs to be a  change but don't know how, or young people who are open minded enough to just come in  
**[0:21:40-0:21:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:21:40):**  and learn how to look after the land that we rely on as our base asset as a species  because if we muck that up, we're toast.  So Gillie and I are sitting here wanting to find a couple who want to come and live here.  We personally don't want to be doing the work.  We want to hand that on to somebody else.  
**[0:22:02-0:22:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:22:02):**  We want to be responsible for getting the message out there, helping them to educate  themselves, being front men for people who visit here whilst they're learning their trade  and just generally sort of enjoying the process because it's extraordinarily exciting.  Prudence Ayubare is chair of the Ugandan Network of Farmer Managed Natural Regeneration.  FMNR.  
**[0:22:30-0:22:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:22:30):**  FMNR is an amazingly simple and low cost approach to land restoration.  It's designed to be used by subsistence farmers in particular.  It involves regrowing indigenous trees and shrubs just from the trees' stumps, root  systems and some seeds.  The goal is to increase food and timber production while restoring soils and boosting environmental  
**[0:22:54-0:22:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:22:54):**  resilience and biodiversity.  Farmers in at least 22 African countries are now using FMNR to re-green their land and  reverse desertification.  Prudence gave this talk at the Fixing the Future conference in Barcelona back in 2019.  When all the trees are cut down and when all the animals are dead and when all the waters  
**[0:23:18-0:23:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:23:18):**  are poisoned, when all the air is unsafe to breathe, only then you will discover that  you cannot eat the money.  I found that very interesting and I think it's very good that we think about it.  And of course we are doing very many things, among which the main subject that I will discuss  about is FMNR.  
**[0:23:47-0:23:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:23:47):**  That is what we do sustainably to grow the food that we eat.  And FMNR is just a simple approach and a simple technique that we use in a way that we allow  the indigenous trees and tree stumps to regenerate.  We prune them and we enable them to grow into the trees that we would like to see.  And basically this is having trees on farm, which most of the times most of the farmers  
**[0:24:25-0:24:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:24:25):**  are thinking about getting that smart farm.  But we are talking about having trees on farm because that's the only way we can have trees  exist and then we also have our food grown in a proper manner that we can all coexist.  So those are the simple illustrations, how we have cleared our farm.  It is very clean as we see it, but with FMNR we are saying give it a chance to regenerate.  
**[0:24:59-0:25:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:24:59):**  And when it regenerates, it's like that image three, we can get few shrubs, few thick grasses,  few tree stumps trying to resurface.  And when they resurface, we can manage to have some trees that can try growing.  When we prune once, twice, and thrice, we can be able to get a few trees that can be  nurtured into the nature of the trees that we would want to have.  
**[0:25:28-0:25:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:25:28):**  If we want for fuel as wood, it's available.  If we want big trees for construction, it's also available.  If we need any other kind of trees, it is available.  And it's a technology that works mainly with our indigenous tree species.  So those men you see are trying to prune the trees so that we get those taller trees like  
**[0:25:52-0:25:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:25:52):**  you can see them there.  So basically FMNR is that as I have indicated.  And of course we prune these regularly and regularly.  So that is Tony.  Tony is a champion of FMNR.  
**[0:26:14-0:26:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:26:14):**  He's from Australia and we work closely together.  He got an award on right livelihood.  FMNR was awarded as a right livelihood approach to sustainable development.  So we believe it works.  We have tested it.  
**[0:26:30-0:26:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:26:30):**  It is simple.  It's low cost.  It's sustainable.  Possible.  And reversible to reverse the gear of the global warming that we have.  
**[0:26:41-0:26:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:26:41):**  We believe and we already know that we are in a changing atmosphere when we talk about  seasons.  Most of our farmers in Uganda have been used to planting in March and harvesting in June,  July.  But this time even in May it is not yet raining.  
**[0:26:59-0:27:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:26:59):**  So that means there is a lot that is going on in seasons.  And I believe also with us the seasons are changing.  When we talk about increased pests due to global warming, they are increasing.  We see new pests every day.  And all those challenges that we see available, the changes, we have decline in soil fertility  
**[0:27:22-0:27:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:27:22):**  and very many of those.  But we come in as FMNR advocates.  We come in as FMNR champions to say that we can use simple techniques to be able to rehabilitate,  to be able to increase our land productivity using a simple approach as I have talked about  it in the beginning.  
**[0:27:49-0:27:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:27:49):**  Comparing our statistics, we realized from one of the studies that we did in West Africa,  you can use 40 U.S. dollars to nurture the trees on farm per hectare with FMNR.  Using and planting new trees, you need 8,000 U.S. dollars on a farm, meaning FMNR is still  cheaper.  That is what we are saying.  
**[0:28:21-0:28:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:28:21):**  It's very easy to give an example, but it's very difficult to become one.  Yes, we are here talking.  We need to change.  We need to work out something.  We are giving examples, but what are we going to do ourselves?  
**[0:28:36-0:28:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:28:36):**  So I'm here to tell us that we can do something.  Myself when I learned about the simplicity of FMNR, I mobilized several farmers around  the country and we started practicing the FMNR network, the FMNR networking, and practically  we have rehabilitated several hectares of land in millions.  So you that is here, what are you going to do?  
**[0:29:09-0:29:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:29:09):**  Are you going to start learning by doing, as we say, with the approach?  I've been told, and it is a reality, that there is no school you go to learn riding  a bicycle.  If you want to ride a bicycle, you get on it, you ride it, you fall down, the next time  you will ride it better.  
**[0:29:32-0:29:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:29:32):**  So we say that as FMNR, that we do not have to go to school and start doing everything.  But we need to do to learn by doing.  And with that, we will perfect it and perfect it and become experts.  So there are several benefits that we can get from FMNR.  That is one of the honey products that we got from some of the farmers in Ofaka, that  
**[0:29:57-0:30:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:29:57):**  is West Nile region of Uganda, which we harvested from some FMNR farms and sites.  We have fuel.  In Uganda, most of our farmers use wood as fuel.  We use it for construction purposes.  Farmers are earning more from selling of the products from FMNR.  
**[0:30:29-0:30:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:30:29):**  From the simple illustrations, that is how a tree was cut, some of the farmers do bush  burning.  So if there is bush burning around from the farms, that is how the field may look like.  But if you look in that corner, there is a shoot that is coming up.  And that is what we need.  
**[0:30:51-0:30:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:30:51):**  And when that shoot grows to some level, we start planning.  And in a twinkle of an eye, we have a great forest.  That is a picture before FMNR and below is when FMNR had been done.  That was taken in West Africa.  So it is possible, it is reversible, we can do it together.  
**[0:31:15-0:31:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:31:15):**  That is part of the team and the farmers that we work with.  And we are working with them in one of the projects where a forest, a natural forest  was cut down, and we are working with them to do FMNR in that place so that we can be  able to re-green our landscape.  So simply, we can reduce global warming with our FMNR approach.  
**[0:31:45-0:31:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:31:45):**  And of course, as the question suggests, how do you grow the food that we eat?  FMNR simply will say it is sustainably grown.  And we can also restore our landscapes, creating favorable microclimate, and several other  elements that we can always talk about and talk about.  Let's network to scale up this approach because it is possible.  
**[0:32:16-0:32:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:32:16):**  Lastly, we have what we call the Bonn Challenge.  Our different countries have committed that by 2020 we need to have re-greened 150 million  hectares of trees.  And by 2030, we need to have re-greened with 250 million hectares.  And of course, there is a lot of scratching of the heads.  
**[0:32:49-0:32:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:32:49):**  What can we do?  How do we do it?  How do we do it?  And we are simply saying it's about FMNR that we can do.  Simple, but we shall reach.  
**[0:33:03-0:33:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:33:03):**  Insects provide many of the services we rely on for our survival.  They pollinate crops, control pests, and decompose waste.  But they also have another side to their lives.  A huge number of insects, from butterflies to beetles and dragonflies to moths, are migratory.  Some of them travel thousands of kilometers every year.  
**[0:33:29-0:33:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:33:29):**  Now, research by the University of Exeter and other European universities is beginning  to reveal the huge impact that insect migration has on agriculture across Europe, yet another  reason why it's absolutely vital that we protect these remarkable creatures.  Will Hawkes is part of the research team at the University of Exeter.  My research looks at these tiny insects which travel such great distances around the globe.  
**[0:33:58-0:34:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:33:58):**  So, for example, we think some hoverflies will travel from the UK right down to the  Mediterranean basin.  I'm very lucky.  It takes me to the mountains of Europe to areas where they can make their long pathways,  long journeys down and over.  
**[0:34:18-0:34:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:34:18):**  Then in the springtime, we go to Cyprus in order to catch the insects going back north  again.  We do this research by catching the insects in nets and then identifying them and letting  them go on their migration.  Then also counting them using a little video camera, as well as doing some more specific  
**[0:34:40-0:34:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:34:40):**  things.  We look at their pollen, what flower pollen they're carrying.  The numbers of insects which migrate seem to be really quite incredible, considering  that you see the great arrivals of swifts and swallows into the UK, but you don't always  see these numbers of insects because they're often far too small to notice.  
**[0:35:05-0:35:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:35:05):**  You might notice the painted lady butterflies coming in on the red antlers.  There's been some reports about really big ears.  But then a lot of the insects that are migrating, we found them, we found during my PhD, the  vast majority of the insects migrating are in fact flies.  That's a really, really exciting finding because that's very new.  
**[0:35:31-0:35:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:35:31):**  So the effect that flies have could be massive on the ecosystem.  Also there are some little things like when we went to the Pyrenees, we expected to see  the painted ladies and red antler butterflies because they're the known migrants.  And then we saw tens of thousands of cabbage white butterflies going up over the passes.  And that was quite interesting because everyone, well, at least I seem to think they were quite  
**[0:35:57-0:35:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:35:57):**  sedentary creatures.  They stay in one place, but in fact they seem to be moving such vast distances as well.  And so the numbers of the insects also seems to be massive.  So we were seeing, as I said, tens of thousands of these butterflies.  But when we went to Cyprus, we saw millions of these painted lady butterflies coming into  
**[0:36:20-0:36:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:36:20):**  land.  But the flies were by far the most numerous.  We had tens and tens of nearly 50 million flies making landfall across Cyprus.  So there's been some published data on how many insects are moving around just Southern  England.  
**[0:36:38-0:36:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:36:38):**  And using these amazing entomological radars, these insect radars, which fire a beam up  into the sky and then they count the number of insects passing across this beam.  And that research showed that in any given average year, three and a half trillion insects  migrate across Southern England, which is an incredible amount.  And this has loads of potential applications as well.  
**[0:37:03-0:37:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:37:03):**  So when we are in Cyprus, we saw many hover flies crossing oceans covered in pollen.  And this long distance pollen transfer is really, really important because it allows  the gene flow between populations of plants, which although they're the same species,  are geographically isolated from each other.  And because of these migratory insects, it allows these populations to be connected.  
**[0:37:34-0:37:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:37:34):**  This allows gene flow between them.  And then also this gene flow increases the fitness of the plant populations.  If they're declining, a new gene could come and rescue them.  And overall, it increases yield.  And this is really important for farming, of course.  
**[0:37:49-0:37:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:37:49):**  So like crops, crops being hundreds of kilometers apart are actually connected.  The differences in genetic diversity or increasing genetic diversity of the pollen they receive.  One of the main reasons for insect decline is habitat loss and also pesticides along  with climate change.  And they seem to be the three main things.  
**[0:38:15-0:38:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:38:15):**  And the habitat loss and pesticides seem to be quite easy fixes.  And I think it's the farmers which are in the best position to do this.  And I think it's also by a few studies which looked at the benefits of wildflower strips  on the edges of farms.  That is really important because this provides habitat for the beneficial insects.  
**[0:38:38-0:38:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:38:38):**  And it's not just pollination as well.  It's things like pest control.  And so another study that my supervisor, PhD supervisor Carl Watson did was look at just  two species of hoverfly.  And he found in just southern England, he found that they would eat six trillion aphids  
**[0:38:58-0:39:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:38:58):**  in a year, which is like 6000 tons worth of aphids, which is an incredible amount.  Two species of hoverflies eating what is about 20% of the early spring population of aphids.  And there are far, far more hoverflies which eat the aphids coming into the UK that are  migratory.  So you see how important these insects are for the agricultural industry as a whole.  
**[0:39:23-0:39:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:39:23):**  So having these wildflower strips along the edges of farms.  And even there is an experiment I think showing that having wildflower strips in the center  of fields as well was really, really useful because that just allows the insects to get  to more of the crop.  And so they can provide the pollination, provide the eating of the aphids as well, which seems  
**[0:39:45-0:39:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:39:45):**  very, very important.  This episode of Farmerama was produced by Joe Barrett, Katie Revel, and myself, Abby  Rose.  We're really grateful to our Patreon supporters who make Farmerama possible.  If you'd like to become a supporter, please visit patreon.com forward slash farmerama.  
**[0:40:07-0:40:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:40:07):**  And next month we'll announce that we have some special treats for new Patreon members  thanks to our supporters this month, Treatum.  Thank you to Philip Revel, James Fryer, Phil Moore, and Atlas of the Future for recording  a couple of the interviews featured in this episode.  Community support for Farmerama is provided by Hannah Soderlund, Fran Bailey, Annie Landless,  
**[0:40:29-0:40:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:40:29):**  Eliza Jenkins, and Olivia Oldham.  And our theme music is by Owen Barrett.  Thanks to Treatum for supporting this episode in particular.  And we're excited to be in conversation and work with many more farmers planting trees  in agroforestry systems.  
**[0:40:49-0:40:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:40:49):**  Finally, we recently let you know that our cereal series had been nominated for two Guild  of Food Writers awards in the podcast or broadcast and investigative categories.  Well, we're delighted to say that we won both of them.  Thank you so much to everyone who was involved with making and sharing the series and to  everyone who's listened so far.  
**[0:41:12-0:41:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-58-cooperative-land-holistic-management-farmer-managed-natural-regeneration-and-the-secret-life-of-insects#t=0:41:12):**  If you haven't, you can find the series on our SoundCloud page.  