---
title: 59: Upland restoration, agroforestry in Kenya and the language of regeneration
---

### Farmerama  (2020-08-30)  
### Author(s): Farmerama  

**[0:00:00-0:00:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, and welcome to Farmerama. This month we explore an innovative model for ecological  restoration in the uplands that's a combination of rewilding and regenerative farming techniques.  We head to Kenya to hear about tree planting with farmers there and why the future is bright.  
**[0:00:20-0:00:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:00:20):**  And we end up in Los Angeles speaking to a gardener who's reckoning with the words we  use and proposing a new approach to the language of regeneration.  This episode is supported by Tree-dom. Tree-dom make it easy for you and I to support a farmer  
**[0:00:42-0:00:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:00:42):**  in Africa or South America to plant a tree. To date, over a million trees have been planted  by local farmers, bringing environmental, social and financial benefits to their communities.  Once you do buy a tree with Tree-dom, you can also follow its journey online. It's a brilliant  
**[0:00:59-0:01:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:00:59):**  gift and we really recommend learning more about it and the good work that they're doing  if you head to treedom.net.  Caroline Grindrod has farmed for many years using different regenerative practices to  
**[0:01:15-0:01:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:01:15):**  optimise her farming system. Over the years she's recognised that upland farming systems  worked best using a combined approach of rewilding and regenerative agriculture. She now works  as a consultant, bringing that knowledge to many upland farms through her community interest  
**[0:01:32-0:01:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:01:32):**  company Wilderculture. Caroline also has an online shop, Primal Meats, which sells 100%  pasture-fed meat and is an accredited holistic grazing consultant.  The way I've started describing Wilderculture is it's a hybrid between rewilding and regenerative  
**[0:01:51-0:01:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:01:51):**  grazing. So we all know, well not we all don't know, but there's a growing number of people  that understand how to use mob grazing and regenerative grazing and that can work pretty  well and these things should never be a formula but you know we know how to do that reasonably  
**[0:02:07-0:02:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:02:07):**  well in the lowland areas or areas where you can paddock down into small areas. But you  know when you've got a huge fell, you've got sort of five or six flocks potentially sharing  a large mountain with no fences in between because they're all hefted and nobody can  
**[0:02:23-0:02:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:02:23):**  agree on anything and if you reduce your numbers everybody else has fell in your space. You  know these are really difficult cultural contexts and that makes life a lot more confusing.  So we've really wanted to work on how could we make this work and nearly all of these  
**[0:02:40-0:02:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:02:40):**  projects, whether they're farming projects or driven by ecological restoration like rewilding,  all fall down on the back of the social piece not being fully addressed. So people don't  understand how important it is. They think they can just come up with a set of prescriptions  
**[0:02:55-0:03:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:02:55):**  for land management and as long as the farmers or the managers will follow those that they'll  work and of course it just doesn't work and that's what holistic management is all about  is the understanding that there's more to it, that we need to address the social issues  
**[0:03:09-0:03:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:03:09):**  and that might be the fact that farmers want to be farmers, they don't necessarily want  to be paid to just look after wildlife, although it's becoming a very important part of it.  You know in rewilding projects similarly you're working in places where we've got a rich cultural  
**[0:03:24-0:03:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:03:24):**  heritage of upland management, whether that's management for deer, grouse or sheep and it's  got to be addressed and incorporated or at least understood better I think. And we hope  that with wilder culture that's what we can achieve. We can come up with bespoke models  
**[0:03:38-0:03:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:03:38):**  for different situations, whether that's a grouse moor or a sheep farm, but really we're  looking at how do we manage large blocks of land in ways that suit the people that are  actually running it and it's economically viable because again lots of conservation  
**[0:03:54-0:03:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:03:54):**  organisations doing great stuff but if it doesn't pay the bills on its own right it's  never going to take off throughout all of the landowners that are privately owned, it's  only ever going to be limited to where conservation organisations can fund it. So we're really  
**[0:04:07-0:04:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:04:07):**  keen on developing practical, effective, large scale applications of this so that people  will just think this makes sense, it's better for us in lots of different ways, it's better  because we're enjoying our management, it's better for the livestock, it's more profitable  
**[0:04:22-0:04:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:04:22):**  and of course at the same time it's extremely effective at restoring the ecology as well.  And what that looks like in many of our projects so far is a kind of splitting the farm into  productive area and a sort of hill area if you like that's less productive and running  
**[0:04:37-0:04:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:04:37):**  it like two blocks, management blocks. So we have, generally speaking on the three projects  we've got, we've got what we're calling the winter block which is the hilly area that's  less productive, it's rested all summer so all the trees can grow there, we want to just  
**[0:04:50-0:04:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:04:50):**  allow it to succeed to a wood pasture type environment so everything can grow unhindered  from grazing and then during that period we'll use the in-by and paddock that and sort of  do regenerative grazing management through those in-by areas more like your conventional  
**[0:05:05-0:05:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:05:05):**  sort of mob grazing and then reverse it so that it that gets a rest all winter that means  that you're getting a nice warm thatch put down on the soil surface so that stuff grows  a bit earlier in the spring and everything's, the soil is protected and all the microbes  
**[0:05:19-0:05:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:05:19):**  can do their stuff through the winter and then as I said they got, they have deferred  grazing that's had a full summer's rest so that they can pretty much we can get away  from using any tractors having to make hay, you know it's a transition so this takes a  
**[0:05:32-0:05:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:05:32):**  bit of time but eventually that's the aim is to get to the point where we can pretty  much be you know not needing any fossil fuel use at all or is very minimal and that would  be sequestering carbon so in theory you know we should be putting more down than we're  
**[0:05:46-0:05:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:05:46):**  putting out and at the same time we're really hoping that we can optimise biodiversity and  that all the early indications show that that's definitely the case.  Rewilding is brilliant with this we've had such wonderful results from such great projects  
**[0:05:58-0:06:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:05:58):**  with rewilding you know NEPS just led the way and I'm certainly not thinking that wilderculture  is an alternative you know we want both and similarly want conventional farming too or  certainly a more regenerative version so this is just another option within the suite of  
**[0:06:12-0:06:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:06:12):**  land management options I think.  If we rewilded all of the uplands that seems like a great idea and people will sort of  use this very simplistic calculations about what food can be produced and the fact that  
**[0:06:23-0:06:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:06:23):**  that's less productive so you know we just we should just concentrate on producing more  intensively on other areas but I think what we've learned with regenerative is that actually  it doesn't need necessarily need to be less and actually what's really important is the  
**[0:06:37-0:06:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:06:37):**  nutrient density of the food that's been produced so plant-based foods that can be produced  very intensively certainly in a conventional system are very low in nutrients and also  I think that again if we're taking a holistic approach to management we've got to realise  
**[0:06:48-0:06:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:06:48):**  that the cultural and the social aspects of what we do in our countryside is really important  and you know we don't want to lose our hay meadows we don't want to lose our fell farmers  or we don't want to lose the herded sheep in the Lake District you know there's lots  
**[0:06:59-0:07:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:06:59):**  of really good reasons that are that we need to keep those things you know if we decide  in the next 10 years to just get rid of the fell flocks I can't go back from that you  know we can't just suddenly it's taken hundreds and hundreds of years to establish those boundaries  
**[0:07:13-0:07:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:07:13):**  and that hefting system so this is these are big decisions that should be given you know  serious consideration so what we feel is and I'm not sure there is a real solution to the  fell farming problem but just resting just getting rid of the sheep and resting it isn't  
**[0:07:28-0:07:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:07:28):**  working that well either you know you're not getting a true regeneration in that system  so our job is to sort of teach the principles and test certain elements of the principles  and then try and find some pilot projects to demonstrate it to the best of our ability  
**[0:07:42-0:07:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:07:42):**  but really it's up to these individual farmers to get on board and that's why again we unlike  a lot of the conservation organisations which are buying up land so they can manage it in  hand which is obviously the easiest approach if you can find the money because you've got  
**[0:07:54-0:08:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:07:54):**  complete control but you know we just feel that our resources can be better leveraged  if we do training and we work with sort of partnerships and management agreements so  we we're working on going into agreements you know estates and landowners where we help  
**[0:08:12-0:08:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:08:12):**  the transition we sort of do consultancy arrangement or we can do some sort of long-term management  arrangement where we actually employ people to go in and look after that estate and get  it back on its feet you know so those are the sorts of ideas that we're trying to explore  
**[0:08:26-0:08:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:08:26):**  and use our time and energy in the best way possible to get the maximum impact of the  largest acreage I suppose but it's very much about trying to find bespoke you know solutions  for each individual cultural problem so in the Lake District it'll look very different  
**[0:08:40-0:08:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:08:40):**  to the Highland situation on you know a moorland on the east coast and the Dales again totally  different system culturally really important for its hay meadows and its field barns so  every situation would be adapted using the overall agro-ecological principles to sort  
**[0:08:55-0:08:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:08:55):**  of see how we can come up with something that's profitable for the farmer still encapsulates  those are really important area you know things that people want to see in that area and the  heritage and also as I say it's ultimately it's just got to make some money hasn't it.  
**[0:09:13-0:09:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:09:13):**  Katsan-Niimaya Mahindo is CEO of Africa IPM Alliance. He's got a PhD in entomology with  25 years experience in building agro-ecological practices with small-scale farmers in Kenya.  Africa IPM Alliance works with this month's supporter, TREEDM, to promote agroforestry  
**[0:09:35-0:09:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:09:35):**  in Kenya and Tanzania. They've distributed over 300,000 trees and helped over 5,000 farmers  improve their living standards by introducing trees as part of their cropping system. One  of the parts of TREEDM model that works well is that when you purchase a tree you also  
**[0:09:51-0:09:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:09:51):**  support training in agro-ecological practices and you get to see regular photos and updates  keeping your abreast of the tree's journey through life.  We work with communities in promoting agro-ecology, promoting sustainable agriculture. In Kenya  
**[0:10:09-0:10:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:10:09):**  we have different projects promoting soil fertility, promoting agroforestry and also  promoting integrated pest management. For the last five years we have worked with TREEDM.  We have established tree nurseries in different parts of the country and we distribute trees  
**[0:10:29-0:10:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:10:29):**  to the farmers and mainly we look at those trees of good economic benefit to the farmers,  especially the fruit trees and those trees with medicinal value. To date we have been  able to work with over 5,000 farmers in Kenya in this TREEDM project and we have distributed  
**[0:10:55-0:11:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:10:55):**  more than 300,000 trees of different species to the farmers. I would say that this project  has really helped us and helped our farmers in Kenya to uplift their living standards.  Last week we had a group of farmers who were celebrating because of the work that we did  
**[0:11:18-0:11:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:11:18):**  for them because they are now getting a lot of money from the harvesting of avocados and  bananas that we gave them. One of the medicinal trees that we are promoting is Prunus africana.  It's called the African cherry and we are also promoting Moringa olivera as a medicinal  
**[0:11:39-0:11:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:11:39):**  tree. The other tree that we are promoting which is medicinal especially at the coast  is Nib as a director indica. Currently the farmers are using them locally because they  are known to be medicinal since long time in Memoria. With the technologies I think  
**[0:12:00-0:12:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:12:00):**  as a director indica which is NIM, they are companies that are manufacturing some medicines  and exporting them but for us we are doing it at the local level. Farmers are using it  locally. We are distributing them for free is one thing that is making farmers to really  
**[0:12:20-0:12:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:12:20):**  like the project and then the selection of the trees to use is also very strategic because  we are not just planting trees. We are planting trees that will have good benefits to the  farmers that will bring benefits to the farmers almost immediately. This is through improving  
**[0:12:42-0:12:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:12:42):**  the kind of trees that we are giving them. For avocados we are doing a lot of propagation,  a lot of grafting so that we give them the improved varieties. That one is also giving  us a plus. Plus of course the training that we are giving them and the monitoring system  
**[0:13:06-0:13:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:13:06):**  by TreeDom is also good because they have a system where we take photographs and that  factor that the farmer feels secure when his tree is registered and they are very happy.  Before we give them trees we train them on best agricultural practices not just for tree  
**[0:13:30-0:13:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:13:30):**  management but for the farm management. Then we go down to agroforestry which is tree planting  and we go specifically to the trees that we are distributing to the farmers and we train  them how to manage those trees, their requirements, how to do even pest management, how to do  
**[0:13:52-0:13:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:13:52):**  harvesting and all that including marketing because marketing is also an issue. It's a  whole range of training from production to marketing. So farmers go through all that  orientation before and after they receive the trees. Lastly, those people who buy those  
**[0:14:14-0:14:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:14:14):**  photographs, some of them visitors, like this year we received a few visitors at the beginning  of the year before COVID-19 came. It's a very interesting program. I would say that it is  quite different from the others. The conventional way of training farmers is just plant trees  
**[0:14:33-0:14:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:14:33):**  and then they plant no follow-ups, nothing. It is really working for us. We go back with  other programs like composting, the issue of seed selection, all those. So we do a lot  of integration, a lot of integrating other projects into the TREADOM program. I have  
**[0:14:54-0:15:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:14:54):**  always liked agriculture, that is personal. The other thing is that I'm a professor myself.  I am an entomologist and I have always liked working with the communities. I left teaching.  I left because I felt that I was not giving enough to the communities. It's my passion  
**[0:15:22-0:15:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:15:22):**  that I should help the farmers to improve their living standards through better ways  of farming. For the last almost, it's now going to that  I have been promoting organic agriculture, sustainable agriculture. I have a lot of extensive  
**[0:15:43-0:15:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:15:43):**  know-how on sustainable agriculture systems. As an entomologist, I have been working with  the university. I have been working with the conventional systems. But I always look at  the other side of the coin. I thought that I would be one of those people who would help  
**[0:16:04-0:16:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:16:04):**  our farmers to have a balance between the conventional agriculture and their way of  living. Therefore, I felt that if I concentrated a lot of my research on especially methods  that are going to remove the farmers' problems without a lot of use of chemicals, I thought  
**[0:16:29-0:16:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:16:29):**  that I would be of a lot of help to the farmers. That is what I have been doing.  I have done some research on the fusion of agroecology or organic agriculture with the  traditional farming methods in Kenya. I will tell you that most of the things were done  
**[0:16:47-0:16:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:16:47):**  by our grandfathers long ago. They used different methods to purify water. They used some plants  to purify water. Some of them are there. Some of them have become extinct. But some of the  technologies were used long ago. I will agree that some of them were used. Of course, there  
**[0:17:10-0:17:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:17:10):**  are some that have been developed by the scientists. But the majority of them were there. Talk  of composting, my grandmother used to tell me not to take manure that is not decomposed  to the farm. She would tell me that that manure would burn the seeds. It is the same principles.  
**[0:17:33-0:17:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:17:33):**  I have done that study and it was very interesting to see some of the things that were done by  our grandfathers that have been brought forward. Now we are promoting them quite a lot. One  of the reasons why agroecology is still behind in terms of promotion in Kenya is because  
**[0:17:57-0:18:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:17:57):**  we don't have some policies that are promoting agroecology. I am happy to note that the government  is now keen to listen to people like us. We are now in the process of developing an agroecology  policy in Kenya. It is something that is bright. They are really keen because at the international  
**[0:18:23-0:18:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:18:23):**  level farmers are suffering. They can't sell their products because of the residual levels.  I can see a bright future for agroecology in Kenya. The other thing is that farmers  themselves are also becoming conscious of what they are eating. They know that they  
**[0:18:42-0:18:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:18:42):**  should eat food that is safe from chemicals. I can see that going forward they will demand  for services that are safe for them. I think Tridome has the best model that I have ever  worked with. Where farmers are shown how to do it, but they are also assisted in doing  
**[0:19:11-0:19:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:19:11):**  it. When we give these farmers these trees you can see the appreciation and you can even  see transformation. I wish I could share with you some of the clips that we have about what  Tridome has done and the kind of work, the kind of assistance that they have given to  
**[0:19:31-0:19:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:19:31):**  our farmers. It's tremendous.  A few months ago I read three posts on Instagram that really kind of rocked my soul into a  state of alertness. The words were somewhat uncomfortable to me, but it also felt like  
**[0:19:53-0:20:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:19:53):**  they were saying something really deeply true or something I had felt deep down over the  last few years, but never been able to kind of bring into my consciousness or to vocalize.  The posts were shared by Rishi Kumar, known as Farmer Rishi. He's a gardener and grower  
**[0:20:15-0:20:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:20:15):**  and he teaches a regenerative gardening course. His idea, or the idea he shared, is that many  of the words we use today, for example, waste, environment, and even natural, are serving  the degenerative economy and culture. And he proposes alternative words that provide  
**[0:20:38-0:20:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:20:38):**  a regenerative lens to allow for the development of regenerative culture. This interview includes  a reference to suicide, so please listen with care.  Here is Rishi reading his second post, which explores how we use the word environment,  
**[0:20:56-0:21:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:20:56):**  particularly in the environmental movement, and his proposal for the regenerative word  to be used in its place, body.  The language of regeneration. This is a series where I will explore the words we use every  
**[0:21:12-0:21:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:21:12):**  day that serve the economy and culture of degeneration and offer alternative words and  concepts to encourage the development of a regenerative culture.  Part two. Degenerative, environment. Regenerative, body.  
**[0:21:31-0:21:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:21:31):**  Save the environment. I am an environmentalist. You don't care about the environment. I study  the environment, not biology. Plastic is bad for the environment. Meat is bad for the environment.  I bought a Prius. It's good for the environment. The Impossible Burger is good for the environment,  
**[0:21:52-0:21:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:21:52):**  but it's bad for your health. Quote, John Mackey, CEO of Whole Foods.  If I shower too long, it's bad for the environment. If I eat too much, it's bad for the environment.  My shit, it's bad for the environment. I breathe out CO2. I'm bad for the environment. I am  
**[0:22:11-0:22:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:22:11):**  a pollutant.  Where is the environment? It's out there. Where? There. Where am I? There. We're both  there? Huh? Where does the environment start? Is it where my fingers end? Is it on my in-breath  
**[0:22:34-0:22:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:22:34):**  or my out-breath? Is it before I eat or after I poop? Where can I see it? Can you point  me in its direction? I must be stupid. I can't find it. Why does it hurt here in my heart  when the animals die? Why does it burn here in my lungs when the forests are ablaze? Why  
**[0:23:00-0:23:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:23:00):**  does it pain here in my gut when the soil is poisoned? Why can't I sleep when my family  can't find rest from their pain, their hunger, their addiction? Why do I feel like I'm sinking  as the waters rise? Is it because I'm weak? Why do I feel the pain in my body? Why does  
**[0:23:26-0:23:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:23:26):**  it feel like it's happening to me? It's just the environment, isn't it? Isn't it?  All of this work is like, originally it was for me. I needed this because of the extreme  anxiety that I was going through. In the environmental conception, you are in opposition to the environment.  
**[0:23:55-0:24:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:23:55):**  Every shower you take is a consumption of water, which is creating waste water, which  needs energy to process, which is going to the ocean and going to pollute the ocean.  That is a scary, that's a very anxiety inducing conception. Moving to the body and understanding,  
**[0:24:23-0:24:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:24:23):**  this is my body and in this body there is no waste. In this body there is movement of  energy around and there is more of a play. It's not that I drink water and I create waste.  I drink water and I pee my gifts to the plants and the plants give it back. We are just moving  
**[0:24:46-0:24:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:24:46):**  energy around and understanding that that is our role. Why the garden is such a beautiful  place for us to understand these things is that that is what we do as gardeners. A lot  of times we are just moving things around. We take the leaves to the compost pile, we  
**[0:25:02-0:25:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:25:02):**  take the compost to the plants, we take the fruit to our family, we take the food scraps  back to the compost, we trim the trees and we chop them up and we feed them. That is  basically what we are doing. We just move. This is where a lot of people get stuck with  
**[0:25:19-0:25:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:25:19):**  gardening is they are trying to grow the plants. No, you don't grow the plant. You move the  energy to make the energy available to the plant. It takes you out of this fighting conception  and this opposition conception and just understanding that this is my role as the organ. My role  
**[0:25:39-0:25:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:25:39):**  as the organ is to move and to give gifts, to be the transporter of gifts.  If we could look at the first one which you named, if you could say it yourself, but you  named it as degenerative waste and regenerative gift or offering.  
**[0:25:58-0:26:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:25:58):**  Yeah, the reason I made this the first one that I shared is because I think it is just  really accessible. There are so many great metaphors that make it clear. I think the  first one is waste. We have this idea and along with that we have some other concepts  
**[0:26:15-0:26:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:26:15):**  like with waste we also have consumption, we also have pollution. The idea is that something  has value and then that thing, whatever it is, that value is used. In the use of that  value, the value is destroyed. Then we have this thing that is waste and waste is something  
**[0:26:41-0:26:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:26:41):**  that needs to be thrown away. Waste is something that needs to be put away from us that we  don't want near us. It is disgusting. It is going to harm us. It is this negative thing.  We have so many terms for waste. We have food waste, we have food waste, we have food waste,  
**[0:27:02-0:27:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:27:02):**  we have food waste, we have waste water, we have human waste, we have animal waste, we  have industrial waste. There are so many things in our world that we call waste. We have this  concept that something can be through one instant, one use or one consumption be instantly  
**[0:27:27-0:27:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:27:27):**  devalued to the point where it can't be redeemed. It has reached the end of its life. Being  in the garden, this concept becomes obviously not true. Composting is definitely the most  easily accessible metaphor for this where all of the leaves that come from your garden,  
**[0:27:53-0:27:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:27:53):**  all the plant bodies that come from your garden, all of the food scraps, all your leftovers  from your kitchen, these aren't waste. These are actually gifts. Our job as a gardener  is not to take the material and judge it and say, oh, leaves, bad. Food waste, bad. Our  
**[0:28:16-0:28:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:28:16):**  job as a gardener is to just say, okay, here's this gift. Who is wanting this gift? Who is  this gift for? For me in understanding this concept even more deeply, it's not just that  it's not waste. It's not just that actually all these things have value. It's that in  
**[0:28:36-0:28:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:28:36):**  seeing that value, we're understanding our connection. It's not just the waste. These  are actually the gifts that bind us to our community in this garden. I kind of see everything  as just layers of gardens now. These things that we call waste are actually the ties between  
**[0:28:57-0:29:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:28:57):**  us. Even with the global zero waste movement, it's not about reducing the amount of trash  you create to zero. That's not really the goal. The goal is just recognizing that nothing  is trash. I talk about things. I'm really talking about people too. No one is trash.  
**[0:29:19-0:29:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:29:19):**  No person is trash. No person is waste. Everyone has value. How can we recognize each other's  value? How can we encourage each other and strengthen each other and lift each other  up? Okay, brilliant. Thank you. Then the third one. This is the most controversial one.  
**[0:29:43-0:29:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:29:43):**  The degenerative term was natural or also unnatural. The regenerative term was healthy  and to feel whole. Yeah. This is the one that for me was the most difficult and actually  was part of the trigger of the breakdown that I experienced. I think this is something that  
**[0:30:10-0:30:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:30:10):**  is still probably the one that's going to be the most controversial and the least understood.  I think the most important for us to move through and to understand. This is in the  environmental world. This is in the permaculture world. I hear this a lot and I still hear it  
**[0:30:32-0:30:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:30:32):**  a lot in the regenerative world. I really feel like this is a major missing piece to  the conversation. We hear things like we need to be more natural. We need to do what nature  does, copy nature's systems. We're disconnected from nature. What this definition tells you  
**[0:30:55-0:31:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:30:55):**  is nature doesn't include you. Nature doesn't need you. Nature isn't benefited by you. You  hear this so much, especially with the pandemic. Look how the trees are doing. Look how the air  is clean. Look how the birds are singing. Look how the animals are coming back now that we're  
**[0:31:15-0:31:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:31:15):**  locked up inside. Because you're not nature. You could never benefit anything that's out there.  The best thing you can do is lock yourself inside. Actually, the best thing you could do,  which is really the underlying message in all of this, which is very dark, is that the best thing  
**[0:31:33-0:31:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:31:33):**  you can do is to kill yourself. The bottom of the message is that you have no function here. You  have no beneficial purpose. Given that the world is in this state of crisis and climate change is  happening, what's the best thing you can do? You can make your impact zero. You can reduce your  
**[0:31:53-0:32:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:31:53):**  footprint to zero. You can make your waste zero. You can make your carbon impact zero. Where does  that lead you? That leads you to how do I make myself zero? I don't know if we're not hearing  that's what we're saying or what it is. Then you see this among the environmental movement. You  
**[0:32:13-0:32:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:32:13):**  meet long-time environmentalists. A lot of them are depressed. A lot of us are depressed, and we  don't see a way out because we are constantly seeing this opposition. If we keep going towards  what's natural, we'll never understand what we actually need to do. That's not a guide for us.  
**[0:32:38-0:32:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:32:38):**  Once we understand, okay, I am nature, then a lot of these questions we ask ourselves like,  what's natural? Everything is natural. How the hell does that help me make any decision? What's  natural? What's unnatural? That's a completely invalid question. What I do need to ask myself  
**[0:33:00-0:33:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:33:00):**  is what actually makes me feel healthy? What makes me feel whole? What makes me feel connected? What  makes me feel nourished? Those are the important questions, not what's natural. Remembering that  my health is the earth's health and not seeing that as opposition. This is a completely different  
**[0:33:23-0:33:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:33:23):**  way of thinking where you're saying, if I'm stressed, if I'm anxious, then taking a bath  with hot water and a candle is healing the earth, is a reversal of climate change. It's going against  that tide because it's healing for me. Let's focus on what's healing and not what's natural.  
**[0:33:51-0:34:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:33:51):**  As Farmer Rishi says, the third post is the most controversial and it definitely needs a bit more  time to explore. You can head to at Farmer Rishi on Instagram to read all three of these posts and  let us know what you think. You can check out his other projects on his website, FarmerRishi.com.  
**[0:34:15-0:34:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:34:15):**  If you are interested in exploring regenerative gardening further, then you can sign up for his  online regenerative gardening course with Kiss the Ground. This episode of Farmer Rama was  produced by me, Joe Barrett, Abbey Rose, and Katie Reppel. Our Patreon supporters help make  
**[0:34:33-0:34:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:34:33):**  Farmer Rama possible. We're very grateful and even the smallest contribution makes a big difference  to us. If you'd like to consider becoming a supporter, visit patreon.com forward slash  Farmer Rama. Community support for Farmer Rama is provided by Hannah Sutherland, Fran Bailey,  
**[0:34:52-0:34:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/episode-59-upland-restoration-agroforestry-in-kenya-and-the-language-of-regeneration#t=0:34:52):**  Annie Landless, Eliza Jenkins, and Olivia Aldam. Our theme music is by Owen Barrett.  Toodle-oo!  