---
title: 60: Regenerative Cheesemakers, Brixton Windmill, Food & Development and Tractors
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.

---

### Farmerama  (2020-09-27)  
### Author(s): Farmerama  

**[0:00:00-0:00:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to Farmerama.  This month we hear how some artisan cheesemakers are starting to embrace regenerative farming.  We give you a sneak peek at one of the producers featured in our new series, Who Feeds Us.  
**[0:00:16-0:00:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:00:16):**  We learn about a new course investigating the complex links between food and development.  And finally we hear from a long time farmer who's got some clever tips on how to be resourceful with machinery.  This episode is supported by Tree-dom.  
**[0:00:37-0:00:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:00:37):**  Tree-dom make it easy for you and me to support a farmer in Africa or South America to plant a tree.  To date, over a million trees have been planted by local farmers bringing environmental, social and financial benefits to their communities.  Once you buy a tree, you can also follow its journey online.  
**[0:00:56-0:01:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:00:56):**  It's a really brilliant gift and we recommend learning more about it and the good work that Tree-dom are doing at www.tree-dom.net  Dwanwyn Perciville is the cheese buyer for Neal's Yard Dairy in London.  Abby visited her to hear about how a collaboration with a small dairy farm in Yorkshire is as much about nourishing the landscape as nourishing cheese.  
**[0:01:20-0:01:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:01:20):**  Recent months have been a challenging time for cheesemakers and this conversation feels more relevant than ever.  As we all look to more resilient and regenerative farming in the future,  this recording was made prior to the Covid pandemic.  
**[0:01:36-0:01:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:01:36):**  I think from Neal's Yard Dairy's perspective, without good farmers making good cheeses, we don't have a business.  And so it's absolutely in our selfish best interest to do everything that we can to help people who are struggling,  either with the quality of their cheese or with the financial side of their business,  
**[0:01:52-0:01:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:01:52):**  really get through the tough times and get through the tough times.  And so for us, success looks like them running profitable businesses as well and splitting that value all the way up and down the supply chain.  So, you know, I think that's been part of the ethos and the philosophy since the very beginning.  
**[0:02:07-0:02:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:02:07):**  And I hope that it's something that we're continuing today and into the future.  Just even over the last five to ten years, I've seen a lot of growth in the dairy industry.  And I think that's been a big part of the philosophy since the very beginning.  
**[0:02:25-0:02:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:02:25):**  And I hope that it's something that we're continuing today and into the future.  Just even over the last five to ten years, we've really started to think differently about farming as the first step in the cheese making process.  And for me, that's really exciting because it's this whole area that, you know,  
**[0:02:40-0:02:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:02:40):**  we really haven't been that familiar with in the past and this opportunity to understand farming better  and to be able to really get a sense of the meaning of that path.  But I also think it holds this extraordinary potential for us to really discover the flavors of good farming  
**[0:02:55-0:03:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:02:55):**  and to help our customers understand what that is and to celebrate that by rewarding the people who are farming  in really sustainable and wonderful ways with a sustainable price for their cheese as well.  The choice of cheese that a new farmer makes is really essential.  
**[0:03:12-0:03:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:03:12):**  How are we going to make sure that in the farming system, are we going to be able to have a cheese that's really delicious to eat?  And then following back from that, how are we going to accentuate the uniqueness of this cheese?  There are tons and tons, there are hundreds of cheeses being made within the UK, and many of them taste essentially the same.  
**[0:03:29-0:03:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:03:29):**  They taste of commercial starter cultures that have been added.  They taste like milk that's been, you know, from cows that are fed on a lot of concentrates.  And to be honest, it's really hard to differentiate yourself by just using a different starter culture or a different unique recipe.  
**[0:03:41-0:03:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:03:41):**  It's really about what is your farming system looking like?  What's that biodiversity and how can we express that in the cheese?  When I get samples of cheeses that reflect those values, immediately we're interested in having a chat.  
**[0:03:54-0:03:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:03:54):**  Let me show you a cheese that just came in.  Unfortunately, we're going to have to go into the cold room.  This is a cheese that's made by one of our newest cheesemakers.  
**[0:04:04-0:04:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:04:04):**  His name is Andrew Hatton and he is actually, I would say he's a farmer first and foremost  and then a cheesemaker.  He is based in Nitterdale in the Yorkshire Dales.  
**[0:04:15-0:04:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:04:15):**  It's probably the most remote farm that we buy from.  To get there, we can't even drive our rental car to get there because the track to the farm is so poorly maintained and bumpy.  So we have to park in the nearest village and he collects us in his 4x4.  
**[0:04:28-0:04:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:04:28):**  And so it's like a three mile track to the farm.  It's absolutely out in the middle of nowhere, but it's also in this sort of very protected area of natural beauty.  And to be honest, I think for Andrew, the farming is almost a means to an end in terms of preserving a really sort of rare ecosystem of upland hay meadows  
**[0:04:47-0:04:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:04:47):**  with huge floral biodiversity, but also rare ground nesting birds and this whole ecology of interesting and endangered species,  including his cows, which are northern dairy short horns, which is a critically endangered breed with only about 150 cows left.  So he's decided that he's going to use these cows because they originated here and they're absolutely perfectly adapted to his ecosystem  
**[0:05:14-0:05:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:05:14):**  to make a cheese that's like the Winsley Dales that would have been made on all of those farms 100 years ago.  Skulls!  These came in a few weeks ago and we put them aside where nobody's going to mess with them and I wonder if, unfortunately...  
**[0:05:37-0:05:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:05:37):**  We've only had three cheeses from him so far.  He's had a lot of trouble convincing his local health inspector that the cheeses are alright to sell.  And I think one of the challenges that small cheesemakers who are just getting started in the UK have is that often the people who are responsible  
**[0:05:53-0:05:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:05:53):**  for approving their businesses and helping them get started are used to a very different status quo.  So in this case, the environmental health officer is also responsible for inspecting Winsley Dale Creamery, which is one valley over,  which makes more than 5,000 tonnes a year of cheeses that are made from pasteurized milk and for her that's the status quo.  
**[0:06:13-0:06:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:06:13):**  So somebody making cheese from 15 cows using raw milk and a very slow acidification is automatically a little bit scary.  So I think they've been working together really well and actually both sides have come a long way to understanding the others.  And I have to say that we aren't able to sell these cheeses yet, but we're so excited to be starting to, hopefully before the end of this year  
**[0:06:35-0:06:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:06:35):**  and if not when the season starts again next year.  Andrew and Sally are milking their cows seasonally, which is another thing which is almost unheard of with cows.  Goats and sheep, we think, you know, it's completely natural that they'd only be giving milk during the summer months,  
**[0:06:48-0:06:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:06:48):**  but with cows we're so used to the modern paradigm where cows can just, you know, you have herds that are calving all year long  and that you have an uninterrupted supply of cheese with the Winsley Dale.  It's only going to be made between April and November and all the cows will calve at the same time,  
**[0:07:02-0:07:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:07:02):**  which means that the early lactation milk will be very different from the mid-lactation milk and the late lactation milk.  And actually in reading old books, Andrew said that he was very interested that some of these Winsley Dale makers  were talking about making three different styles of cheese based on the stage of lactation of their cows  
**[0:07:20-0:07:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:07:20):**  and that the mid-summer cheeses were the ones that would most often naturally go blue and be ripe in time for Christmas,  whereas the cheeses made in autumn, for example, would be much softer and ready to sell earlier.  So it's really interesting to be using this as a way of exploring not only what old farming systems might look like,  
**[0:07:37-0:07:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:07:37):**  but what actually the cheeses that could only be made with the kind of milk that was coming from these highly diverse systems  might be tasting like.  Everything that I see, and from listening to your podcast as well, I recognize that we're on the cusp of a really significant change in the face of farming.  
**[0:07:54-0:08:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:07:54):**  And I think entering into that dialogue with farmers is something that is at the top of our priority list  in terms of understanding what that seismic shift looks like and how we as a cheese industry are placed to help people  who are working to evolve in this way, how we can help them get the most value from those changes that they're making.  
**[0:08:18-0:08:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:08:18):**  So I would love to have more of a dialogue with people who are coming to this, not necessarily from the cheese side to begin with,  but from the farming side because we have tons to learn and I feel like that exchange could be extremely fruitful.  Abigail Holesborough is head miller at Brixton Windmill in London.  
**[0:08:45-0:08:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:08:45):**  They initially started volunteering at the windmill because of their passion for heritage sites and heritage technology.  You may have heard we're about to release a new series called Who Feeds Us.  The first episode is out mid-October and Abigail is one of the many people featured.  
**[0:09:02-0:09:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:09:02):**  The series is a celebration of the many key workers like Abigail who kept us fed during the COVID lockdown and beyond.  I'm Abigail. I've been a miller at the windmill for three years this month.  Literally every month I'm in here milling grain or milling flour, sorry, and then we deliver it to bakeries and shops around Brixton.  
**[0:09:31-0:09:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:09:31):**  When I joined the senior miller at the time was a guy called Sean and Sean was very kind of rough and ready.  He would just chuck you in at the deep end and he would ask me what I thought of the consistency of the flour and I'm not a baker,  I've never really baked so I didn't know what I was doing but yeah he taught me that this idea of the rule of thumb which came from millers that we would,  
**[0:09:57-0:10:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:09:57):**  it's almost like each time we mill it's an experiment because you never get, conditions always different, the weather's always different,  of course the grain is the same you hope but there can be changes in the consistency of that so each time we put some grain into the hopper  we'll spend a few minutes just like everyone who's in the mill will get a handful of the flour and like literally rub it between your thumb and index finger  
**[0:10:21-0:10:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:10:21):**  and think okay is this good enough or do we want to move a bit more and each time we're lowering the stones just to get that consistency right.  So when I joined it was very evident quite quickly that I was the youngest person here. A lot of the volunteers are retirees.  A lot of them or some of them had kind of baked or a few have worked in engineering and that's how they kind of got involved  
**[0:10:45-0:10:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:10:45):**  and yeah I think I was the youngest by about 20 years initially or maybe more which was nice for me because I was just learning not just about the mill but about life from people.  I remember one guy I started working with in the beginning he was an engineer on the Crystal Maze that a game show used to come on  but it was so cool for me to hear about his experiences and the stuff that he'd learned and in some ways being amongst people who've retired it's nice just kind of having a slower pace of life and conversation.  
**[0:11:18-0:11:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:11:18):**  So yeah I mean I'm obviously keen to get more young people involved because we get a lot of school children in and colleges as well and sixth formers  but for me it needs to go beyond just those initial educational workshops and actually encouraging young people not just in mills across country to get involved in heritage.  It has a very bad stigma at the moment in that it's old buildings for old people and those are the only kind of people who are interested when in actual fact there's loads of things you can learn and loads of skills even in terms of employment.  
**[0:11:53-0:12:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:11:53):**  This is voluntary obviously but there are skills I've had here in terms of working with other people, sorting out admin and logistics of the mill and deliveries that definitely helps me in terms of work.  So when I was younger I was a brownie guide, it's very important to me and so there's always kind of been a moral duty I suppose to protect the things around me and in my community  and that kind of initially, so I grew up in Walthamstow, we've got a really interesting in terms of museums and galleries and things like that.  
**[0:12:31-0:12:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:12:31):**  But the things that I was more drawn to was like we've got the old pump house museum and there's all these old trains and fire engines and it's, I suppose it's kind of like yeah the things that are the cogs that keep life turning as well.  It sounds very cheesy but at least when you think about a mill for us now we've talked about this loads, we're so removed from the processes and the people that make our food and it's nice one to understand how things were done before  but then two to also have the pleasure I suppose of still making flour and making things that people find useful and really enjoy as well.  
**[0:13:19-0:13:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:13:19):**  It's interesting when you think about history in general and the way it's taught to young people in schools because it's this thing you kind of tick off and it's like well we cover World War Two, we talk about Churchill for a bit  and then I don't know the civil rights movement in America and that's the end of it and it's a shame because of that approach a lot of young people kind of see history as separate to their lives or other than the rest of everything else they do.  Whereas in actual fact what needs to happen is a shift to see that it influences everything we do and affects everything that we do and we'll continue to do so and I think right now in terms of, I don't know, access to the internet and social media when we think about the ways that people are self archiving and capturing their own stories and hopefully we'll continue to present that into future generations.  
**[0:14:12-0:14:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:14:12):**  There's an importance just to give young people a voice to talk about how life is affecting them right now and how that will change as we get older.  Brixton has been historically a very black area. A lot of Jamaican and Caribbean migrants when they came to this country this is where they came. We have Windrush Square because of that.  But if you look at the makeup of our volunteers here or the types of people that come to visit it tends not to be the old Brixtonians or people who kind of, I don't know, for whatever reason feel like things like this aren't for them, which is a real shame.  
**[0:14:48-0:15:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:14:48):**  And I think that not even just in terms of having visitors but we would benefit from having different types of volunteers coming in and giving their kind of background and experiences to add into what we've got on the team.  Even when you look at kind of like every year we've got our festive bake at Christmas time. It would be nice as well as to see someone come in and make an old Jamaican rum cake out of Brixton windmill flour. So fingers crossed we'll get some in.  It would be nice to see more things like this podcast happening that makes the whole world, like that world, more accessible to people who don't know what's going on. Whether they're working in the industry or not, whether they are volunteering, even if they're not a baker just because, yeah, it's important and it's affecting their lives and I think there's a lot more work that we can do at the mill in terms of educating people and just getting them interested.  
**[0:15:47-0:16:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:15:47):**  But it would be nice to see more other mills and other bakeries kind of open up a bit more. I know every year there's national mills weekend. It would be nice for that to kind of be publicised a bit more, to be on the mill in the community and kind of school groups who get roped in on coaches and stuff because someone like my mum or my dad they just wouldn't know about that if I wasn't already volunteering.  So I think there's a big job around, yes, educating people but also the ways in which, or the mediums that people are using to do that, whether that's podcasts, whether that's, I don't know, TV shows, etc. It would be nice to get a milling vlog running maybe potentially.  At this point in time there's a real urgency across the country, across the world, to protect assets or assets in the community in terms of heritage and in terms of people's understanding of what the area has been like.  
**[0:16:46-0:16:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:16:46):**  And I think, yeah, obviously, fingers crossed that we'll be here for another 200 years hopefully, and we'll just keep passing it down.  India Hamilton is chef and co-founder of Scoop, the sustainable co-operative in Jersey.  And she's just completed an MA in food and development at the University of Sussex.  
**[0:17:12-0:17:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:17:12):**  Throughout her time on the MA programme, India has been feeding us little gems of knowledge and insights that she picked up along the way.  The course is taught by lecturers from multiple departments at the university and aims to explore the true complexity of links between food and development across the world.  We spoke to two of the lecturers on the programme.  
**[0:17:36-0:17:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:17:36):**  Lydia Cabral is research fellow at the Institute of Development Studies.  And Pedram Rohani is senior lecturer in geography at the School of Global Studies.  I guess one important thing that we try to add to the landscape on food systems thinking, there's actually quite a lot on offer in the UK, around the world, on food studies, food systems perspectives.  
**[0:18:06-0:18:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:18:06):**  But what we really add is a very strong focus on development and within that, a strong concern with how the pursuit of more sustainable and fairer food futures is largely a political process,  which is about managing conflicting interests, managing paradoxes, managing contradictions in the system.  So I think we put a lot of emphasis on the development nature of food issues and the need to take a sort of an ethical perspective that is concerned not only with aspects related to environmental sustainability,  
**[0:18:58-0:19:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:18:58):**  but also with fairness, with equity in the system more broadly.  We try to, in the course, to really capture the multi-dimensional character of food as a development issue,  which is not only about addressing hunger and malnutrition, which are, of course, still huge, huge problems.  
**[0:19:24-0:19:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:19:24):**  If you consider that about two billion people in the world are still struggling with malnutrition and that's likely to increase now under the current pandemic.  So that continues to be the biggest challenge.  But there are other challenges which are connected to these and that are related with how we use natural resources,  
**[0:19:47-0:19:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:19:47):**  with how access to resources, water, land, financial resources, markets are distributed in the system.  The fact that there are some clear contradictions between different development objectives.  Should you put first ecological sustainability, for example, going for greener sources of energy?  
**[0:20:17-0:20:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:20:17):**  Or is it more important to ensure that you have food availability and access to the most vulnerable?  Sometimes there are contradictions between different objectives.  And I think we try to discuss those to the extent possible.  
**[0:20:32-0:20:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:20:32):**  So I think one strong element that I particularly try to bring into the course is that emphasis on the political nature of food,  which relates to those contradictions, competition for resources, but also different ideas, different understandings of how the world should operate.  Some people are more concerned with ensuring the system is efficient, there is little waste in the system.  
**[0:21:03-0:21:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:21:03):**  Others are more concerned with people having capacity to engage with decision making to protect their identities, protect their territories.  So there are these different interests and epistemologies within the system.  And that's something that we try to engage with.  
**[0:21:24-0:21:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:21:24):**  Of course, to fully be able to engage and understand this multidimensionality and the political nature of food, you need to draw on these different disciplines.  So you need to understand history, you need to understand class, you need to understand political settings, you need to understand geographies, as Pedro emphasized.  So we do need interdisciplinary lenses and I think what we're offering through this course is very much tries to do that.  
**[0:21:56-0:22:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:21:56):**  So the reason we started this MA in food and development was, in addition to my interest in studying food systems,  was that there were all these developments on campus and beyond around the sustainable development goals and building also on the strengths across campus,  both at IDS and in global studies on our expertise in development studies.  
**[0:22:28-0:22:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:22:28):**  We thought it was extremely important to set up such a course that tackles the complexities of the food systems with a specific course,  tries to bring in all those different viewpoints together.  We have anthropologists and political scientists and me as a natural scientist and other people bringing all these different perspectives together.  
**[0:22:57-0:23:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:22:57):**  To highlight the different actors and processes that exist here.  And as Lydia was saying earlier as well, it's moving beyond issues around malnutrition, undernutrition and food security, which is very important,  but there's just more to that as well.  
**[0:23:27-0:23:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:23:27):**  Building a conversation with researchers like Lydia and Pedram provides you with an opening of understanding things in such a different way.  It's been in that sense incredibly helpful from a development perspective, which is this huge complex thing.  Development itself can also be seen and utilised in your own home or in your own business.  
**[0:24:02-0:24:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:24:02):**  Because I think there's this idea that we're developing and the global south needs to develop more than the global north.  But actually in this, in the time of challenges we're facing, we all need to kind of look at ourselves and look at our own practices.  And it's been an incredible tool for me, who gets a bit overwhelmed by the larger, bigger issues,  
**[0:24:28-0:24:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:24:28):**  but has found it hugely practical to come and take to my own place of work, which is a small island, which is just Jersey.  And it helps me articulate the importance of looking globally, looking into unexpected places and learning from those areas.  We have this course, but I think this course is helping Pedram and I to create together with many other colleagues from both the School of Global Studies  
**[0:25:00-0:25:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:25:00):**  and the Institute of Development Studies who deliver the course.  So it's creating some sort of a community of thinking, a community of practice around food issues.  And I think our ambition is to expand that beyond the course.  
**[0:25:19-0:25:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:25:19):**  So it's not only the master's programme that we deliver to students, but it's also these other networks that are created in the process.  And we very much try to connect with different players in the food system through different ways.  So we've had seminars on food issues, bringing in not only academics, but also practitioners from the field.  
**[0:25:49-0:25:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:25:49):**  So we very much welcome to have those opportunities.  And we've also had a plan of having more regular field visits.  We managed last year to take our students to a permaculture site here in Sussex, just around the corner from the university.  
**[0:26:13-0:26:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:26:13):**  So very convenient. And just get a sense of those local experiences with the issues that we discuss in the course.  Unfortunately, at the moment, we are not able to organise other such visits.  But this is another way of engaging with a broader community out there.  
**[0:26:33-0:26:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:26:33):**  And in that way, you know, enrich the learning experience, but also expand our community.  Jonathan Boas has farmed for over 50 years at his 600 acre mixed arable farm in Worcestershire.  He's a conventional farmer, and he's come up with lots of simple ways to make his conventional arable system more ecological and profitable.  
**[0:27:01-0:27:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:27:01):**  Jonathan is a tractor fiend, and he uses his machines in creative ways to get the most from his system.  Tongue in cheek, this is true, I actually own 100 tractors, believe it or not.  Having said that, a lot of this is sort of museum and old classic stuff and that, which is another great interest of mine.  
**[0:27:24-0:27:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:27:24):**  But what we tend to do is look at a machine and see what functions it can do on the farm, besides what it was originally designed for.  A couple of classic examples are the old precision chop forage harvesters, which as well as picking up grass with it for silage,  which we don't any longer do, we use it to harvest.  
**[0:27:47-0:27:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:27:47):**  We mow with a conventional mower, not a mower conditioner, these clover lathes.  Then we pick it up with a precision chop forager and blow it into the muck spreader, which spreads it.  So it acts like a seed drill, the muck spreader does.  
**[0:28:01-0:28:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:28:01):**  The muck spreader is also used as a composting machine.  We put it in it and run it stationary, and it stirs it all up.  As well as we use it to spread the farmyard manure, so we invent multiple uses out of the muck spreader really.  
**[0:28:16-0:28:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:28:16):**  And this has been my policy all along really, is adapting and making machines to do as much as possible on the farm.  Something I enjoy a lot as well.  This episode of Farmerama was produced by me, Joe Barrett, Abbey Rose and Katie Revel.  
**[0:28:38-0:28:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:28:38):**  Thank you to Treedom for supporting this episode.  Our Patreon supporters help make Farmerama possible.  And even the smallest contribution makes a big difference to us.  
**[0:28:48-0:28:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:28:48):**  If you'd like to become a supporter, visit patreon.com.com.  Community support for Farmerama is provided by Hannah Sutherland,  Fran Bailey, Annie Landless, Eliza Jenkins and Olivia Oldham.  
**[0:29:03-0:29:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/60-regenerative-cheesemakers-brixton-windmill-food-development-and-tractors#t=0:29:03):**  Our theme music is by Owen Barrett.  Toodle-oo!  