### Farmerama  (2020-15-27)
**[0:00:00-0:00:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, and welcome to Farmerama.  It's good to be back this month with a collection of conversations with farmers who are trying  to build a more ecological future.  This has been quite a year.  Many of us are not enjoying the holiday season the way we'd expected, but the darkness can  
**[0:00:24-0:00:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:00:24):**  also be a time for reflection, for planning, and a time to take comfort in the natural  cycles that guide our planet, as well as ourselves.  We've now passed the winter solstice in the northern hemisphere, and the days are once  again getting longer.  This month, we bring you three stories of positive change, offering grounds for hope.  
**[0:00:53-0:00:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:00:53):**  We begin by learning how raising sheep and goats ecologically results in wool that's  extra special, all because of the good work going on in the soil.  We head to France to hear about one farmer's regenerative learning journey, and discover  how he's putting that learning into practice here in the UK.  And finally, we're in Germany, where an innovative funding model is bringing farmland  
**[0:01:17-0:01:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:01:17):**  back into common ownership, and securing it for generations to come.  Alice and Dominic Ellsworth manage 58 acres at Whistlebear Farm, nestled between the North umberland Coast and the Cheviot Hills. They keep pedigree flocks of angora goats for their  fine mohair fleece, and wensleydale sheep for their high-luster longwool. Their aim  is to produce ethical, high-quality knitting yarn. They know that this begins with the  
**[0:01:58-0:02:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:01:58):**  soil and the land, and they're always looking for ways to keep their farm as healthy as  possible.  Alice spoke with Annie Landless about some of their pioneering practices.  Principally what we've done is we have gone over from the previous owners who are arable  farmers to having grass lays, different herbal lays, very mixed swords, and we have seen  
**[0:02:32-0:02:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:02:32):**  a really fantastic change in organic matter. When we were first here, it was measuring  between 2.8 and 3.0, and more recently last year we measured again and we were between  5 and 7, so that's a really, really significant change. And you can see it around you, you  can just see the way things grow and the colour and the life, it's changed everything.  We've been planting trees for the last year or so. We've had a big project in conjunction  
**[0:03:09-0:03:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:03:09):**  with the Woodland Trust, sorry, it's gone out of my head. We've planted trees across  the whole farm and we've divided all the fields into long strips. The trees are planted in  three rows, and the outermost rows are for coppicing, which will give us plenty of browse  for the goats and leaf hay for the goats through the winter, because goats are naturally browsers  as opposed to grazers. And then the centre trees will be allowed to grow much bigger  
**[0:03:39-0:03:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:03:39):**  and be more specimen trees. The other thing it's done though, it's divided the farm into  these strips, which opens up very easy, in theory, mob grazing for us. And that's something  we're really interested in and want to have in place across the whole farm. We started  for the first time this year, and we've had some success. In some of the fields, the rows  of trees are fenced, but they're open at the ends. And we find that some of our stock are  
**[0:04:11-0:04:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:04:11):**  really good at respecting electric fences, and some of them are really not. It has definitely  worked this year. We have seen an impact on the growth in the fields, etc. But hopefully  next year, it will be better. In the 16 years we've been here, there have been massive changes  in soil health. We have very little standing water on the farm now. When it rains here,  our water soaks in really quite well. And that's essential because the livestock that  
**[0:04:42-0:04:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:04:42):**  we have get very, very sore feet very easily. So if it's wet, they don't go outside, they  cost so much more to feed, etc, etc. And it's more biodiversity, and it's more shelter,  and that will bring in more wildlife and more species, and everything works together. So  the more variety and variation we can have above the ground and below the ground, it's  going to be a good thing. And that's a lot of what it's about. It's only a small farm,  
**[0:05:13-0:05:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:05:13):**  it's only 58 acres. So unless we were a market garden or intensive pigs or something, we  need to do something a bit different. We need to produce a product that's going all the  way to the end consumer. And yarn is great, actually. It doesn't have a sell by date,  which is a wonderful thing. And it's a really, really growing industry. It's the fastest  growing craft in the Western world at the moment. And what's really lovely is that the  
**[0:05:46-0:05:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:05:46):**  people who come here to buy wool, they really want to know. They want to know the story,  they want to meet the animals, they want to know what we're doing about regenerative farming.  Even in 2013, I first started selling wool. And at that time, specialist yarn like ours,  boutique yarn as it's called, was mostly sold through wool festivals. And you would go to  a big festival and you would set up a stand and they would be buying their year's supply  
**[0:06:14-0:06:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:06:14):**  of wool. And then they would be interested in your story, but they were mostly interested  in your wool. In the last few years, that has definitely changed. My best customers  are now the ones that come to the studio and they want to know everything about the way  that we farm because that adds to their enjoyment of the whole knitting process and the garment.  They want to knit without guilt and why not? And the way they can do that is actually seeing  
**[0:06:44-0:06:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:06:44):**  for themselves. So yes, it's been over the last eight years, it's changed from being  entirely product led to now being completely story based. When we first started farming,  we were always focused on the environment. We were originally organically certified. We do believe  in all of that. But as the years have gone by, it's become about soil. It's all about  soil. If the soil is why everything else follows, or that's what it feels like. Our most recent  
**[0:07:13-0:07:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:07:13):**  change actually is that we are trying to reduce our use of fossil fuels and compaction for  our fields. So we're reducing the use of the tractor. So we have got two working horses  and we're starting to do more of our farming with the horses. This is the first year that  they've been working and they've only been trained this year. So we have done some significant  jobs. We've done some hay-treading and we've sown some seed, moved things around, done  
**[0:07:44-0:07:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:07:44):**  some logging. But hopefully over the next few years, we will get that down to virtually  all the farm jobs with the tractor just being a backup. We're not brave enough to get rid  of the tractor yet. The kit isn't that easy to get anymore because obviously, although  it's surprising actually, very, very pleasingly, more and more farms are genuinely going back  to horsepower. And they're not doing that for romantic ideals. They're doing it because  
**[0:08:12-0:08:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:08:12):**  it adds up. It is getting more and more difficult to farm conventionally on the back of fossil  fuels.  Andy Cato was a really successful DJ before he switched careers to become a farmer. He  now farms a 100 hectare mixed farm in France with a bustling farm shop and an unfarmed  mill and bakery. But getting there has not been straightforward. Although he's always  
**[0:08:45-0:08:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:08:45):**  farmed organically, Andy realized a few years ago that the way he was farming just wasn't  working. So he started grazing animals, growing heritage weeds, and using horses on the land,  as well as developing some pasture cropping methods. Essentially, planting and growing  crops as part of a pasture. It's a really exciting way of growing crops. And as you'll  hear from Andy, it has lots of benefits.  
**[0:09:24-0:09:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:09:24):**  All my professional life until about 15 years ago, maybe a little bit more, I was a musician.  And so this whole adventure started when I was on the way back from a gig one day and  I picked up an article about industrial food production. And I was a kind of occasional  organic food eating person at the time without really knowing why. And I read this article,  very shocked by what I read, started doing more and more reading on the subject. And  
**[0:09:46-0:09:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:09:46):**  that led to me wanting to be self-sufficient. So I started growing vegetables for the family  and went through a kind of transformational moment when I went down to the greenhouse  one day. I built myself this little greenhouse and planted some tomatoes and lettuces. And  then when these seeds actually germinated and had two leaves, that was a miraculous  moment for me. And why that isn't the first thing that happens when we go to school, I  
**[0:10:08-0:10:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:10:08):**  have no idea. And when that became food on my, or on our family table a few weeks later,  that was just absolutely transformational. And from that moment really began a sort of  long love affair, which has since led me to depths of despair and peaks of euphoria along  the road. But basically I decided that the rest of my life I want to be involved in growing  things. And I took the kind of absolutely insane decision to sell all of my song publishing  
**[0:10:41-0:10:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:10:41):**  rights to finance the purchase of a farm in Gascony because I thought I had the bit between  my teeth. I've been selling some vegetables at the local market. I was like, yeah, I want  to do this at scale. I want to show we can do this at scale. And then when I finally  found this farm, the finding farm in France, there are upsides. It's a lot cheaper than  it is in the UK, which is why they do that. The downsides are it's heavily regulated.  
**[0:11:03-0:11:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:11:03):**  So you have to do these insane kind of interviews in local town halls to say, why it should  be you that gets the field, not the other guy. And that's quite intimidating. And all  the sort of white dusty Citrons come into the town, town center and everyone knows each  other apart from me. And some of the things that I said in those presentations make me  wince. But anyway, you live and you learn. But so I got the farm and then it was just  
**[0:11:24-0:11:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:11:24):**  terrible really, because the guy who sold it to me, his family had found that farm for  many, many generations. They built everything. I mean, just that incredible generation of  people who'd felled the trees, made the beams, built the hangar, done the irrigation, built  a lake. You know, I mean, just insane. But it was a tsunami wave of information. You  know, if you don't do that knob on the 1st of November, then that would explode and this  
**[0:11:44-0:11:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:11:44):**  tractor and this and that and the other. And I knew nothing about mechanics, you know,  and realized that a lot of the job as it was passed over to me was about being a mechanic.  And maintaining machinery and all of that. Yeah, I think it's because of that sort of  fear and all this confusion, too much information that I abandoned everything that I learned  the vegetable patch, which was from the moment I started no, no tilling or no digging and  
**[0:12:08-0:12:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:12:08):**  planted a large diversity of plants. Everything was great. And before that it was wild oats  and dog leaves when I was using rotovators. And I, and I forgot that fundamental or just  didn't have the courage to do that on 100 hectares. And so I went into a sort of non-plough  but standard organic farming, the shallow tillage and realized that the soil was at  0.5% organic matter, 80 years of maize. The average year, the average field in Gaskini  
**[0:12:37-0:12:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:12:37):**  is bare for more than six months of the year. It's left bare all winter. I mean, it's all  the kind of horror shows of modern industrial agriculture. And so the soil responded by  throwing up wave after wave of weeds, of thistles and dog leaves and the French equivalent of  black grass and these highly toxic weeds called Datura, which are like sort of dinosaur era  weeds that are so toxic that if you get one plant per 100 square meters, your soil is  
**[0:13:07-0:13:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:13:07):**  declassified. I mean, just horrendous. And about three, four years into this, I had to  borrow this machine, which is, I don't want to, it's called an English, but basically  it's a load of blades. And the idea is that they cut above the crop to stop the weeds  that have gone high in the crop from seeding. I don't know what it's called in English,  but I borrowed a sort of homemade version of one of those off a neighbor. And it was  
**[0:13:29-0:13:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:13:29):**  like five fly mo blades on a beam on an open top tractor. So you have to put the whole  biggles like scarf goggles and keep your mouth shut because there's debris going everywhere.  And I was going through this field, it's like 35 degrees, debris flying everywhere. And  I just realized the utter futility of what I was doing. And the fact that the other guy  next door who had his 30 meter spray around, he was just doing the same thing as me. I  
**[0:13:55-0:13:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:13:55):**  was basically at war, but mechanically rather than chemically. Thought I'm going to have  to give up because I was broke. And then there was a kind of like a semi-spiritual moment  where totally by chance, whilst looking for an Enid Blyton book for my daughter, I found  a misfiled book by Albert Howard called an agricultural Testament on this Enid Blyton  shelf, which is kind of too weird really. And his whole thing was plants and animals  
**[0:14:17-0:14:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:14:17):**  need to be together. And so I said to my poor wife, before we give up, I want to try this  herbivores and grass thing. And so we got a herd of cows. I'd never had a dog or a cat  when I was younger. So then the cows turned up and then so we went to a phase of like  red Sussex and herbal lays based on the Newman Turner herbal lays from the 1950s. And the  effect on the soil from the moment I started doing that was absolutely unbelievable. Quite  
**[0:14:46-0:14:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:14:46):**  hard to put your finger on it, but it's a sort of sense of life that came around in  the grazed lays. So from that point, I was like, if we could just combine, yeah, annual  crops in a perennial setting, that would be a great thing. And one of the big problems  that I found right from the beginning actually coming into agriculture from the outside was  that this is ridiculous that we're trying to do like new ways of growing things with  
**[0:15:12-0:15:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:15:12):**  varieties of plants that were built for a chemical system and a hopelessly uncompetitive.  Really hard. And one of the reasons why I ended up focusing on wheat is because, you  know, through a variety of circumstances, like there's a guy in France called Jean-François  who, his English equivalent would be John Letts, I guess, like real sort of botanical  obsessives almost to like, you know, just really drill down into all these varieties  
**[0:15:40-0:15:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:15:40):**  and kept a lot of them alive. And in my case, also, I was lucky enough to meet an old guy  who was a farmer baker who'd resisted the new wheats in the 50s. And he gave me some  of his grain. And I imagine the same applies to vegetables in all these worlds, you know,  through a combination of sort of dogmatic growers who've held on and preserved things  and some sort of specialists who've come in to try and retain things as well. Luckily,  
**[0:16:07-0:16:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:16:07):**  we've got a decent genetic bank, even if it's very, very depleted to try and do some of  that. So we really need these competitive varieties. So the reason why I sort of went  towards wheat in the pasture cropping was because these more competitive plants are  hard. And so my first attempts at pasture cropping were literally just to graze it down  hard, put the wheat in there and manage it all with grazing. So basically intervene with  
**[0:16:33-0:16:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:16:33):**  the cows two or three times during the growing cycle of the wheat to favor the wheat compared  to its, you know, the plants all around it. And knowing that, you know, these are the  more aggressive wheat varieties, they go up so high and fast at the end that you can normally  get above the grass. As the sort of grazing management thing got a bit more refined, we  started to get consistent enough results to be able to grow all of the wheat for our farm  
**[0:17:05-0:17:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:17:05):**  bakery in this way. And when it works, it's deeply satisfying because we were using a  very straightforward drill. We were pulling with horses to avoid compaction, which is  kind of got quite a good colleague, but it's also very handy to avoid compaction because  you say I'm never going to, you know, work my soil again. And it's basically just modeling  clay and so very vulnerable to being squashed. It was a very practical move, the horses,  
**[0:17:32-0:17:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:17:32):**  it wasn't just to be pretty, you know, it was and so we were doing it like that. And  the Achilles heel of that system is that you end up with the wheat that's above the grass  and so long as it stays above the grass, that's fine. But if you get any kind of lodging,  that's when the wheat gets knocked over and you get the ears are in all this grass, it's  horrific, you know. I try to harvest it all impossible. Now in the context of our farm  
**[0:18:00-0:18:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:18:00):**  bakery, you can get around that because you just sow like 30% more and if you get it all  then it's great and if you don't, you don't and that's fine.  Andy was very clear that we can't expect everyone to build farm to table mixed farms.  That would be a huge shift from the current status quo. Instead, he's drawn on what  he's learnt through his experiments to develop a system that plugs soil building methods  
**[0:18:25-0:18:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:18:25):**  into a conventional farming setup. He's created a very low risk way for farmers to  start farming more regeneratively. Andy also realized that creating a route to market is  key for the success of this, and so he set up Wildfarm Grains, which aims to be a regenerative  wheat supply network in the UK. Andy shared some of the details of this system with us.  The wildfarm thing was more like things are as they are and so with things being as they  
**[0:18:55-0:18:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:18:55):**  are in terms of buying habits, logistics, the way societies are organized, the way the  infrastructure of societies are organized, how can we do a thing which allows people  to grow crops in a way which makes things better rather than worse? And part of that  was modifying the farming system to lower the risk as much as possible of failure. And  part of that, and just as important in my opinion as what happens in the field, was  
**[0:19:20-0:19:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:19:20):**  working out a supply chain solution, which meant that in the case of wheat, our thing,  the three people involved now, the farmer, the miller and the baker, can all get paid  correctly for their work and you can do all of that in a transparent way and still keep  it affordable in the real world of food prices as they are. The farming part of that required  de-risking this pasture cropping that I was doing because you just can't be in a situation  
**[0:19:48-0:19:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:19:48):**  where if the wind blows hard it's all over, you know, you can't have that. And so the  starting point for me was that and how can we keep the perennial thing because I was  convinced of the need for, or how perennials optimize things in lots of ways, allows you  to work animals and arable together. And so how can we control that? And that's what  led to this system which we're now applying in the UK where the wheat is on very wide  
**[0:20:18-0:20:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:20:18):**  spacings and we've got this slightly funky bright orange inter-row mower which allows  us to control the height of the perennial grass so if we do get any lodging issues you  can still harvest it as you would in a sort of bare earth field. You know, there is some  tillage and so basically when we set up the wheat rows that's a tillage operation which  allows those wheat rows to be established and on those rows we'll sow wheat, we'll also  
**[0:20:49-0:20:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:20:49):**  sow dwarf white clover. From that moment on that remains set. And so one thing that's  funny for someone who's been farming with horses actually, what's been great coming  over here and working with the contractors here, the contractor here was amazing and  like just all over the latest stuff which was pretty foreign to me but again in the  spirit of like let's use what we've got today now to solve these problems we've been working  
**[0:21:15-0:21:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:21:15):**  a lot with the GPS guys to really make the most of this because once you've established  those strips what we want to make sure is that two thirds of the field which remains  undisturbed perennial grasses is undisturbed. And so if we can get the GPS working to within  two centimeters which we spent about a month trying to work out in August, which we can  now all the time, allowing for satellite drift and so next year it's the same and the year  
**[0:21:38-0:21:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:21:38):**  after it's the same which required a whole lot of coding from someone a lot cleverer  than me. But if you can do that that just optimizes the fact that you're never going  to touch your perennial ecosystem which is great. So between the sort of precision of  it and the simplicity of like let's just build a mower which allows us to keep the grass  between the wheat down. Which ultimately the system is very very simple but to apply it  
**[0:22:07-0:22:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:22:07):**  requires a bit of precision. It's a little bit case by case so the farm where we are  now has been in grass for a very long time. Now the grass has lost a lot of its diversity  so there's a lot of some people seem to call it couch some people call it couch grass but  whichever way you call it it's not great. But so there's a lot of that around and there's  not a lot of diversity around so but equally it would be a real shame to plow all this  
**[0:22:34-0:22:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:22:34):**  up or even just do a surface cultivation of all this grass with all the release of CO2  that we're going with there and establish you know a brand new like you know white clover  cover or herbal lake clover, herbal lake cover everywhere. Year one we've gone over with  the drill that's again it's something that's been made in France and is now going to live  here but which basically creates about 20 centimeter strips into which we sow two rows  
**[0:23:04-0:23:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:23:04):**  of wheat and some white clover and that's been done and then we'll mow between those  strips when necessary to favor the wheat and a lot of that job in the farm in France is  done with livestock and that's the plan here. We just need to get the fences made and then  when the weather permits you can just graze the whole lot strips and wheat included which  is which is great and that's where we're heading but where you can't do that then the mower  
**[0:23:31-0:23:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:23:31):**  can come in and save the day and then that will go on until harvest and obviously new  things that matter to the system include things like sap analysis and foliar sprays of seaweed  and compost tea which I've been using in France for a while and just try and optimize the  potential of the plants. And then after harvest in an ideal situation you would hit all of  the the grass and straw residues as hard as you can with as big a herd as you can. The  
**[0:24:00-0:24:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:24:00):**  second time around sow the wheat again back into the strips where the clover is now established  but that's a much lighter and quicker and easier operation because everything's been  been set up and depending on what you want to do whether you want to do a break crop  or just do continuous wheat you just carry on like that. That's it and that's what allows  us to to have two-thirds of the field as a perennial ecosystem with with security as  
**[0:24:28-0:24:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:24:28):**  much as there ever is in farming around the wheat. Just sort of putting all the details  aside for one moment it's kind of interesting for me because I did something very very different  for a very long time and and in the sort of rules of the game as often described on social  media and on advertising I was sort of DJing at the parties and in the houses and on the  yachts of the people who in quotes won and they won the game as we define it and it's  
**[0:25:01-0:25:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:25:01):**  kind of very interesting to to come back from that sort of back down to earth as it were  no pun intended actually there was a pun intended but and to to just to go into this this whole  new world and it and it brings a lot of things home about our notions of time and patience  and lifespan and you go from like you know microseconds of a google search to experiments  which take a year to find out what that might be in those weather conditions and in five  
**[0:25:32-0:25:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:25:32):**  years you might know if that's actually going to work. I mean it's a whole different mentality  and and just to sort of work alongside people who have got nothing really a lot of the farming  where I'm is quite poor you know and so they're very sort of cash poor and a lot of them are  going through very very difficult times but most of them wouldn't change it either you  know and there's a sort of richness of of experience in this world which I've been lucky  
**[0:25:58-0:26:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:25:58):**  enough to have a second life in which which gives you a kind of whole new whole new sense  of like what happiness is all about and what life's all about and so there's a good quote  from from from the actual Cato about how agriculture is the the only choice for noble men or something  obviously it was men back then you have to adapt that last words to suit the times.  We first met Thomas Ripple several years ago at We Feed the Planet which was a meeting  
**[0:26:37-0:26:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:26:37):**  organised by the Slow Food Youth Network in Milan. We'd just started Farmerama. Thomas  trained as a biodynamic farmer in Switzerland and hoped to buy his own farm but he quickly  realised the prospects of ever managing to do that were slim. Instead he joined a community  farm in Germany just as the farm's landowners had decided to sell up. Faced with the prospect  of losing the farm, Thomas set up a crowdfunding campaign and by selling community shares he  
**[0:27:08-0:27:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:27:08):**  managed to raise nearly a million euros. With the farm secured he realised this was a model  that could help bring other farms into collective ownership.  It's a cooperative where people can pool their money together to enable the purchase of land.  The Kulturan cooperative has today bought land with 22 farms and we're growing very  quickly. We have secured more than 300 hectares of land and raised something like four million  
**[0:27:49-0:27:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:27:49):**  euros of community capital. We basically developed our own software. It's a platform where each  farm has its own site where people can then participate in this crowd-investing. 80 to  85 percent are directly connected to the farm so they are either members of that CSA farm  or they are customers of the farm so they want to see their farm secured financially  and the land secured. And then there's 15 to 20 percent of people who just think that  
**[0:28:19-0:28:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:28:19):**  overall this is a wonderful idea and those 15 to 20 percent are usually people who have larger  amounts of money. So about half of our money is coming from those 15 to 20 percent and  half of the money is coming from people who want to support their farm. We don't offer  any financial returns because I mean who's going to pay for that? The farmer. And how  is the farmer going to pay for that? Well he's going to charge more money for the produce  
**[0:28:46-0:28:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:28:46):**  and who's going to pay for that? The customers. And who's giving us the money? Well the customers.  So why should we pay them returns? In the end they have to pay their own returns. So  we're not offering any dividends and the shares, they don't rise in value, they stay at nominal  value. But I mean for the past 10 years you're not getting any interest at the bank as well  either and we're moving into negative interest territory. So rather than having your money  
**[0:29:13-0:29:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:29:13):**  on a bank account you might as well make that available for something good. I do think that  there's some people who think well you know in the end the most secure thing is land right.  So I might as well you know put my money into land. They're not putting it directly into  land they're rather you know they're putting it into the cooperative which then buys land.  But in the end yeah we you know we do have all this land which if a crash comes or hyperinflation  
**[0:29:40-0:29:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:29:40):**  comes or whatever then you know we are still going to exist. We're still going to be there  and land is always going to be needed and food is always going to be produced. I think  a lot of the value is just in knowing that you're securing this land and then you're  taking it out of private property, securing it as a commons and making it available for  a kind of agriculture that really is in harmony with nature, that is promoting biodiversity,  
**[0:30:08-0:30:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:30:08):**  that is building up soil fertility and is hopefully also treating the people that are  involved better than conventional farming you know. So it's really about mostly about  the community aspect and making sure that this land is secured for generations to come.  We consider ourselves a commons in the sense that we basically created a legal framework  where the land is not actually owned by the cooperative itself but we create these kind  
**[0:30:45-0:30:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:30:45):**  of subsidiary entities where the farmers who are actively farming the land are stakeholders  in that entity. So the cooperative collects the money from the community basically and  then we put that money into that subsidiary legal entity where the farmer is involved  as the fully liable entity and the party that is putting the money in, the cooperative,  has actually very few rights. We can't really tell the farmer anything. He has a perpetual  
**[0:31:18-0:31:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:31:18):**  lease agreement that can't be cancelled. So the only difference I would say to owning  the land outright is that they can't sell the land. So they can farm the land, they  can do with the land what they want as long as they're doing organic agriculture and we  have a several few other criteria like 10% of the land has to be put aside for natural  conservation area and the farm has to be socially active and we have listed several criteria.  
**[0:31:50-0:31:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:31:50):**  So either the farm is doing direct marketing or it's a CSA or the farm has apprentices  or is working with disabled people or has school children working on farm and so on.  So it has to have a social aspect as well. As long as the farms stick to those criteria,  they can cultivate the land in perpetuity. So legally speaking, the farmer is basically  the owner of the land but he can't sell it. It has to be a mutual agreement of both entities,  
**[0:32:22-0:32:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:32:22):**  the cooperative and the farmer. So basically the land can never be sold. And this turned  out to be a really wonderful solution because we as a cooperative, we can't sell the land  on the market as well. If we would be the outright owners, let's say 30 years down the  line, 50 years down the line, it's a whole different set of members and then they think,  well, this land is worth a lot of money, let's sell this land. Well, we have set it up in  
**[0:32:48-0:32:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:32:48):**  a way that the land, if it were to ever have to be sold, then the farmers who are actively  farming the land have a right of first refusal for the original purchasing price. So whatever  price we paid back then is basically the maximum we're ever going to get. So there's no incentive  to ever sell the land for profit because there is never going to be any profit.  So that's our model. It's a participative model. It only works if people think that  
**[0:33:18-0:33:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:33:18):**  this model is something worthwhile and they want to buy shares in the cooperative and  then we have the money available to fund these land purchases. We've in the past couple  of years developed a model which enables succession outside the family basically.  In the culture land succession model, the farmer says how much they need to buy a house  somewhere off the farm and how much they need per month as living expenses and culture land  
**[0:33:48-0:33:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:33:48):**  commits to this payment. These costs combined don't come close to the value of the land.  So the farm is essentially making a donation to the co-op in order to ensure the farm stays  ecological. They're able to leave the farm comfortably with a new house and essentially  a pension. Thomas talked us through an example of one farmer they worked with recently.  Two years ago we started talking with a farmer. This farm has belonged to this family for  
**[0:34:17-0:34:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:34:17):**  more than 400 years. He farmed the land for 30 years. He has two children. They both don't  want to take over the farm. Yeah, so he said he really wants the farm to keep existing  as a farm. He doesn't want to sell it on the market for market value but rather hand it  over to an organization that is going to make sure that the farm exists as an entity. And  he said he needs, I think it was something like 400,000 euros so he can leave the farm  
**[0:34:49-0:34:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:34:49):**  so he can also pay his children a little bit of money and he needed 2,300 euros per month.  So if you calculate the total value of that 2,300 euros times 12 times the number of years  that he is probably going to live plus minus then that has a value of about, depending  on how you calculate that, between half a million and 700,000 euros. So in total what  he was asking for basically was around about a million euros. And the value of the land  
**[0:35:23-0:35:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:35:23):**  was more than that. Quite a lot more than that. I think in total it was worth at least  two and a half million. So basically he was donating a million and a half euros. What  we did was we got that 60 hectares of land plus the buildings worth two and a half million  euros and then we guaranteed him that monthly stipend and we paid him the 400,000 euros  and now we are looking for young people to take over the farm. And they don't have to  
**[0:35:51-0:35:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:35:51):**  worry about any of that. They don't have to worry about the 400,000 euros or the 2,300  euros a month. What we are asking them is to pay, we don't call it a lease because that  associates a different kind of relationship. So we are not the landlords and they are the  leases. But rather we are a community and the organization itself also needs some money  to fund its expenses. So our partnering farms, they pay basically a contribution. Each farm  
**[0:36:23-0:36:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:36:23):**  gets a suggested amount which is not fixed but rather it is really a suggestion and then  the farm can say that they want to pay more or less than that. And this is basically the  money that we need to make sure that the cooperative as an entity can cover its expenses and to  maintain the organization so that the land is secured. So we got a lot of applications  the past three months from young people, families or communities who want to take over the farm  
**[0:36:53-0:37:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:36:53):**  and we are just now in the final stages. In the next couple of weeks we will make the  final agreements with the two couples who will be taking over this farm and we now have  several farms that we are in the process of taking over and then looking for young people  to farm. I think the way we have worked it out now is very much scalable without running  the danger that it is going to get structurally corrupted. I think we put in a lot of safeguards  
**[0:37:27-0:37:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:37:27):**  there. I really do think that this can be a model that can be a solution for thousands  of farms in Germany but also outside of Germany and I am very happy to share our know-how.  I think it can be pretty much copy-pasted and also the infrastructure that we created  in terms of the IT, we have worked very, very hard to keep developing that. It is still  in prototype phase but by the middle of next year we should have a 2.0 version of the software  
**[0:38:00-0:38:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:38:00):**  ready where other users can use it. Individual farms could use the software just to run their  own little crowd investing campaign. We are not going to charge the classical fee model  of whatever, 5-7% or so on. We want this to be a commons-based tool. We are going to say,  well, we think maybe we need about 3% or something like that to cover our costs but then it is  up to you to decide if you can pay more or less than that.  
**[0:38:39-0:38:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:38:39):**  This episode of Farmerama was produced by Katie Revel, Joe Barrett and me, Abby Rose.  Thanks to Annie Lendless for the recording from Whistle Bear Farm. Our Patreon supporters  help make Farmerama possible. We are very grateful to them and even the smallest contribution  makes a big difference to us. If you'd like to become a supporter, visit patreon.com forward  slash farmerama. Community support for Farmerama is provided by Olivia Oldham, Fran Bailey,  
**[0:39:10-0:39:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/61-fine-fleeces-pasture-cropping-and-land-in-commons#t=0:39:10):**  Annie Lendless, Eliza Jenkins and Hannah Soderlund. Our theme music is by Owen Barrett.  Toodle-oo!  