### Farmerama  (2021-30-28)
**[0:00:00-0:00:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:00:00):**  Welcome to Farmerama.  In the northern hemisphere we're feeling grateful for the increasing light and glimpses  of spring in the air and ground.  This month we begin hearing from a great Indian scholar and farming advocate as she shares  her thoughts on the farming protests happening in India right now.  
**[0:00:27-0:00:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:00:27):**  We explore death and life and how one farmer is embracing the characters of individual  sheep and making wool a higher end fibre once again.  And we hear some great tips and tricks on biopriming from an international agroecologist.  Over the last few months the largest protest in human history has been taking place in  India.  
**[0:00:57-0:01:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:00:57):**  Tens of thousands of farmers marched to the capital to protest the new farm laws and 250  million people around the country participated in a 24 hour general strike in solidarity.  With almost 50% of the Indian population working in farming, the majority of them farming at  small scales, India has retained small scale farming communities.  A few weeks ago I helped moderate a discussion about seeding liberation on the land hosted  
**[0:01:26-0:01:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:01:26):**  by Chelsea Green and Advaya.  Vandana Shiva joined me on the panel.  She's an Indian scholar who set up the Navdanya farm that works with hundreds of thousands  of farmers in India.  I took the opportunity to ask her for an on the ground account of what the farmer protests  
**[0:01:41-0:01:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:01:41):**  in India were all about.  1984 there were similar protests in Punjab and a deflection was taken.  It became a religious narrative, the Golden Temple was invaded and the farmers issue was  forgotten.  The same, the people today are the children of the farmers who protested there.  
**[0:02:07-0:02:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:02:07):**  91 when the World Bank and the early drafts of the GATT and WTO started, we had huge movements.  I went to every farmer union of this country and explained patenting of seed, explained  trade in agriculture, explained sanitary and phytosanitary measures.  We had rallies of 500,000, 200,000 saying food is too important to be left to trade  and profiteering.  
**[0:02:35-0:02:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:02:35):**  That's where the language of seed sovereignty and food sovereignty started to grow.  I brought farmers from across the world, including the Koreans.  You might remember there was a Korean farmer who committed suicide in the WTO meeting in  Kanpur to say, I am committing suicide to let the world know that there's a crisis.  The farmers are facing a crisis.  
**[0:02:57-0:03:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:02:57):**  That's exactly what they're fighting about now.  They're basically saying, we'll stick here till you shoot us dead because if you pass  these laws of total deregulation, we're going to be dead anyway.  What happened yesterday was Republic Day of India and a totally orchestrated invasion  of the Red Fort was done.  
**[0:03:22-0:03:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:03:22):**  The parade was peaceful.  The farmers protest over two months has been totally peaceful.  This to me took me back to 84 where exactly in the same way a deflection took place, a  criminalization of farmers took place.  30,000 people had died in 84 in that period in Punjab.  
**[0:03:40-0:03:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:03:40):**  Right now, for a very peaceful movement to continue to be able to tell its story in authenticity  when now the loaded media is deflecting it, that's the challenge.  I think for all of us, that's the challenge.  Here is this amazing work being done all over, three of us from three continents and sharing  the same vision.  
**[0:04:07-0:04:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:04:07):**  Look at them and look at BBC and what they talk about in terms of the future of agriculture.  For those who are working on care for the land, harvesting your tomatoes is not a painful  task, but all of the thing is we'll get robots to relieve the farmer of hard work.  They've been trying to relieve us of hard work forever till they made everyone jobless.  I think that narrative of work as drudgery rather than work as liberation is part of  
**[0:04:43-0:04:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:04:43):**  the new narrative that we must tell.  It's so much of a fossil fuel story that it had to define every bit of autonomous work  by people as drudgery and real slave work as progress.  Now they're reaching the stage with robotics and artificial intelligence.  We don't need people.  
**[0:05:03-0:05:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:05:03):**  99% of you are useless.  So our farmers are seeing the past.  They've lived through 30 years of globalization and neoliberal deregulation, and they can  see what the future will be.  They know they won't have a place and they don't want to be disposable because they're  
**[0:05:24-0:05:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:05:24):**  proud farmers.  They take pride in their work.  I think nobody should see the Indian farmers protest as Indian for two reasons.  First, every fourth farmer of the world is an Indian because we have fought to stay small  farmers.  
**[0:05:43-0:05:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:05:43):**  We fought against the mythology of large farms are productive.  We've defended the smallness.  We've celebrated smallness.  And so every fourth farmer is an Indian, but also whether it was the green revolution in  1965 or neoliberal agriculture in 91 or Bill Gates and digital agriculture, India or East  
**[0:06:05-0:06:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:06:05):**  India Company in the beginning.  India for some reason has always been with experiment of greed in a new colonization  always comes.  I think it's because the land is so generous.  People are so hardworking that we are a very big economy, just that it's not counted.  
**[0:06:24-0:06:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:06:24):**  So the Indian farmers protest are really global protests and it's about small farmers.  It's a small farmer future.  The farmers are defending.  And it is about continuing the fight against the East India Company that captured Africans  to work as slaves on land grab from the indigenous people.  
**[0:06:44-0:06:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:06:44):**  That empire of cotton is today the empire of bad food.  And all of the struggles are one.  And I think our duty is to not allow the story of the Indian farmers protest to be catalyzed  and to build it and link it to our stories wherever we are, because it is relevant.  You know, you've got such an important extinction rebellion going on.  
**[0:07:10-0:07:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:07:10):**  I think the threat of extinction of the small farmer is the foundation of all other extinctions  because only the small farmer who has the possibility and potential to care, not just  for the land, but all the species that depend on the land.  So if all those other movements can wake up to this, until we cannot allow the extinction  of the small farmer, we need the opposite.  
**[0:07:34-0:07:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:07:34):**  We need everyone to be a farmer directly or indirectly, you know, and to really have more  people on the land.  You know, we need 50, according to me, we need 50% directly taking care of the land  and the rest supported and supporting the 50%.  Rebecca Hosking is a regenerative farmer and filmmaker who has had a great impact on many  
**[0:08:01-0:08:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:08:01):**  people in the farming world through her film, A Farm for the Future.  A few years ago, she set up Village Farm with her best friend, Tim Green.  Very sadly, that partnership ended suddenly when Tim was killed in a tractor accident.  Rebecca talks to us about why she now cares for a flock of sheep, the forever flock, and  sells their wool to a local craft's business, Felted Sheepskins, run by Rosie Anderson.  
**[0:08:33-0:08:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:08:33):**  Five years ago, I was flying along as a director of a farm called Village Farm Organics.  And I was farming that with my best friend, and we were pushing the realms really of regenerative  farming in the UK.  We were very much trying to base ourselves as part of the ecology on our farm.  The challenge we had taken on with Village Farm was taking this very denuded coastal  
**[0:09:02-0:09:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:09:02):**  arable farm and turning it into a wildlife haven, producing beautiful food that was increasing  biodiversity every year.  And the nuts and bolts of it all, and the very sadness of it all, Tim was killed in  2017 in a tractor crash.  And the fallout of this was that we lost staff, very quickly turned this business that was  
**[0:09:29-0:09:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:09:29):**  something that I look forward to every day getting up to do into a deeply sad, very emotional  job where my heart was broken.  Long story short, I got back to my family farm and my family gave me a small part of  the farm to run.  And I tried to take back as many animals as I possibly could.  
**[0:09:58-0:10:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:09:58):**  And I got the rest of them to as best of homes as I possibly could, because that was really  important to me.  And I had an awful year.  And the one thing that kept me going every day was getting up and seeing these sheep  and moving them and caring for them.  
**[0:10:13-0:10:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:10:13):**  And they got me through this horrible time.  And slowly in 2019, I began to dust myself back off and pick myself up.  And it was what to do with these sheep, because they were characters and I loved them dearly  and they'd seen me through this awful time.  There was no way I could go back into meat and death and killing them to make money.  
**[0:10:37-0:10:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:10:37):**  So we came up with the idea of the forever flock and that was their payback.  They got me through this awful time.  Now it's my time that they have a time off from being a commercial animal.  So we thought, well, they have to be sheared every year.  So let's make a story out of them, of we're preserving them.  
**[0:10:57-0:11:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:10:57):**  They're still doing ecological good, but I wanted to try and find a way of finding worth  from them without killing them.  Actually I used to find myself once I'd move them, I would just sit down with them.  And it was a really peaceful, you know, it was just a peaceful practice to do was sit  and watch them graze and happily graze on their fresh pasture.  
**[0:11:17-0:11:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:11:17):**  We've got grumpy ones and bullies and we've got funny ones and we've got curious, curious,  curious guys in there.  And we've got happy ones and caring ones and sensitive and shy.  And there's ones, there's individuals that work like guards.  They're like guard dogs in the flock.  
**[0:11:33-0:11:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:11:33):**  And we have very matriarchal old characters that are the leaders and the others trust  them.  And there's the huge amount of contact calls that goes on between the whole flock.  They're always communicating.  I'd seen it already, obviously, because I've been a shepherd for several years, but I was  
**[0:11:52-0:11:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:11:52):**  seeing it in that, okay, these are individual characters I'm now going to stay with for  a very long time.  Because I think when people say sheep, you know, sheep are sheep and they just see white  fluffy sheep.  But with, well, one of the things that helps with ours are the Shetland Icelandic crosses.  
**[0:12:08-0:12:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:12:08):**  So they're all multicolored and they're very different looking individuals anyway.  But I wanted to, when people were starting to buy the wall, I wanted to share the stories  of what I was seeing in the field with these sheep.  So that's how we've started to go about selling our wall now.  We call them by the names and we tell the buyers of the wall a little bit about the  
**[0:12:30-0:12:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:12:30):**  characters of each of the sheep.  It was interesting because when we were at Village Farm, we had a local neighbor who  was into felting and asked for some of the rugs to be made into felted sheep skins.  And so she did it there.  And this is the great thing with a felted rug is no animal has lost its life.  
**[0:12:50-0:12:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:12:50):**  So if someone hasn't seen one of these rugs, essentially when it's thrown down on the floor  on the back of a settee, it looks like a sheepskin.  But when you flip it over, it's felted on the back.  So you have all of the benefit of a sheepskin rug and no animal has lost its life.  When we're at shearing time, we write the name of the ewe as we're rolling up the fleece.  
**[0:13:15-0:13:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:13:15):**  And then when Rosie comes to make this rug, she emails me to say, okay, we're making,  say, like Marmite's rug is being made at the moment.  So I run out and take a photo of Marmite.  And then I have to write a little bit about Marmite's personality.  And that goes back to Rosie.  
**[0:13:31-0:13:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:13:31):**  And all of that encompassed goes to the buyer.  And so it goes onto the website.  So not only do you have the name of the sheep, you have a photo of the sheep.  And this is really popular because people are connecting with the animal.  And for me, it's lovely when Rosie is saying, actually, they're not just buying it on the  
**[0:13:49-0:13:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:13:49):**  colour, they're buying it on the personality.  They love the story behind this individual.  And on a more sort of, I suppose, a more personhood type way, we're giving agency back to the  animal who created this fleece in the first place.  This isn't just the craftsperson who has made this.  
**[0:14:09-0:14:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:14:09):**  This is the individual sheep behind this as well.  And so there's this real link buyers now have.  And some people are framing their photos of the sheep beside their fleece.  And it's a, I mean, it's wonderful, I think, of completely changing the personality of  sheep in the UK.  
**[0:14:31-0:14:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:14:31):**  And people are so proud of it.  And now the great thing is they want another fleece from the same sheep because they're  there.  So they want matching ones.  So we really like, I don't know, whoever it is, Duckies Fleece, please can we have another  
**[0:14:47-0:14:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:14:47):**  one?  We've got one on the back of the chair, we've got another chair or settee and we'd love  another one to match.  So it's all that this goes on as well.  This has come from a personal choice of mine, but I still holistically plan graze the forever  
**[0:15:02-0:15:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:15:02):**  flock.  They're still doing the same land maintenance that they were doing when we were putting  them through into meat sales.  That bit hasn't changed at all.  And I actually think I've seen the importance of animals on the land.  
**[0:15:17-0:15:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:15:17):**  I've seen the health benefits to the local ecology, if done correctly, and I've seen  the health benefits to the soil.  And the forever flock, now they are just a fiber flock, their ecological stance within  our landscape is exactly the same.  So I still see them as an integral part of the ecology here.  
**[0:15:42-0:15:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:15:42):**  This is just a sort of a personal choice within how I'm using these sheep and how they're  sort of the interface between the general public and the way of making an income from  them.  The fact is, is obviously if you do the nuts and bolts and you're just very pragmatic about  this and hard nosed, you will get a lot more money from killing an animal than getting  
**[0:16:09-0:16:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:16:09):**  the wool from the animal.  The usual prices for wool in this country are just horrifically bad.  But by having this beautiful fleece and by having the animal alive and the whole story  and the narrative of what they're doing to benefit nature, then we're able to get a top  price for those fleeces.  
**[0:16:34-0:16:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:16:34):**  And I suppose I'm putting this out for someone who's going, well, surely you can't make money  doing this.  If I took on doing secondary product, made manufacturer or created something from that  wool, then yes, we would make a nice income from the wool.  As it is at the moment, the wool covers the price of looking after the sheep.  
**[0:16:54-0:16:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:16:54):**  So they pay for themselves.  I wouldn't say I make an income from them because I'm doing secondary incomes, but if  I wanted to make an income from them and that would mean some way of processing the wool  into other goods, then yes, you could make an income from doing this.  Obviously, I've been through this rather personal, painful journey to get to where I am today.  
**[0:17:21-0:17:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:17:21):**  And we're all energy and life ending.  And do we really end life?  You know, when I go, when I pop my clogs one day, I'm going to go into the soil and the  worms and the microbes are going to eat me and there's my energy into them.  And then the energy from them is going to go into a plant.  
**[0:17:38-0:17:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:17:38):**  My energy will end up in plants.  And then the energy in the plants will be ending up into the animals.  And then depending where they are on the food chain, if they're small animals, they're going  to be predated on bigger animals.  And eventually those animals are going to die and back they go into the soil.  
**[0:17:53-0:17:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:17:53):**  And there is that energy cycle going on the whole time.  That energy never goes.  And I suppose what, whether you're vegan or actually it's not even a vegan type question,  it's where you like that energy.  And right now I rather like the energy in those sheep.  
**[0:18:11-0:18:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:18:11):**  And then, you know, and I like the characters of those sheep and I don't want to end that  energy there for me.  But other people may want to end that energy and may want to put it into the circle of  life a bit quicker than I do.  As Rebecca acknowledged, farming is full of life and death.  
**[0:18:32-0:18:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:18:32):**  And at the core of agroecological farming is to cultivate a good life and a good death  for all beings in this cycle of life.  That's something that I think when you farm, you do start to really understand is, you  face up to is that death is an unavoidable part of this life.  I think it's something, you know, we're all told and we know.  
**[0:18:57-0:19:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:18:57):**  But as a farmer, you actually live that, recurringly.  Whether you're farming crops or with animals or anything, it's like these cycles of life  are happening all the time and the energy is flowing in many different ways.  I guess farmers really have to understand or have the opportunity to work with both  life and death on a regular basis.  
**[0:19:26-0:19:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:19:26):**  And I think that's something that people outside the farming community don't really  acknowledge fully or understand.  It's something I think we could explore further.  Nicole Masters is an agroecologist, systems thinker and educator, originally from New  Zealand and now living in Montana.  
**[0:19:48-0:19:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:19:48):**  She's the director of an agroecological consultancy, Integrity Soils, and recently published a  brilliant book, definitely recommend it, For the Love of Soil.  Nicole's a bounty of knowledge about many different regenerative techniques and she  offers a number of online courses for farmers and coaching for advisors.  She gave us the lowdown on bio-priming and explained why it can be an important part  
**[0:20:12-0:20:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:20:12):**  of a more regenerative approach to farming.  There's a process of what we call bio-priming, so using different types of products that  we can put onto seed to support that plant's defense system and a process called ISR, so  induced systemic responses.  And also in terms of looking at trace elements, of lifting the quality of what you're growing.  
**[0:20:35-0:20:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:20:35):**  So if you're seeing things like viruses and aphids and insects attacking, it's really  telling you that there's something nutritionally and biologically off with the crop that you're  trying to grow and no one wants to grow a subpar product.  So some of these bio-priming processes, we can actually add bio-control agents to the  seed.  
**[0:20:54-0:20:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:20:54):**  So some of these are what they're called entomopathogenic fungi, and I don't know who comes up with  these words, but people that like really big words.  And basically what they are is a fungus that will live inside the plant like an endophyte,  and when an insect chews on it, it infects that insect and basically turns it into a  mummy and then it spreads out spores.  
**[0:21:15-0:21:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:21:15):**  It's really, really cool.  So there's a number of those that you can use as seed treatments in transition while  you're trying to build up your soil health and not resort to some of these really ghastly  chemicals.  It's something that has happened for centuries, especially if you look at Korean natural farming  
**[0:21:32-0:21:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:21:32):**  or some of the technologies coming out of India.  And what's fascinating is that there's so much research that's been coming out in the  last two or three years about the benefits of bio-priming.  So bio-priming means that we're going to put some kind of biological catalyst or microbial  inoculant on seed.  
**[0:21:51-0:21:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:21:51):**  So if you think about that little seed, there is a microbiome inside that seed and on the  outside of that seed, and the research on that's really very, very new.  The reason for that is that the minute that that plant starts to germinate, that microbiology  goes out and is absorbing different types of nutrients, solubilizing different types  of nutrients, and then as that plant grows in that process known as rhizophagy, they'll  
**[0:22:18-0:22:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:22:18):**  actually absorb that bacteria again, blow open their cell walls and absorb those nutrients.  So there's this feeding process.  So they say between 30 to 100% of the nutrients that's coming into a seedling actually comes  from this biological process.  So if you're planting a seed naked or with fungicides and pesticides on it into a fairly  
**[0:22:38-0:22:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:22:38):**  hostile environment, you're not going to get these benefits.  And then we have a situation where you're going to need to apply pesticides or fungicides.  So these microbes are producing all sorts of compounds.  So these compounds are eliciting plant responses in terms of them being able to prime or being  able to respond by increasing their defense molecules or the enzymes or proteins.  
**[0:23:05-0:23:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:23:05):**  So like proteinase, which is what the plant uses to defend itself from insects, is primed  by microbiology.  So when we're talking about these different types of biopriming agents, we can do things  like compost extracts or vermicast, so the worm extracts, putting that directly onto  seed as a liquid or as something that we can put on as a dried product when we're drilling.  
**[0:23:30-0:23:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:23:30):**  And what they contain are all sorts of those humic compounds.  They got minerals, they got plant growth promotants in them, enzymes, hormones, the quorum signaling  metabolites.  So there's all sorts of things that we can actually use as even commercial products like  trichoderma, lactobacillus, aspergillus, so our nitrogen fixers, mycorrhizae.  
**[0:23:54-0:24:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:23:54):**  And what's amazing, they just contain such a huge variety of these secondary metabolites,  things that plants use for defense and health that we couldn't even fathom being able to  add these things as individuals.  What's exciting is to see that in the literature, the effect that these biopriming agents are  having in terms of seed germination, in terms of yield, in terms of the need to be adding  
**[0:24:20-0:24:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:24:20):**  all of these other chemical products and instead going, how do I support this plant optimally  so that it's healthy, so that I don't need to be putting all of this other junk in basically,  and then at the end of the day, we're going to be more profitable.  Yay.  Thank you.  
**[0:24:38-0:24:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:24:38):**  Probably wondering if that sounds quite complicated.  And what I'm finding is probably nearly all of our clients now are doing these things  themselves.  So you can make your own vermicast very, very simply with any kind of farm waste materials,  so manure and straw and wood chips and wood shavings or anything like that, and feed that  
**[0:24:59-0:25:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:24:59):**  to worms and it creates a highly concentrated biological product that we can put down with  the seed.  You can also make your own compost.  And the thing here is you can buy these products commercially, you just got to ensure that  they really are top quality because you're resting your whole farm on that this is going  
**[0:25:18-0:25:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:25:18):**  to be successful.  And if you're buying what we call municipal waste compost, so compost that's come from  the cities where maybe they're not thinking, how do I make a good product for a farmer?  What they're thinking is how do I get rid of waste?  Those products typically aren't very biologically diverse.  
**[0:25:34-0:25:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:25:34):**  They're generally full of bacteria, they're not going to have all this disease suppression  that you need.  So thinking long term, do we need to continue to do biopriming?  And what I find is for my cropping guys anyway, probably.  I mean, it's something that's not very expensive.  
**[0:25:53-0:25:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:25:53):**  It's very simple to do once you have your systems up and running.  You're going into systems where, I mean, hopefully you're not cultivating, but you might be  cultivating or you might be spraying with herbicides.  So we still have this, it's like earning the right to get off the inputs.  And until we stop those kinds of disturbance mechanisms, you're going to need to be able  
**[0:26:15-0:26:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:26:15):**  to help to repair that system.  But if you're in a perennial grassland system, then absolutely not, you're not going to need  to keep this up if you have really good management.  So I've been asked why we don't call ourselves consultants.  So there's this expectation in agriculture that you're going to get a consultant and  
**[0:26:33-0:26:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:26:33):**  they're going to tell you what to do.  Whereas regenerative agriculture is actually a mindset shift.  It's learning how to learn again, learning how to observe, learning how to shift a whole  worldview really around insects and diseases.  And so we find the most successful way to really imparting long term change where you're  
**[0:26:54-0:26:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:26:54):**  not going to require someone to hold your hand because actually you can figure this  stuff out yourself is through coaching.  So we work alongside farmers and viticulture and water culture and ranches in terms of  what do you see, what are your goals, what's going to be the best fit here and ensuring  that we don't have these kind of long term inputs.  
**[0:27:18-0:27:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:27:18):**  How do we get off these inputs?  But that really happens through knowledge.  And I think a lot of modern agriculture is really trying people to stop being creative  and stop that kind of thinking.  So learning to really think diagnostically is it's a long term journey.  
**[0:27:35-0:27:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:27:35):**  And so it's something that we see that actually this is where the coaching needs to come in.  And if we look at the massive expansion in regenerative agriculture, the biggest missing  is having really highly trained coaches to help support that transition because that  transition period can be really, really scary, especially if you've got a lot of debt and  someone saying to you, hey, question everything.  
**[0:27:59-0:28:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:27:59):**  That's really easy to get overwhelmed and just go, I'm just going to stick with what  I know.  And we can't stick with what we know.  We don't have the time.  We don't have we don't have the public license, quite frankly, to continue with the use of  
**[0:28:11-0:28:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:28:11):**  some of these chemicals that we're doing or the land degradation or what how much land  is actually affecting climate change.  So we're seeing a lens shine in on agriculture now that it hasn't done in the past.  And the only way we're going to be able to stand up proud to confront that light shining  on us is to be doing these practices regeneratively.  
**[0:28:46-0:28:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:28:46):**  This episode of Farmerama was made by me, Joe Barrett and Abbey Rose.  Thank you to Chelsea Green and Advaya for letting us use content from their Food, Farming  and Healing Our World series.  You can get tickets to all of the sessions on the Advaya website.  Our Patreon supporters help make Farmerama possible.  
**[0:29:06-0:29:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:29:06):**  We're so grateful to all of you who support us and allow us to keep bringing you these  stories every month.  Even a small contribution makes a big difference to us.  So if you'd like to become a supporter, visit patreon.com forward slash Farmerama.  A big thanks to the rest of the team.  
**[0:29:23-0:29:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/63-indian-farmers-protests-the-forever-flock-and-biopriming#t=0:29:23):**  Katie Revel, Olivia Oldham, Fran Bailey, Annie Landless, Eliza Jenkins, Dora Taylor and Hannah  Sutherland.  Our theme music is by Owen Barrett.  некоторinerferneo. disgracepe dell'acqua.  You  