### Farmerama  (2021-44-28)
**[0:00:00-0:00:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to Farmerama.  This month we learn from an entomologist in Wiltshire about the importance of dung beetles  in our farming systems.  We hear how a medical herbalist in London is bringing people together to care for and  heal each other.  
**[0:00:21-0:00:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:00:21):**  And a soil microbiologist shares how restoring hydrological cycles is vital in mitigating  the climate crisis.  Sally-Anne Spence is a farmer and entomologist who's helped launch Dung Beetles for Farmers,  a website with practical tips for how farmers can help this keystone species thrive on their  farms.  
**[0:00:49-0:00:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:00:49):**  So dung beetles are a whole group of insects that are based around breaking down dung.  They live, they inhabit the dungpacks themselves.  And the reason we don't see them so much in the UK and why we're not so aware of them  is because they are actually living in the dung or under the dung.  So we have two groups in the UK, those that live in it, the dwellers, and those that live  
**[0:01:08-0:01:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:01:08):**  underneath it in long tunnels underneath the dung.  We don't have the rollers, the big David Attenborough nature programme where it's got a lump of  elephant poo and it's rolling it across the road and the jeep stops and everybody leaps  out and takes loads of photographs.  We don't have those in this country and because we don't have those, we don't see them, we  
**[0:01:25-0:01:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:01:25):**  just forget about our dung beetles.  But they are there.  Dung beetles are phenomenally important in pasture land.  And the biggest reason of all is that they actually remove the dung.  If you have that dung staying on the pasture, it'll actually damage the pasture land, it'll  
**[0:01:39-0:01:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:01:39):**  reduce the grazing opportunities for the livestock and it will actually increase pests within  the livestock as well.  So removing the dung is the first and foremost thing that the dung beetles do that's really,  really important to everybody that's concerned with that pasture land.  Now they also, in removing the dung, they're releasing the nutrients that are inside that  
**[0:01:58-0:02:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:01:58):**  dung back into the pasture so that the roots and the plants can take it back up and the  grass can grow better.  And so they're really, really important for that.  And then you've got the fact that they're digging these tunnels underneath, the tunnellers,  you've got soil aeration, you've got water infiltration.  
**[0:02:13-0:02:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:02:13):**  You know, these are all good things for soil health.  They're actually taking the organic matter down and releasing the organic matter nutrients  into the soil for all the things that are actually living within the soil as well.  If they're breaking up the dung, there's various parasites that actually pass through the animal  and can be re-ingested.  
**[0:02:31-0:02:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:02:31):**  So you can have a worm infestation in an animal that will actually pass through the gut of  the animal and out into the dung, still live, still in the larval form.  It'll then change into a next stage in the larval form and it'll migrate into the grass  growing around the dung, climb up the grass and get eaten by the animal again and go back  through its stages.  
**[0:02:53-0:02:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:02:53):**  And if you've got the dung being broken up and got rid of, that reduces the habitat for  that parasite larvae to actually go through its whole cycle.  It breaks it up and so it stops the animal getting the parasites.  They are also really important food.  Now lots of people talk about dung beetles are food for bats.  
**[0:03:09-0:03:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:03:09):**  Yes, they are.  They're very, very important to bats and bats are a species that's in decline generally.  And they're also very important for birds and badgers, foxes, all sorts of things eat  them.  Owls will eat a dung beetle, a nice big geotropin walking through the grass at night and owl  
**[0:03:24-0:03:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:03:24):**  will quite happily have that.  You've got all sorts of things that will feed on it from raptors to waders to songbirds,  all sorts of different things.  And here we have swallows and swifts that come every year and they will spend a lot  of the time, especially the swallows, over the pasture land.  
**[0:03:39-0:03:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:03:39):**  And some of the things they're collecting are flies, but they're also collecting and  feeding dung beetles to their larvae too.  So they're very, very important to the whole ecosystem, the biodiversity, the soil health,  and actually for the animal's health in the farm.  So that you're getting three real big major things ticked off because of dung beetles.  
**[0:03:56-0:03:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:03:56):**  So really, really important, tiny, but an awful lot of them.  And that's what the important part is.  So there's been a decline in dung beetles and we've been seeing this because we've been  mapping their populations, finding out where they are and using historic specimens and  the data in museums.  
**[0:04:12-0:04:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:04:12):**  So we've been able to build up a data line of what dung beetles were where at one stage.  And then we've been able to look forward and actually go out and survey and see how dung  beetles are doing today.  And there has been a marked decline.  And that decline has come through many reasons.  
**[0:04:28-0:04:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:04:28):**  One is the removal of livestock.  So I live on the Wilkshire Downs and up here was big sheep wool country, lots and lots  of sheep all over the Downs.  Those sheep have now gone and there's only a few grazing flocks and the grassland has  been turned into arable.  
**[0:04:42-0:04:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:04:42):**  So you've lost that habitat.  If there's no dung, there is no dung beetles.  They can't survive without the dung.  Change of use, areas where there was livestock, the livestock has gone and it's now either  a car park or a golf course or arable, that sort of thing.  
**[0:04:55-0:04:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:04:55):**  That is a habitat removal and habitat loss.  And then you've got habitat disturbance.  So if you've got animals in a field one year and then you come in and you chain harrow  it, you are disturbing that soil.  And in the soil underneath the dung is where all the pupae are, all the middle stage of  
**[0:05:14-0:05:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:05:14):**  the life cycle of the dung beetle.  Before they actually develop into a natural beetle, you'll be disturbing them and exposing  them to predators and everything else if you go through that soil.  So soil damage in any way, shape or form in that respect.  And if you're using an insecticide, you are going to kill insects or invertebrates.  
**[0:05:30-0:05:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:05:30):**  And it's obviously designed to kill off the parasites.  Animal welfare is incredibly important.  However, depending on the range of lethal and sublethal, the chemical you're using,  you get a range of lethal and sublethal effects.  And that sort of depends on the concentration of the various chemicals.  
**[0:05:47-0:05:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:05:47):**  But this will result in death in the dung beetles if it's very strong when they first  come to the dung to eat the dung.  Because you've got to remember the dung beetles are consuming the dung.  So if there's anything in the dung, they're going to end up eating it.  So there's a real threat to dung beetles, the loss of habitat, the disturbance of habitat  
**[0:06:03-0:06:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:06:03):**  and the use of insecticides.  As a community of people, we all understand the importance of earthworms now.  Everybody really gets earthworms.  Earthworms are phenomenally important to our soil.  And yet they're still quite small, an earthworm.  
**[0:06:17-0:06:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:06:17):**  But we now accept that earthworms are really, really important because there's lots of them  and what they're doing is incredible.  What we've got to do is the same as dung beetles.  Dung beetles are really small, but there's lots of them and what they're doing is incredible.  So we just need to get that mindset is just to accept that although the insects are small,  
**[0:06:32-0:06:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:06:32):**  it's the sheer mass of them and they really are moving it.  A lot of people will go out into their paddocks and think, well, basically, perhaps they don't  think about the dung.  Perhaps they haven't realized the dung has disappeared.  They just accept the dung has disappeared.  
**[0:06:45-0:06:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:06:45):**  The report to the International Union for Conservation of Nature, the IUCN report, puts  them nearly, well, virtually half of them, just over half of the dung beetle species  are considered locally or regionally threatened to extinct.  So let's not go out one day and suddenly realize that the dung is still there.  Let's appreciate what's actually moving that dung and doing those ecosystem services.  
**[0:07:09-0:07:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:07:09):**  And it is the dung beetles.  Dung Beetles for Farmers.co.uk is a collective effort by farmers, vets and scientists and  will continue to be updated as research comes out.  Check it out.  Rashika Ahmad is a medical herbalist in London.  
**[0:07:40-0:07:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:07:40):**  She runs the medical practice HedgeHerbs and leads the Mobile Apothecary for Phytology,  a cultural institute in Bethnal Green.  Founded in early 2019, the Mobile Apothecary brings people together to create herbal medicines,  which are then distributed to community members facing barriers to accessing food, shelter  and health care.  
**[0:08:02-0:08:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:08:02):**  We spoke with Rashika as part of Who Feeds Us, our 2020 series about the people who helped  feed us during the COVID-19 lockdown.  This conversation wasn't actually shared in the final series.  So here's a snippet to bring the Who Feeds Us stories back into our lives.  And definitely head to our blog to read more of her story as well.  
**[0:08:25-0:08:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:08:25):**  Medicine originally was something that was accessible to all humans.  It's something we've evolved with.  We've cohabited with plants that are much, much older than us and really know how to  inhabit the earth.  They contain a lot of compounds that support our bodies, but also in their own right, they're  
**[0:08:43-0:08:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:08:43):**  living beings, and we make a kind of an exchange with them that is more than just about the  physical cellular level.  Medicine has become about extraction, active ingredients from plants, that kind of reflects  the way that humans have taken this extractive approach to the resources of the earth rather  than a more cooperative, exchange based way of living, if that makes sense.  
**[0:09:09-0:09:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:09:09):**  And healthcare isn't necessarily about caring and nourishing us, but it's about making money  and profit a lot of the time.  I guess it's part of the whole way that for the last few hundred years, humanity has seen  progress being kind of distancing ourselves from our physical bodies and being more about  rationality in the mind.  
**[0:09:29-0:09:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:09:29):**  And yeah, maybe it's not a surprising outcome, but in the end, we can't live without what  the earth gives us.  And yeah, it's something that has been forgotten, but I think is still very much present in  certain cultures.  So like in Ayurvedic medicine and Chinese medicine and pretty much most parts of the  
**[0:09:50-0:09:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:09:50):**  world that I've spoken to people about, there's a strong idea that food is medicinal.  And people talk about the energies of food, like for example, in a simple way, food being  heating or cooling, or moist or dry, this kind of thing.  And that's very much still present in, I know it is in Indian culture.  And I remember speaking to someone at a workshop from Iran who was talking about this and the  
**[0:10:12-0:10:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:10:12):**  effect that the different energies of food have on your body.  I think the rise of kind of foraging and wild food and herbalism, all of this has really  reawakened that knowledge in humans again.  Yeah, we've been separated from it, but it's not unfamiliar really.  Having this knowledge and using it as a kind of revolutionary act in this world, I think  
**[0:10:34-0:10:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:10:34):**  it's massively important.  On a personal level, it's really helped me living in London, knowing the plants that  grow around me in the wild spaces and also then feeling this desire to nurture it more  and take care of the land that we live in.  Originally in the meadow were planted plants that grow wild all around the British Isles  
**[0:10:55-0:10:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:10:55):**  that have a history of use, medicinal use for the last thousand years.  They're ones that you have weeds really plants that you would find all over the place.  So common ones are plants like yarrow, comfrey, which is a great healer of bones and connective  tissue, plantain, rip-warp plantain.  I think there's marshmallow has been planted.  
**[0:11:16-0:11:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:11:16):**  Ground ivy is really good, another good respiratory system herb.  What else?  Mugwort I think there is and vervain, which are two herbs that were sacred to the Anglo-Saxons  in the 10th century.  We did a harvest of a plant called Ella campaign, which is root that we use for respiratory  
**[0:11:34-0:11:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:11:34):**  infection and to heal the lungs and help with breathing.  So also really kind of relevant for this moment.  But it worked really well, the activity where we did a harvest of the root and then we collectively  in a workshop made it into a syrup, a cough syrup.  And the whole model just seemed to be really exciting was being in the garden, learning  
**[0:11:56-0:12:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:11:56):**  about the plants as a group and then communally making medicine together.  And this then turned into that we started distributing medicines we made from the garden  and the workshops.  And we were doing that, we've been doing that alongside refugee community kitchen who do  hot food distribution.  
**[0:12:16-0:12:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:12:16):**  Also at Bethnal Green, so it's all very much within one locality.  So we started going out monthly and giving out seasonal medicines like cough remedies  and immune protection alongside our CK.  And that's still going on now the mobile apothecary we sort of shifted to doing weekly distribution  as a rapid response when the pandemic started.  
**[0:12:39-0:12:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:12:39):**  So offering protective remedies for people living on the street or others that don't  have access to welfare, don't have access to healthcare resources as much as other people.  People from different cultures have come along and shared with us the plants that they use  in their home life as well.  But I think it's been quite a revelatory thing for some people to say, go, all right, yeah,  
**[0:13:05-0:13:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:13:05):**  these plants grow around us and we can use them quite easily.  So a project that I'm doing closer to home in Wharton Forest is the community apothecary  where we're starting to develop herb gardens, medicinal herb gardens where people come and  learn how to grow herbs themselves.  And then we together, we're harvesting the herbs and making them into medicines for people  
**[0:13:24-0:13:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:13:24):**  in the community.  And it's already been happening that people are saying, oh, right, like I'm going to start  growing these in my garden at home or we've got quite a big garden, can we start to make  it into a medicine garden?  So that's really the beauty of this is, you know, we don't have this thing where some  
**[0:13:40-0:13:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:13:40):**  people have no knowledge and kind of deign to share it with others.  It's something that is accessible to everybody and everyone can develop it and use it in  their own way.  I just have always this long term vision of a place like the medicine house in India that  my dad's grandfather started of being a lovely hub, a social hub where people can come and  
**[0:14:00-0:14:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:14:00):**  hang out with each other and learn about medicines and learn about plants and take part in growing  them together.  For me, it's really a community thing.  I just feel really happy and connected with the place where I live when we're in these  gardens doing all the stuff together.  
**[0:14:15-0:14:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:14:15):**  It just makes you feel strong, joyful.  You feel good, you know, in your body and your soul.  So for me, I see it being a place, a location where people can come to and connect with  each other and feel taken care of and take care of each other.  So, yeah, all of the things that are happening in London that I'm connected with, all the  
**[0:14:38-0:14:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:14:38):**  gardens and the projects makes you feel like part of this big web, this network of people  making each other healthier.  Walter Yenna is a soil microbiologist and director of Healthy Soils Australia.  Walter has talked extensively about the Earth's soil carbon sponge and hydrology as they relate  to the climate crisis.  
**[0:15:03-0:15:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:15:03):**  This interview originally appeared on the podcast Investing in Regenerative Agriculture,  made by our friend, Khurun Seijin.  We're really grateful to Khurun for allowing us to share his interview and definitely recommend  tuning in to the whole thing.  If you go back 420 million years, there were no soils, it was just ocean and rock.  
**[0:15:27-0:15:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:15:27):**  And it was the fungal processes of pedogenesis, the lichens and the mosses that then dissolve  that rock, leaving organic matter behind, creating soil.  And it's a soil then that formed for the first time that succession of plants on land.  And of course, that built the soil.  And with the soil, we built hydrology, the capacity of those soils to retain water, to  
**[0:15:55-0:15:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:15:55):**  infiltrate, retain rain before it used to just all run off.  And that actually then created life on land, right?  So it's really soil in nature is the point of generation.  And so if we need to regenerate, it's just logical that, hey, we've got to go back and  use exactly the same processes that nature did in creating the biosphere we all depend  
**[0:16:20-0:16:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:16:20):**  on.  And it's safe to say we haven't been in the last 50 or in some cases 12,000 years.  We haven't used those processes of nature.  We've done the opposite.  Absolutely.  
**[0:16:31-0:16:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:16:31):**  But we shouldn't be too harsh on ourselves.  Because what we're saying is, no, we have agency.  We have a capacity to either degenerate, degrade or regenerate.  So it's a very empowering understanding of soils that, hey, this is our point of agency.  It's actually quite profound to that when you think of it, humans, it is the only point  
**[0:16:58-0:17:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:16:58):**  of agency we have on the planet.  Explain that.  And I'd contemplate, well, look, what can I do to the oceans?  What can do the air?  But you really have to then come back to soils and our management of soils if you want to  
**[0:17:11-0:17:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:17:11):**  influence anything in this biogeological cycle and the dynamics of the planet.  So now we've got climate change.  We've obviously got a planetary emergency.  It's critical.  But when you think of our point of leverage, even CO2, we have to go back to soils because  
**[0:17:32-0:17:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:17:32):**  we have to ask the question, one, where did the CO2 come from?  Yes, the oxidation largely of soils, as you said, for the last 12,000 years.  But also if we have to draw down CO2 from the air, what can we do?  Yes, we can draw it down and put it back into the soil as stable soil carbon.  So even managing CO2 is a soils issue.  
**[0:17:59-0:18:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:17:59):**  Because many people are questioning that.  They are saying they're questioning the carbon piece, the CO2 piece, because they're saying  it only gets stored in the first 30 centimeters according to the common model.  It's not stable because then when we plow and you're saying it's the only point of agency  we have is actually the soil.  
**[0:18:17-0:18:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:18:17):**  Well, look, I mean, and the science is very important to mention this, about 750 billion  tons of carbon in the air is CO2.  There's currently about 3,000 billion tons of carbon in our soils.  But that may be half of what there was 12,000 years ago when you consider how much we've  oxidized, cleared, desertified.  
**[0:18:43-0:18:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:18:43):**  So the soils as a major sink might have been eight times more than in the atmosphere.  And in a sense, it's really the buffer.  And in a sense, we have altered that buffer.  But it's the only point of agency, the only point we have of actually removing carbon  from the air, from the ocean to put it back into this other sink.  
**[0:19:06-0:19:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:19:06):**  Because a lot of the carbon went into the ocean.  Yes, yes.  Well, actually, it's very serious because it says why soils are so important, because  absolutely when we release carbon dioxide, initially about half goes into the ocean.  But then it re-equilibrates and it ends up with about a third of the CO2 we've released  
**[0:19:28-0:19:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:19:28):**  is in the oceans.  There's some 38,000 billion tons of carbon dissolved in the ocean.  And it makes a point, you see, that's 50 times the carbon in the atmosphere.  And so even if we try to draw down carbon in the atmosphere, the oceans will, as a big  buffered system, will just re-equilibrate.  
**[0:19:51-0:19:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:19:51):**  So it will take centuries for us even drawing down, even having negative net emissions to  change the carbon in the atmosphere in a meaningful way to change its greenhouse effect.  So it's actually the evidence that we can't fix the climate anymore with CO2 emissions  reductions because the ocean is such an enormous sink.  And it will release it again as we are drawing it down from the air.  
**[0:20:20-0:20:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:20:20):**  And so we now have to say, where is there a bigger point of agency?  And that's where we come to soils.  So just to summarize that point, we have released so much carbon and a lot of that ended up  in the oceans.  And if we're now going to draw down, which we want to, and we're going to get to that  
**[0:20:37-0:20:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:20:37):**  in soils, but for another reason, you're going to draw down a lot of this carbon, it will  basically be released from the oceans.  And so the amount of carbon in the atmosphere won't really go down and will take centuries  before that amount goes under 400 parts per million or 350 or whatever we're talking.  So why are you not super depressed?  
**[0:20:55-0:20:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:20:55):**  Because that sounds very depressing.  OK, no, no, look, we gave up on worrying about carbon emissions as a tool for reducing the  reducing climate, the CO2 atmosphere concentration.  It can't affect the climate.  But if we put carbon into the soil, then we have another force multiplier, because if  
**[0:21:18-0:21:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:21:18):**  we put carbon in the soil, we can hold more water.  Now we get to the interesting part.  And if we can hold more water, then we engage the next more dominant whole fundamental of  the climate, and that is that 95 percent of the heat dynamics of the blue planet is driven  by water.  
**[0:21:39-0:21:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:21:39):**  The CO2 component in the air drives 4 percent.  So now instead of being trying to manage the climate with 4 percent, we have 95 percent  leverage effect if we manage the hydrology.  But we can only do that if we have water in our soils.  And so the carbon in the soil is critical to get the water in the soil.  
**[0:22:04-0:22:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:22:04):**  So that's why the soil carbon sponge is such an essential concept.  It's not the fact of drawing down carbon.  It's about rebuilding the soil carbon sponge, hydrology, and then our power to cool the  planet safely and naturally in time through that hydrological process.  So you're saying we have been pulling on the wrong lever, basically.  
**[0:22:30-0:22:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:22:30):**  We've been pulling on the 4 percent lever while we could be pulling or working on the  95 percent lever.  Absolutely.  Why are we all so excited about the CO2?  Let's just take it a little bit further.  
**[0:22:43-0:22:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:22:43):**  See, I think we've been focused on the symptom.  OK, we looked at Charles Keeling's beautiful graph from 1958 when he said here was CO2  going up, the zig-zag going up every year.  And we've looked at the symptom of our land degradation, our fossil fuel use, and said  the symptom is the problem.  
**[0:23:06-0:23:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:23:06):**  And cleaning up the symptom is a solution.  But it's not like that.  You see, it's just the symptom.  It's a resource.  It's like fever.  
**[0:23:14-0:23:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:23:14):**  Yeah.  If we can take that resource and put it back into the soil, then we can engage hydrology.  And hydrology is the driver of the heat dynamics.  And hydrology is our potential to safely and naturally cool the planet almost immediately,  not the centuries that we can no longer wait for CO2 to have an effect.  
**[0:23:40-0:23:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:23:40):**  We can use a 95 percent lever, as you said, not the 4 percent lever.  And so it's the CO2.  We have heard this before.  Actually, I will link the interview below with Zach Wise, where he called climate change  and carbon the symptom of a much bigger of land degradation and broken water cycles.  
**[0:23:58-0:24:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:23:58):**  And that's exactly why I wanted to have you on it as well, because I've heard you speak  on it and read a number of things.  We need to focus on water.  And it happens to be the same thing at the end in soil.  Like that's if we regenerate and restore soils, we store a lot more water because of the carbon  
**[0:24:12-0:24:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:24:12):**  and not because we want to store the carbon, but we actually want to restore the water  cycle.  Yeah.  So it's the resource that we need to use to rebuild the soils, to rebuild the water, to  cool the planet.  
**[0:24:24-0:24:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:24:24):**  Exactly.  And so just to reiterate the water cycle for people that are not spending a lot of time  on that, what are the key pieces there?  If you had to explain it to a six year old, what are the key pieces of the water cycle  that we should all know?  
**[0:24:38-0:24:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:24:38):**  OK, well, look, I mean, obviously, first of all, you look at water.  Seventy one percent of the planet is covered with oceans, 4000 meters deep, right?  Four kilometers deep on average.  So there's a lot of water on this planet and it's got this extraordinary capacity to absorb  and retain heat.  
**[0:24:58-0:25:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:24:58):**  And so that's why it's a key part of the heat dynamics.  And even with climate change, 93 percent of the additional heat that we're warming the  planet with is going into the oceans.  So what we're recording at the moment is only a fraction of what the system is taking.  But then we've got to look at water.  
**[0:25:21-0:25:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:25:21):**  So, yeah, that's the heat buffer effect.  But now what are the processes that involve with warming and cooling the planet through  these hydrological processes?  And there's about 10 steps, both warming and cooling, where water regulates 95 percent  of the heat dynamics of the planet.  
**[0:25:42-0:25:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:25:42):**  But they're very simple.  And for example, the key one that we can focus on is just a transpiration.  When water is taken from soils by vegetation and taken up into the atmosphere, it has to  transfer from liquid to a gas, water vapor.  But to do that, it needs to be converted from liquid to gas.  
**[0:26:05-0:26:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:26:05):**  And that takes about 590 calories of heat energy per gram of water.  So this is an enormous quantity of heat that is taken from the surface by vegetation transpiring  and taken back up into the atmosphere.  And of course, that cools the surface.  It's like when we're sweating.  
**[0:26:27-0:26:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:26:27):**  So if you have a bare piece of land compared to a strongly vegetated piece of land, first  of all, you feel it immediately because underneath it's cool compared to the other.  But it actually cools, let's say, the microclimate around that, in that, above it as well, because  it takes so much energy and so much warmth for that plant to transpire that liquid.  But it needs the water, obviously, somewhere because the soil needs to be full of water.  
**[0:26:50-0:26:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:26:50):**  Otherwise, it cannot happen.  And the amount of heat that it does is profound.  When you think of it, you think of the Earth as a planet.  There's solar energy coming in, 342 watts per square meter on average continually.  And to have a stable climate, you've got to have 342 watts going out.  
**[0:27:10-0:27:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:27:10):**  And of course, we've impeded that heat escape, and that's the greenhouse effect.  And we're heating the planet artificially about 3 watts per square meter, which is about  1% unbalanced.  But the Earth's transpiration, these latent heat fluxes through transpiration, evaporation,  they naturally take 24% of the heat that we're getting from the sun, taking it from the surface  
**[0:27:38-0:27:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:27:38):**  back up into the atmosphere.  It's 2085 watts per square meter globally, or 24% of the heat energy this process is  actually using to take it from the surface.  And so theoretically, if we just increase the vegetation 4%, we can do that 1% cooling  effect, right?  
**[0:28:01-0:28:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:28:01):**  So another argument to reforest, regreen.  To regenerate, right?  Exactly.  Take away asphalt, yeah.  So 4% regeneration, in a sense, offsets the abnormal warming of the planet.  
**[0:28:15-0:28:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:28:15):**  And of course, when you think of that, we've basically cleared half the vegetation on the  planet already in the last 8,000 years, you know, through deforestation, desertification,  agriculture, cities, etc.  So we've delimited 50% and we have to regenerate 4%.  Sounds doable.  
**[0:28:35-0:28:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:28:35):**  Well, how easy is that?  That's the interesting part.  I mean, how beneficial and how doable and practical.  We couldn't resist adding this bit about the bacteria behind rain.  But by far the most important in forested area or inland warmer regions where ice and  
**[0:28:55-0:28:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:28:55):**  salt aren't there, are certain bacteria.  Okay, and these are bacteria that are extremely hygroscopic.  Meaning they attract to others.  Louis Pasteur identified that hygroscopic, they can suck in lots of moisture molecules  to make a big raindrop.  
**[0:29:14-0:29:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:29:14):**  And Louis Pasteur identified them way back in the 1870s, right?  Aerobacter.  And it's these bacteria.  Now these bacteria are formed by forests, certain forests in certain regions.  And so the Amazon, for example, is generating these microbial precipitation nuclei.  
**[0:29:38-0:29:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:29:38):**  And we've got all the radio labeled data that well over half the rainfall in the Amazon  is driven by the trees releasing these precipitation nuclei.  And so we've got this wonderful sort of reality that actually rain is a symbiotic process  of vegetation of life.  Instead of the other way around, we always hear like it needs to rain to create vegetation,  
**[0:30:06-0:30:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:30:06):**  but actually you need vegetation to make it rain.  Beautiful.  And so we now see this rain, the hydrology.  So we see hydrology as a part of a dynamic cycle with vegetation and with soil.  And so now we have rain, but if the rain falls on rock, it runs off into the ocean as lost.  
**[0:30:27-0:30:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:30:27):**  But if it falls into a well structured, healthy soil, it infiltrates as retained for more  evaporative cooling.  And so we've simplified it.  So now we have, yeah, transpiration, clouds, rain, soil.  And that can actually drive the whole hydrology of the planet.  
**[0:30:47-0:30:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:30:47):**  It can drive the whole heat dynamics of the planet.  And it can allow us to cool regions.  And now let's get practical.  I live in Canberra.  It's an artificial city, 100 years old.  
**[0:30:59-0:31:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:30:59):**  It was created as an urban forest.  And in a hot summer's day, as we're already getting now, 40 degrees centigrade, it's 12  degrees centigrade cooler.  In that urban forest areas compared to bare concrete heat island regions, three, four,  five kilometers away.  
**[0:31:20-0:31:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:31:20):**  That's a lot.  That's a big difference.  So we've got natural air conditioning of 12 degrees centigrade in an urban habitat simply  because of this water cycle effect.  I always feel uneasy about the tunnel vision focus on carbon dioxide in relation to the  
**[0:31:38-0:31:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:31:38):**  climate crisis.  To be clear, I don't think this is an excuse for business as usual when it comes to fossil  fuels or anything like that.  That is a form of extraction and land degradation in itself.  And there's just no doubt we need to move away from fossil fuels.  
**[0:31:55-0:32:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:31:55):**  However, I do feel very unsure or uneasy about the linear and transactional approach we're  taking to carbon, such as through carbon markets and carbon offsetting.  And so I'm excited by Walter's thinking because it's embracing the fact that carbon is one  part of a complex interlinked system.  And he shows that land regeneration, healthy soils and vegetation cover can have multiple  
**[0:32:24-0:32:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:32:24):**  benefits in this complex system.  It's clear that we need to recognize this is about so much more than just carbon.  This episode of PharmaRama was made by me, Joe Barrett, Abbey Rose and Olivia Oldham.  The interview with Rashika was by Lovechit Dhaliwal.  Our Patreon supporters help make PharmaRama possible.  
**[0:32:57-0:33:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:32:57):**  We're very grateful to all of you who support us and allow us to bring you these stories  every month.  Even the smallest contribution makes a big difference to us.  And if you'd like to consider becoming a supporter, visit patreon.com forward slash pharma-rama.  Big thanks to the rest of the PharmaRama team.  
**[0:33:15-0:33:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/64-dung-beetles-herbal-medicine-hydrology-and-soil-carbon#t=0:33:15):**  Katie Revel, Fran Bailey, Annie Landless, Eliza Jenkins, Dora Taylor and Hannah Söderlund.  Our music is by Owen Barrett.  