---
title: 68: Commoners in Cumbria and collective landscape restoration in Spain
---
### Farmerama  (2021-10-31)  
### Author(s): Farmerama  

**[0:00:00-0:00:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to Farmerama. We're very grateful to those of you that support us and  allow us to bring you these stories every month. Even the smallest contribution makes  a big difference to us, so if you'd like to become a supporter, please visit patreon.com  
**[0:00:19-0:00:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:00:19):**  forward slash farmerama.  This month we hear from a Cumbrian sheep farmer working collectively with his neighbours to  farm and regenerate the landscape. And we learn about one organisation providing the  
**[0:00:32-0:00:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:00:32):**  infrastructure and frameworks for landscape restoration on multiple continents.  James Rebanks farms sheep and cows in Cumbria. He explains what it means to be a commoner,  and tells us how a local group have come together to set up a community interest company which  
**[0:01:10-0:01:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:01:10):**  has allowed farmers to work collaboratively in their ecological restoration efforts. You  may have already heard of James as he's the author of a number of best-selling books.  My name's James Rebanks and I run with my wife Helen a family farm in the Lake District.  
**[0:01:32-0:01:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:01:32):**  We're 1100 feet above sea level, we've got 185 acres that we own, another 200 or so acres  that we rent off other people or graze for them. And then we have, because we're commoners,  we have rights to graze a flock of sheep on the mountain. And we haven't got a flat field  
**[0:01:49-0:01:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:01:49):**  on the farm, all the fields are like a 45 degree slope. The mountains here still belong  often to the descendants of the feudal aristocrats that once owned them. And the story here was,  so the mountain that I graze technically belongs to, it actually belongs to a charity now,  
**[0:02:07-0:02:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:02:07):**  but most of them belong to the descendants of the feudal aristocrats that used to own  them. People like myself established a second legal right of ownership, which was the right  to take from the mountain what a certain number of sheep could take with their mouths. And  
**[0:02:22-0:02:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:02:22):**  then there's a third ownership, which is the actual sheep themselves on the mountain. And  those three things can belong to three different people. So you have this sort of layers, you  can have layers of ownership. So I rent the right to graze from an elderly shepherdess  
**[0:02:36-0:02:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:02:36):**  that I work with. The sheep belong to me, the mountain doesn't belong to me. I mean,  if you talk to farmers who just used to owning their land, they're like, what is this crazy  stuff? And historically, we were effectively squatters. And the aristocrat from time to  
**[0:02:50-0:02:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:02:50):**  time would ask us to go and fight against the Scots as the rent, which is why in all  the battles between the British and the Scots, almost always they end in people running away.  Because who wants to die for a mountainside that doesn't grow very much grass? So there's  
**[0:03:08-0:03:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:03:08):**  a lot of running away in those battles.  So to get the sheep off the mountain where we have our sheep, it takes 10 or 12 people  and 25 dogs two days to get them down. And we have to do that six times a year. You're  
**[0:03:26-0:03:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:03:26):**  left in no doubt if you farm here that you need a lot of other people and you have to  have some kind of working relationship with them. That doesn't mean we're all friends.  Like there's all sorts of grumbles and reasons why we're mumbling under our breath about  
**[0:03:38-0:03:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:03:38):**  what an idiot that guy is. But we ultimately have to work together. And it was interesting  when my dad died six years ago, some of those people who I wouldn't think of as close friends  at all, I've got a functional relationship with them. What I love is that they would  
**[0:03:51-0:03:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:03:51):**  like message me after my dad died saying, if you need help on the farm, just let us  know. And you think, wow, like that's a guy when I was 20 years old, I wanted to punch  his head in in the pub. And now he's offering like him and his wife are offered to come  
**[0:04:04-0:04:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:04:04):**  and help me on the farm and to make me a cake and stuff. And you think, hang on, there's  some decency there in all of those people.  So I think the thing I've got most excited about the collaborative thing here, and I'm  
**[0:04:15-0:04:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:04:15):**  not at the forefront of this, is that we started to do all sorts of things together. We created  a community interest company, or rather my friend Danny created a community interest  company to do a lot of fundraising and bureaucracy and other things to get the money to do things  
**[0:04:29-0:04:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:04:29):**  on farms from governments or charities or river restoration charities. And what we're  finding is that that works brilliantly well. So my friend Danny, who runs that community  interest company, will go and do all of the boring legwork to get the money. He's also  
**[0:04:44-0:04:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:04:44):**  been around all of the 20 or 30 farmers in this valley and the next. He knows where each  of them is on this journey. Some of them only want some new hedgerows because they want  new fences. Some of them will prepare to put ponds in. Some of them want to create wood  
**[0:04:57-0:05:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:04:57):**  pasture. Some of them are super nerdy and want to do almost rewilding type projects.  And what's cool is he can package that all together and he can take two valleys worth  of that stuff to government, to funders and say, okay, if you've got 300,000 pounds, let's  
**[0:05:15-0:05:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:05:15):**  do a serious project that delivers a whole bunch of outcomes. And we found that's working  really, really well. And it's really stimulating a lot of us to think, why are we selling our  meat and things as commodities? Why is there no added value for farming in the most beautiful  
**[0:05:31-0:05:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:05:31):**  bit of England for doing all these things for insects, birds, rivers? I don't think  we're anywhere near the cutting edge or the coolest, smartest thinking on working collaboratively,  but we're definitely going down that road and we're going to have to take a bunch of  
**[0:05:44-0:05:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:05:44):**  steps quickly if we want to maximize what we're good at and really add value.  Do you know what's really funny? I set off on this journey of trying to change our farm  slightly, how would I put it? A little bit like I described before. I wasn't telling  
**[0:05:59-0:06:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:05:59):**  all my neighbors about it. I was just like, this is what I believe, this is what I'm going  to start doing. I'm going to put more hedges in, I'm going to put more trees in. And I  think I assumed that my neighbors would at some point think I was crazy, but I was going  
**[0:06:09-0:06:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:06:09):**  to do it anyway. The cool thing was that my friend Danny went around the valley, he spoke  to everybody, like one-on-one, non-threatening, over a cup of tea, walked around the farm.  And then he came back and he was grinning from ear to ear. When he came back to see  
**[0:06:21-0:06:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:06:21):**  me, he said, you guys are idiots. You all think that you're going to get laughed at  by each other. And he said, nearly all of you are thinking along the same lines. All  of you want to build ponds, all of you want to put hedgerows in, all of you know that  
**[0:06:34-0:06:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:06:34):**  you're not the cheapest commodity producers in the world. All of you love your land. And  to a greater or lesser extent, all of them wanted to work with him. And I'm hearing this  thinking, why have I not had that conversation? And I think it's because we're so culturally  
**[0:06:50-0:06:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:06:50):**  conservative that we're a bunch of boys and girls that grew up talking about sheep on  the road, competing with sheep at sheep shows or cattle. Nature wasn't a cool thing we ever  spoke about really. It wasn't something we were embarrassed about. It just wasn't the  
**[0:07:04-0:07:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:07:04):**  first thing you spoke about or the thing that we hooked our identity on. So it's been kind  of cool for those conversations to start. And that's literally in the last two, three,  four, five years. We're all coming out now and saying, actually, I'm really into habitat  
**[0:07:18-0:07:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:07:18):**  restoration. Is that okay with you guys? It's making me laugh a lot because, yeah, people  are stopping on the road now and they're like, I didn't know you were into this stuff. We've  just built all these ponds. Do you want to come and see them? And so I think it's going  
**[0:07:33-0:07:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:07:33):**  to become part of who we are and an accepted part of who we are and how silly that a bunch  of guys and girls would not have that as a core and open part of our identity. But I  think that's the truth.  
**[0:07:46-0:07:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:07:46):**  And the other thing here, and I wrote about it in my first book, The Shepherd's Life,  this was effectively a place settled by or deeply influenced by Viking settlers, Viking  farmers. They brought Scandinavian farming, Scandinavian sheep genetics, Scandinavian  
**[0:07:59-0:08:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:07:59):**  ideas. And one of the ideas that really stuck here, I think they call it Jante's Law or  Jante Lager in Sweden or Denmark and Norway. And it's effectively an idea coined by a novelist,  which is that it's like a really robust form of egalitarianism. You're not meant to think  
**[0:08:17-0:08:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:08:17):**  you're better than anyone else. You're not meant to be cleverer than the people around  you. You're not meant to be louder or flasher than the people around you. You're meant to  fit in. And that's traditionally been thought of as a negative thing, a thing that stifled  
**[0:08:28-0:08:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:08:28):**  creativity and individuality.  But I think it has some upsides. I think it has some upsides that you might think about  the whole. You might think about everybody else's feelings. You might think about how  
**[0:08:39-0:08:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:08:39):**  you fit in. And yeah, just as a family, we probably believe that quite strongly. So we  try not to stick out and make everybody else feel uncomfortable. We'll just go into the  radar and do it more subtly if we can. How that fits with writing bestselling books,  
**[0:08:55-0:09:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:08:55):**  I don't know. That's where I've blown my cover.  I think human beings have a sense of what's beautiful and always did. There's this rubbish  idea that the romantic poets taught us what was beautiful. No, they didn't. People have  
**[0:09:08-0:09:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:09:08):**  always known what was beautiful. There's stone circles like 10 miles from here that are built  in the most beautiful field in the valley. You're telling me those people four and a  half thousand years ago didn't care about beauty? Of course they did. I think trying  
**[0:09:20-0:09:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:09:20):**  to make the farm beautiful is often a simple way for a human to understand what nature  needs if I'm honest.  What I'm hopeful about is that I know that I can mend this farm. It wasn't completely  
**[0:09:32-0:09:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:09:32):**  screwed. It was just some good stuff on it to start off with thanks to my dad and my  granddad and mom and grandmother. I can make the problems here better. I can make them  vanish by good land management and by adding things that are needed. What gives me hope  
**[0:09:46-0:09:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:09:46):**  is that not only can I do that, but my neighbors are doing it right now and are starting on  that journey.  Before you know it, you've made a valley better. My friends in the next valley are starting  
**[0:09:58-0:10:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:09:58):**  as well. It's like, okay, that's two valleys. I think that's how we save the world. It starts  one field, one farmer at a time. It gets big pretty quick if the ideas are strong enough  and the culture is powerful and embraces that. I'm a noisy talk too much writer who talks  
**[0:10:18-0:10:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:10:18):**  about this stuff, but what you're doing on the podcast, what I'm doing with my books,  what thousands of other people are doing on social media, the culture is changing. It's  going to get better and the culture changes the land, I think.  
**[0:10:35-0:10:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:10:35):**  Erica Tenbroek is landscape manager at Commonland, a Dutch NGO on a mission to transform degraded  landscapes into thriving ecosystems with equal focus on the land and the communities that  live and work there. They are creating the infrastructure and support to enable a whole  
**[0:10:54-0:11:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:10:54):**  region to address biodiversity, climate change, regenerative agriculture, and revitalize communities  all in one go.  Commonland believes it's possible to restore large scale degraded landscapes based on a  
**[0:11:13-0:11:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:11:13):**  business case. That's already very special. We even take it one step further and we think  we can generate four returns by restoring large scale degraded landscapes. A return  on inspiration, on social capital, on natural capital, and a return on financial capital.  
**[0:11:33-0:11:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:11:33):**  That is in a nutshell the four returns framework. That is what we try to roll out in the landscapes  where we work. What we see is that it's a language. It's a common language to connect  multiple stakeholders in a landscape and most importantly it offers potential. It offers  
**[0:11:53-0:12:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:11:53):**  opportunities for different sets of stakeholders that are in a degraded landscape. It opens  minds. It sketches possibility. It sketches a future of a landscape that is degraded today.  But if you talk in 20 years, what could possibly look a restored landscape look like? By having  
**[0:12:17-0:12:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:12:17):**  that image in mind, you can work back from it and you can say, okay, what does that mean  for us today? What would be a logical step to take then when we're talking about landscape  restoration? If I then imagine how our role will be in 10 years or 15 years from now,  
**[0:12:40-0:12:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:12:40):**  it's really nothing more than just thinking out loud. I could imagine we are still there  as a partner, as a supporter, but maybe even having taken a further step back because our  partners are really the kings and queens running the programs. If I think of our Spanish program,  
**[0:13:00-0:13:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:13:00):**  what we really try to prove is or try to do is that you can not only farm regeneratively,  but you can also have a regenerative business so that the economy, at least the regional  economy here in the landscape where you work becomes regenerative, that society, the communities  
**[0:13:19-0:13:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:13:19):**  where we work become regenerative. And that's actually the blueprint you want to work towards  so that it's no longer special what we, our partners are doing, but that becomes the norm.  The work that is being done on the farmer that it's paid for by the consumers when he  
**[0:13:36-0:13:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:13:36):**  does his or her groceries in the shop, if you really dream out loud, there is no longer  a need for common land or no longer a need for our partner because it's the norm. It's  how society runs.  
**[0:13:50-0:13:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:13:50):**  Alfonso and Janiek of La Quintera in the Spanish anti-plano were on last month's episode. They're  involved in one of the proof of concept landscape regeneration projects that Common Land has  committed to enabling and learning from for a period of at least 20 years. The others  
**[0:14:06-0:14:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:14:06):**  are in the Netherlands, Australia and South Africa. Erika talked us through what it took  to get started in Spain.  In 2014, we went on a scouting trip in Spain. We really wanted to work in Spain to show  
**[0:14:19-0:14:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:14:19):**  it's possible to restore degraded dry lands, yes, as inspiration for the larger Mediterranean  basin. So we started scouting in Spain. We visited several landscapes, several initiatives,  met a lot of people in September 2014 that was. And during the trip, we also visited  
**[0:14:40-0:14:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:14:40):**  the Altiplano, the Altiplano as the patio, a landscape roughly in between Malacca and  Alicante of about one million hectares where climate conditions are extreme and where elements  are the dominant crop. So in this landscape, we met 20, 30 people from all over. One million  
**[0:14:58-0:15:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:14:58):**  hectares is about the size of a quarter of the Netherlands. So they didn't know already  know each other. Some did, some didn't. But in in those conversations, it became apparent  that the farmers and the nurse representatives, local authorities all saw something, saw the  
**[0:15:16-0:15:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:15:16):**  potential of the four returns framework for their landscape. There was a lot of energy.  There was a lot of inspiration, you could say. And that is when we did a first co-initiation  workshop. Common Land works with Theory U. Maybe maybe you've heard about it before.  
**[0:15:33-0:15:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:15:33):**  It's from the Presenting Institute. And it's really a way to really listen to each other,  to leave your judgment a little bit at the door when you enter and then co-create a commonly  shared future together. So in November 2014, with the first farmers and entrepreneurs we  
**[0:15:52-0:16:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:15:52):**  met, we did a landscape visioning workshop. What would the Altiplano look like in 2034,  20 years later? And they were dreaming of a regenerative landscape. They were dreaming  of a landscape where eco-ecology is a form of life, connecting economy and ecology, but  
**[0:16:13-0:16:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:16:13):**  just as important, confidence and well-being, both socially and economically. So they made  a vision and there is a lovely visual and literally with the U, but also with their  dreams of restoring natural zones, of farming regeneratively. And interestingly, there's  
**[0:16:33-0:16:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:16:33):**  also an elephant on top of the vision. And when I first saw that photo, I was thinking  an elephant in Spain? Why is there an elephant in Spain? Yeah, but hang, I wasn't at the  workshop so okay. But the elephant is the representative for all the different stakeholders  
**[0:16:51-0:16:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:16:51):**  and all the different experiences and backgrounds and that we need each other. If we really  aim for restoring a landscape of one million hectares, we need people with different backgrounds  and different expertise. And yes, sometimes that means that interests don't align, but  
**[0:17:09-0:17:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:17:09):**  that's the strength of what we try to do. In November 2014, the people present in the  workshop, the local farmers, the local entrepreneurs, they thought it would be a good thing to jointly  establish a farmer driven association. And that's called Alvalol. And Alvalol is today  
**[0:17:31-0:17:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:17:31):**  Common Lands landscape partner in restoring the Altiplano. So we started with a group  of 20, 30 people. And from there, Alvalol started its work firstly with farmers to facilitate  the transition to regenerative farming. All small, small first the workshop here, enabling  
**[0:17:50-0:17:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:17:50):**  farmers to do a little pilot on their farm. And then of course, they see the results in  wanting to transform the entire farm. So very promising. Already early on, we saw that potential.  And today, Alvalol has about 400 members. And that actually without doing really active  
**[0:18:13-0:18:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:18:13):**  outreach or anything, this has grown organically. And that's the most impressive part. I think  that's also the secret of the four returns. If people hear about it, they see the potential.  There is something inspiring in it. And it becomes part of who they are and how they  
**[0:18:33-0:18:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:18:33):**  operate. Maybe we need more farmers. I don't know if we want to transform the entire Altiplano  in Spain. But this is an incredible group of people already. As soon as Alvalol became  a little bit more established, when there was a coordinadora, when there became a team  
**[0:18:53-0:19:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:18:53):**  with an ecologist and a business developer and an advisor for farmers, Comalent could  already step back a little bit. So the partner took the lead. Comalent, I think today, we  are really a partner for our landscape partners. As in, there is a very trusted relation. It's  
**[0:19:16-0:19:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:19:16):**  very open. We do it together. And at the same time, we respect each other's roles. Our partners  are in the lead in the landscapes. And we are the window of the world for those landscapes.  So that means that we try to bring the collective story of the landscapes we work in to the  
**[0:19:37-0:19:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:19:37):**  world, whether it's in the policy influencing domain or in communications or amongst institutions.  So the partner is responsible for the work in the landscape. And we facilitate. Because  we're doing this really together, there is also this testing and rolling out of the returns  
**[0:19:59-0:20:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:19:59):**  framework. It's also very important to have a certain level of base funding, core funding.  I don't know how you could call it best, to have the consistency in a landscape, that  you're not hanging on from one funding contract to the next. So Comalent tries to be also  
**[0:20:20-0:20:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:20:20):**  that provider of core funding for our landscapes partners. It's also very mutual. So it's not  about only Comalent stepping back. There's also this constant interaction and exchange  and this very open way of working together. That's what makes it work. And only then,  
**[0:20:41-0:20:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:20:41):**  if you have that as a basis, then you can also, or that's what I noticed myself, at  least, then in this co-creation exchange, without being a co-creation, you also see  new opportunities arising, which you can then tap into, involve others in and build on.  
**[0:21:00-0:21:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:21:00):**  Because we are building, we are exploring, and we're constantly adapting and learning,  and that's never done.  When visiting La Ronquera, I was struck by just how important Al Valal had been to the  
**[0:21:13-0:21:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:21:13):**  success of the farm and everything they're doing there. I'd known about Common Land  for a few years, but I think their work can seem quite abstract. It wasn't until Alfonso  expressed just how much of a game changer Al Valal is for them, that it really hit home  
**[0:21:30-0:21:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:21:30):**  to me how impressive the work of Common Land is.  So for me, it was a huge change because it changed from basically being here in this  area alone. I didn't know many other people that were doing more sustainable practices  
**[0:21:49-0:21:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:21:49):**  or interested in regenerative agriculture that back then, we didn't know if it was called  regenerative agriculture or agroecology or biodynamic or permaculture, each one was calling  it a different name, I think, depending on the practice. But we were all interested in  
**[0:22:05-0:22:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:22:05):**  that, doing things that were more sustainable and that were actually improving instead of  degrading the landscape.  And thanks to Al Valal, we got many things at the same time. One, it was a lot of moral  
**[0:22:18-0:22:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:22:18):**  support, mainly moral support at the beginning. Then we started getting also some financing  for doing some of these practices that were not productive in the short term, like swales,  ponds, hedges and borders and things like that. And then a huge amount of knowledge  
**[0:22:36-0:22:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:22:36):**  because of this network, we started sharing a lot of information between all the farmers.  We started sharing also not only information on farming practices, but also on clients,  where to get better products for different things, where to sell better your products.  
**[0:22:55-0:23:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:22:55):**  And then a few years later, also to create new companies like the Almendresa or recently  also Habitat and Al Valal Foods to market the products that we were doing it already  with specific regenerative agriculture practices, with specific standards and with a common  
**[0:23:18-0:23:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:23:18):**  story. And then that has been a gigantic change from basically me planting a few vegetables  alone and not really knowing very well what I was doing and not being able to sell them  as even organic to now what is happening. That is many different projects and practices  
**[0:23:39-0:23:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:23:39):**  and improving the soil, the biodiversity, the water and being able to market them in  a good way and all that. So Al Valal works in four lines of action.  We work on or Al Valal, I should say Al Valal works on natural zone restoration. So this  
**[0:23:58-0:24:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:23:58):**  is about tree planting to retain the soil or building water infrastructures to prevent  runoff, promoting biodiversity in natural areas in the Al Valal territory.  The second line of action is inspiration. This is what gives people hope, purpose, identity,  
**[0:24:17-0:24:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:24:17):**  and this is really what brings people together to regenerate their landscape. And there are  several things that Al Valal does. It is about storytelling. So last year we launched a documentary  on the journey of the Al Valal farmers, for example. It is also about making landscape  
**[0:24:37-0:24:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:24:37):**  restoration visible for normal citizens, normal people who are not involved in the landscape  restoration activities themselves. We, for example, built a large landscape sculpture  at the lower slope where we did tree planting. And the landscape sculpture has a form of  
**[0:24:57-0:25:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:24:57):**  8,000 year rock art and is planted in aromatic plants, so lavender, thyme, rosemary. So  it changes color and smell with the season. And it is huge. I believe it is 200 meters  or something. It is incredibly huge so you can see it from the road. And now there are  
**[0:25:19-0:25:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:25:19):**  also picnic banks and little signs explaining what we are trying to do. So we try to engage  not only with farmers, not only with natural parks, but we try to engage also with people  living in the landscape and try to entomate them, interest them in restoring or beautifying  
**[0:25:38-0:25:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:25:38):**  their landscape as well. So the second line of action is inspiration. Then the third one,  and the third one that was a starting point in Spain, is to facilitate the transition  to regenerative farming. In overall, almonds are a dominant crop. So we focus, especially  
**[0:26:01-0:26:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:26:01):**  in the beginning years, a lot on working with almond farmers to implement regenerative practices.  And that can be a range of practices, depending also on the context of the farm, the physical  place, but also on the ambition of the farmer. Just to name a couple of examples, it is about,  
**[0:26:22-0:26:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:26:22):**  for example, about planting windbreaks. There can be a very heavy wind in the Altiplano,  so windbreaks to protect the almond trees can be super helpful. It is about creating  keyline swales or it is about intercropping with aromatic plants. And the concept we use  
**[0:26:38-0:26:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:26:38):**  to facilitate the transition to regenerative farming is a concept that is called La Almondresa.  La Almondresa is actually a combination of two words, almendra, elmend, and dehesa. And  dehesa is the traditional agroforestry system in Spain. You may get an image of pigs eating  
**[0:27:02-0:27:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:27:02):**  acorns under stone oak trees. That is the dehesa system. And what we did is tweaked  that dehesa system to an almond ore chart. Almendra dehesa is actually an almond ore  chart with undergrowth, green cover, where sheep, there is a local race herding the almond  
**[0:27:25-0:27:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:27:25):**  ore charts, but also the natural areas here. It is called Cordero Segreño. So it is about  an almond ore chart with sheep, where there is intercropping with cereals or aromatic  plants, where there is active bee hiving. So a diverse system, farming system, with  
**[0:27:47-0:27:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:27:47):**  multiple products sprouting, regenerative products sprouting off the farm. And regenerative  products are for us products that give back to nature and not only take. So the products,  the way they are produced is in balance with nature, one step further than organic, at  
**[0:28:05-0:28:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:28:05):**  least in Spain. So in Spain, we talk about regenerative organic produce. And that, the  products coming off the farm, is then the starting point for the fourth line of action  of Alvalal, and that is for returns business development. So Alvalal kickstarts businesses  
**[0:28:25-0:28:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:28:25):**  to function as a commercial driver for landscape restoration. So businesses that market process  products that actually result in a higher margin for the farmer, allowing the farmer  to reinvest in his farm to make the farm even more regenerative. So in 2016, Alvalal, our  
**[0:28:48-0:28:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:28:48):**  partner launched a business La Almendresa. So the same name as the concept that we try  to use to facilitate the transition to regenerative farming is the name of a company that processes  and markets regenerative almonds from the Altiplano. Maybe in 2021, that sounds very  
**[0:29:08-0:29:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:29:08):**  logical, but in 2016, when the company launched, there were no regenerative almonds. That market  did not exist. And that market was made by La Almendresa. Later last year in 2020, Alvalal  also launched a cooperative for regenerative olive oil called Habitat, excellent olive  
**[0:29:32-0:29:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:29:32):**  oil. So we had launched two businesses, but at the same time, we realized, okay, these  are producer structures. These are groups of farmers, proud of their products. But in  Spain, it's not as common as in Italy, then to reach also to consumers directly. So in  
**[0:29:52-0:29:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:29:52):**  the Netherlands, we all know the olive oil from Italy, but in the Netherlands, we have  never heard of olive oil coming from Spain. So the Italian farmers are doing something  smart, at least in marketing directly to consumers. So over the past year, we have been thinking,  
**[0:30:09-0:30:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:30:09):**  how can we develop something similar for the products, the regenerative products coming  from the Alvalal territory, the Altiplano Estepario. I mentioned before that actually  we're creating productive ecosystems on farms with multiple products coming off a farm.  
**[0:30:28-0:30:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:30:28):**  And we are now trying to create a business ecosystem in the territory to actually drive  financially our landscape restoration program. And that the business ecosystem starts with  the products coming off the farm. Then as a second laser, you have the producer structures  
**[0:30:48-0:30:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:30:48):**  like La Almendresa, but also Habitat. And the nice thing is we can now also incorporate  and facilitate already existing companies, for example, wines or capers or honey, who  were interested to join us. They now can become part of the movement to transform the Altiplano.  
**[0:31:07-0:31:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:31:07):**  And then it will, the producer structures are combined and connected through a consumer  brand called Alvalal Foods. It's super exciting. The website is live. It's alvalalfoods.org.  And Alvalal Foods will actually target or will aim for online sales. So there will be  
**[0:31:28-0:31:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:31:28):**  an online shop and Alvalal Foods will target brick and mortar retailers to sell the produce  coming off the lands from the Altiplano Estepario to consumers. And that means that everybody  who buys groceries, you, me, we can all choose for products that are good for you, but also  
**[0:31:48-0:31:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:31:48):**  for the planet, for the Altiplano Estepario and thereby contribute directly to beautifying  and regenerating the landscape here in Spain. In general, I think it's important to stress  that the real heroes in Spain are the farmers, are the managers of natural parks, are the  
**[0:32:09-0:32:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:32:09):**  landowners. They make the difference. And luckily we can now say it's also the case  for the entrepreneurs and for the consumers. And it's for me, it's a great honor and pleasure  to travel along on that journey towards regeneration.  
**[0:32:28-0:32:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:32:28):**  James shared earlier how farmers had come together across his landscape and were doing  a brilliant job implementing ecosystem restoration across each of their farms. What if an organization  like Common Land were there to support them in those changes and focus on inspiration  
**[0:32:44-0:32:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:32:44):**  and building thriving rural communities, as well as building businesses to support farmers  moving out of commodity markets. And all this would be supporting the ecosystem work they're  already doing. How would that change and help the farmers moving forward across the landscape?  
**[0:33:04-0:33:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:33:04):**  Maybe this kind of support could help to collectively move through some of the tensions we're experiencing  on small family farms today, such as the ones Cole explored in Landed.  This episode of Farmerama was made by me, Joe Barrett, Abby Rose and Olivia Oldham.  
**[0:33:49-0:33:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/68-commoners-in-cumbria-and-collective-landscape-restoration-in-spain#t=0:33:49):**  A big thanks to the rest of the Farmerama team. Katie Revel, Fran Bailey, Annie Landless,  Eliza Jenkins and Dora Taylor. Our theme music is by Owen Barrett.  