### Farmerama  (2021-50-28)
**[0:00:00-0:00:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:00:00):**  Welcome to Farmerama and welcome to Glasgow.  This month we're bringing you three stories from the fringes of the COP26 conference.  We'll hear about the challenges of growing food in Scotland's largest city, an innovative  and inclusive project researching young people's experience of the food system, and an urgent  call for solidarity with migrant workers.  
**[0:00:44-0:00:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:00:44):**  We're really grateful to our community of supporters.  It's thanks to you that we can bring you these stories every month.  Even the smallest contribution is a big help.  If you'd like to become a supporter, visit patreon.com forward slash Farmerama.  Here in Glasgow, COP was a pretty surreal experience.  
**[0:01:08-0:01:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:01:08):**  It felt to me like a combination of a fortified trade fair, an academic conference, an art  festival and a protest.  The official blue zone was a huge area right in the middle of the city, shut off behind  towering metal fences patrolled by police and private security.  Across the river in the publicly accessible green zone, there were little stalls where  
**[0:01:31-0:01:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:01:31):**  start-ups, academics, NGOs and charities could share their work, as well as a big airy pavilion  reserved for COP's principal partners, the likes of Unilever, Sainsbury's and the Royal  Bank of Scotland.  And then in church halls, green spaces and community centres all over the city, there  was almost a festival atmosphere with talks, workshops, discussions, concerts, exhibitions  
**[0:01:55-0:01:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:01:55):**  and film screenings.  And many of them were platforming indigenous people, people of colour and local residents  in stark contrast to the official conference.  In this episode, we'll be hearing from some of the people involved with these fringe events,  people who are already doing the work, living the work of climate action, climate justice  
**[0:02:17-0:02:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:02:17):**  and food sovereignty.  One of the many, many food-related fringe events was an urban growing Doors Open Day,  organised by the Glasgow Community Food Network.  It was a chance for people to visit some of the city's market and community gardens to  see and hear about their work.  
**[0:02:41-0:02:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:02:41):**  One of them was Tenement Veg, a market garden that's based, for now at least, on a small  plot of land close to where I live on the south side of Glasgow.  I went along to meet Mark and Kelly from the Tenement Veg team.  So we are a workers' co-op and we run a seasonal box scheme in Glasgow.  We met in 2017 on a food growing programme and decided that we would like to continue  
**[0:03:07-0:03:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:03:07):**  growing food and yeah, we were looking for a space and a project to get involved with  and there wasn't really a lot going on in the city so we felt like the only way to carry  on really was to start a new growing project.  We run a box scheme for 22 households at the minute and supply some wholesale and work  with a community-led supermarket or grocery shop and run volunteer sessions at the site.  
**[0:03:36-0:03:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:03:36):**  So we're about two and a half miles from the city centre.  Most of our Vegbox members live within a 20 minute walk of here.  We're in quite a dense neighbourhood, there's lots of tenement buildings around.  It was an old tennis court as well so it used to have red ash underneath and we've just  been building the soil on top for a few years.  
**[0:04:02-0:04:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:04:02):**  So we've been adding quite a lot of green waste compost.  We practice no dig and use lots of cover crops and green manures.  I guess one of the challenges is the site is quite small so we've quite quickly reached  its capacity and that links into another challenge.  We're looking for a bigger site with a longer term lease.  
**[0:04:25-0:04:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:04:25):**  And I guess one thing to mention is we live in Govan Hill and there's a lot of deprivation  and food poverty where we live so we're quite aware of the need to make local food accessible  to people in our neighbourhood.  We received some funding from the Land Workers Alliance Community Resilience Fund and that  project is about making food more accessible and making sure locally grown sustainable  
**[0:04:52-0:04:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:04:52):**  produce is available for people who might not otherwise have access to it.  And so we were looking at options of who to work with in our neighbourhood and the Peoples  Pantry, Govan Hills Peoples Pantry, seemed like an obvious project.  They have a community shop and people pay a subscription to do a weekly shop and there's  a real emphasis on choice and fresh produce so it's a move away from food banks.  
**[0:05:18-0:05:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:05:18):**  So the funding we got from the Land Workers Alliance means we provided a weekly harvest  to the shop for three or four months.  And when that funding ran out we used the Pay It Forward scheme from our Vegbox customers  and then we used that money to provide food to families in the area and to carry on working  with the Peoples Pantry.  
**[0:05:41-0:05:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:05:41):**  I guess tenancy has been a tricky issue so we moved here in 2020 and we had a one year  lease which was then extended until the end of 2021.  Yeah and we now know we can stay until the end of 2022 but yeah not having a long term  lease makes it quite hard for crop planning and just planning in general.  And we have a long waiting list, people get in touch all the time to sign up for the Vegbox  
**[0:06:08-0:06:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:06:08):**  but yeah we do 22 boxes and some wholesale and that is the capacity really.  Getting access to land, finding land, it has been a long slog.  We try a variety of different ways and speak to different people and I mean it is the challenge  in the city, like there's a lot of land is up for development, it's earmarked for building  houses and whatever else and there's not going to be much room for ecological food growing.  
**[0:06:41-0:06:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:06:41):**  You know we've been working with the council a bit and stuff but we've not really got anything  yet, we've been out the city and stuff like that, looked at old farms like way out the  city but then you don't really get the benefit from growing close to home and the people  who would buy it wouldn't get the benefit either so it's definitely a challenge, it's  something that needs to be prioritised really.  
**[0:07:07-0:07:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:07:07):**  Supply chain issues, fertiliser shortages, the food system is coming home whether we  like it or not in Britain, you know it's crunch time almost so whether the government or the  council prioritises land or not we're going to have to at some point.  Yeah I feel like it's a really frustrating process, yeah extremely slow, I guess there  are people everywhere who want to set up growing projects and they have the energy and the  
**[0:07:40-0:07:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:07:40):**  enthusiasm and the will to do it but there's this massive block in the way.  It's not a transparent thing about who owns land, you know you kind of see a patch of  land and finding out who owns it takes a lot of work and yeah I guess often if you put  in a land registry request it costs you money to find out who owns that bit of land which  is pretty mad.  
**[0:08:03-0:08:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:08:03):**  There's also a question about post Brexit agricultural policy and support and it definitely  feels like urban food growing is missing.  There's a lot of support for rural food growing but urban support definitely needs addressing.  We've had a variety of sites but within very close distance to each other, probably within  what, eight mile radius maybe or something over the past few years.  
**[0:08:30-0:08:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:08:30):**  Our second year of growing probably say that was 2018 and that was super dry, I think that  was the year that Glasgow had the record of the hottest day that it ever had and sometimes  we'd turn up and the grass was on fire.  I've never seen grass on fire in Glasgow.  Last year was extremely wet, it was very humid and wet basically from July forwards so we  
**[0:09:02-0:09:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:09:02):**  had lots and lots and lots of slugs, we also had mildew and disease damage for crops because  of the moisture really and the heat and this year I guess it's been completely different  hasn't it, less slugs, much drier.  Just the heat was a real challenge and it was a real struggle physically working in  it, definitely changed working patterns a little bit, like coming out a little bit earlier  
**[0:09:31-0:09:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:09:31):**  in the mornings and then going in between like one and four pm.  Just irrigating became another challenge.  There is a little bit of rainwater catchment on site but it didn't rain for six weeks and  when it did rain it rained a tiny little amount.  Yeah so having to do a lot more watering.  
**[0:09:53-0:09:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:09:53):**  On the one hand some crops grew very quickly but some crops really struggled.  I think one of the real challenges is the unpredictability so if you knew in advance  it's going to be a really hot dry summer then maybe like planting varieties that are more  suited to that and I think is that not knowing is the real challenge.  I guess there's like a certain acceptance of not all the crops surviving and if we have  
**[0:10:21-0:10:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:10:21):**  a really diverse range of crops growing then that should bolster the kind of resilience.  Also I mean we don't do it probably because of the size of the space but seed saving as  well, the crops are doing well, the crops tend to look like they've survived and they've  thrived and they've given us a lot of food as well, probably trying to make sure we save  some of that seed.  
**[0:10:48-0:10:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:10:48):**  The more we grow the more we're going to find out what's going to be able to deal with unpredictable  conditions within a diverse selection of crops.  So obviously COP is happening.  What's your feeling about COP?  Do you have any...  
**[0:11:04-0:11:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:11:04):**  Do you really want to ask that?  Yeah!  Do you have any expectations, any hopes?  Do I have any expectations about COP?  No, definitely not.  
**[0:11:16-0:11:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:11:16):**  It's a mirage, it's built to deceive people that the system can abolish itself, which  it can't.  Capitalists aren't going to abolish themselves, they're the ones that have created these ecological  conditions.  They're not going to vote themselves out.  
**[0:11:36-0:11:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:11:36):**  One thing I want people to learn from COP is that we need to abolish capitalism and  that will be the only way we can get ourselves out of the climate crisis and imperialism  and colonialism.  That's how I feel about it.  Yeah, it's kind of like a sadness really.  
**[0:11:56-0:11:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:11:56):**  That's one thing I personally also don't want people...  Because we all feel sad and nihilistic, but personally I feel like we need to be done  with nihilism.  We need to learn from systems around the world, we need to learn from global south movements.  It needs to get over itself, basically that's how I feel.  
**[0:12:17-0:12:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:12:17):**  We need to learn from the people who are doing it now.  No more nihilism, because we need to get it done.  We have no choice, so no more nihilism.  You can still be sad.  I am sad, but not nihilistic.  
**[0:12:33-0:12:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:12:33):**  They said they laugh cry all the time.  I feel like that is a great term, just laugh crying.  Definitely done that recently.  It's like, what is this emotion?  Nourish Scotland is a charity working for a fair, healthy and sustainable food system.  
**[0:13:26-0:13:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:13:26):**  They hosted a whole series of fringe events during COP, including one called Young Seeds  for Your Thoughts, towards a just food system.  The event itself was organised by Feedback, a campaign group that seeks to challenge power,  catalyse action and empower people to achieve change within the food system.  This year, Feedback's been running a participatory action research project with seven young people,  
**[0:13:50-0:13:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:13:50):**  some of whom are from racialised minority backgrounds and some of whom are neurodiverse.  As you'll hear, participatory action research is an approach that challenges the idea that  research has to be done by academics, or by experts from outside the group being studied.  Instead, it centres ordinary people as researchers.  It's based on the premise that everyone's innate knowledge and skills are every bit  
**[0:14:14-0:14:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:14:14):**  as valuable as academic knowledge.  And in a sense, it's about decolonising research.  The event at COP was a chance for the young people involved in the research project to  share their experience and their findings.  They gave an incredibly powerful presentation that covered a lot of ground.  
**[0:14:33-0:14:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:14:33):**  In it, they highlighted some of the many power imbalances they came across within the food  system and suggested ways that we can all foster positive change.  After the event, I spoke to two of the participants, Warami Jackson and Marlon Opiko.  I'm Warami Jackson.  I'm a 22-year-old agricultural student who is very passionate about all things food and  
**[0:14:59-0:15:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:14:59):**  all things agriculture.  I'm also Nigerian, yeah.  Nigerian and Lebanese, yeah.  I'm Marlon.  I'm 25 years old.  
**[0:15:11-0:15:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:15:11):**  So I got into the food sector simply through an internship that was with growing communities.  It piqued my interest at the time because I was looking to do something completely different  because my background was within finance.  I studied at university.  And yeah, since then, it's been an amazing journey.  
**[0:15:30-0:15:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:15:30):**  And it's brought me here today.  We're at COP26.  You know, we've just come off stage.  And I feel like the possibilities now are almost endless.  I feel so immersed within the sector.  
**[0:15:43-0:15:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:15:43):**  And I'm just hoping to learn a lot more as well.  I got into food and things that have to do with food through different formats.  So for food, it's always been really important to me because my mom cooked a lot.  So there was a lot of home cooking, local buying from the markets and things like that.  I just always never knew how my food was grown.  
**[0:16:07-0:16:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:16:07):**  But I was really interested in food.  So due to all these factors and a couple of gap years when I decided I didn't want to  do something I was good at, like chemistry for petroleum engineering, I didn't want a  generic 95 job because I was more hands-on, I decided I wanted to go into the food and  agriculture sector and found my university and yeah, my story of food began, well, visualized  
**[0:16:34-0:16:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:16:34):**  rather from there.  I started learning on my course, applied farm management, which was very broad.  Topics of organic and things were mentioned, but not in full knowledge.  So that was my mindset.  I was really going into, had plans for conventional ways of growing.  
**[0:16:53-0:16:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:16:53):**  So it got to the second year when I had to do a placement.  The types I saw that I could tap into weren't accessible due to the need for some kind of  driver's license, UK driver's license, tractors one, and spring licenses, which I was in the  kind of in the works on pre-pandemic.  Yeah, so I started looking for something that would kind of accept me.  
**[0:17:16-0:17:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:17:16):**  So then I found on Facebook the opportunity for a placement with feedback and growing  communities combined.  Shout out to Sophie.  And that's when I was really exposed to organic and agro-ecological practical ways of farming.  And I realized the amount of passion that I had for that and the passion I had for small  
**[0:17:38-0:17:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:17:38):**  scale farming and urban farming, accessible farming, where people could see where they're  growing their food and really understood the benefits, like the social, economic and sustainable  benefits of the type of system.  I concluded my placement with them and found the power process.  And you know, I took my lived experience and story.  
**[0:18:00-0:18:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:18:00):**  And yeah, that's how we got here today.  So for the last four months, a group of young people like myself have been involved in a  participatory action research project.  And this is all about how we can work towards a just and regenerative food system.  So based on our personal and collective lived experiences, how can we work towards a just  
**[0:18:28-0:18:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:18:28):**  and regenerative food system?  That was the mother question.  And we had an umbrella question under that, which was what is your reality of the food  system?  So these were like the main anchors behind a lot of the research that we was doing.  
**[0:18:43-0:18:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:18:43):**  But we had many questions below.  But that was the key question we wanted to ascertain from people.  This came from more or less discussions in a group.  So we just sat together and felt like, what kind of questions can we ask people?  And leading to that, like, what is the outcome?  
**[0:19:04-0:19:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:19:04):**  What kind of information do we want to pull from people?  Once we just started with that question, that main question, it just started flowing.  Question after question, we felt like, this is the direction we want this conversation  to go.  Participatory action research, PATH for short, is a research process of inclusion in a very  
**[0:19:26-0:19:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:19:26):**  succinct way to say, as opposed to leaving research into the hands of scientific researchers  alone and things.  You rely on layman knowledge, people who have experienced things relative to whatever you're  researching.  And you kind of use them as the muse to find out, you know, your objectives and your theories  
**[0:19:53-0:19:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:19:53):**  and your research question and eventually your results, your analysis.  So it's giving power to the lab rats.  The lab rats conduct the experiments and, you know, they kind of also analyze from their  point of view because, I mean, who better?  Who better to do this?  
**[0:20:14-0:20:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:20:14):**  So that's what makes it different, is finding the people out there that are going through  the things and then using them as the muse to kind of find solutions to the problem.  Because if you don't have enough knowledge about it, deep knowledge, which has to do  with like feelings and values and how well it affects the people, you wouldn't know how  well to handle the problem.  
**[0:20:35-0:20:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:20:35):**  So that's what makes it different.  Our research took two forms.  We did analysis, qualitative analysis, which is basically surveys and interviews.  So one-on-one, asking people their stories.  When we went to the interview stages, we decided the kind of people that we wanted to ask questions  
**[0:20:58-0:21:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:20:58):**  and the kind of questions that we wanted to ask them that kind of had to do with our personal  stories.  Yeah, for example, maybe me finding out knowledge on culturally appropriate foods or labor or  access to those kind of things, or just knowledge on supply chains.  It was part of my story.  
**[0:21:20-0:21:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:21:20):**  So I wanted to know those things.  And yeah, Marlon could probably share what he went out there with his interview to find  and his target audience and stuff.  Yeah, so predominantly, we were just aiming to speak with young people.  So this would be between the ages 21 to about 25, 26.  
**[0:21:42-0:21:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:21:42):**  But actually, in our survey responses, they were open to people outside of that age group.  So even though it was targeted towards young people, we wanted to hear from a diverse range.  We didn't really want to leave any stone unturned because I feel like everybody's experiences  and their stories do matter.  But our target audience was the age range that I mentioned, because young people, I  
**[0:22:05-0:22:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:22:05):**  feel that their voices are maybe less heard or is not as important.  So we wanted to give also them agency, like they can actually have a say and speak on  what experiences they have, what are their struggles.  Some of the things that came out of our research were we found that a vast amount of young  people got their food consciousness, as I'll call it, like when they decide, this is what  
**[0:22:33-0:22:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:22:33):**  I want to eat, this is the lifestyle I want to take, when they gain independence.  That's at an age when they're probably moving out of their parents' house or moving into  uni.  Just a stage where you have a choice.  So that was one of the main findings.  
**[0:22:51-0:22:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:22:51):**  And we got that from finding out that that's when they thought, oh, I want to eat this,  I want to eat that.  Some people stay in their habitual ways, but a vast amount of them was like, yeah, this  was the point that I gained my food consciousness.  So that was one of the findings.  
**[0:23:05-0:23:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:23:05):**  Another finding was that a large amount of people do not think about farmers when they  go food shopping.  And this is also due to the disconnect between farmers and consumers.  And yeah, this is also because of longer food supply chains.  We also found out that a lot of them are plastic conscious as opposed to climate conscious.  
**[0:23:29-0:23:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:23:29):**  So when they hear climate consciousness, what they mainly think of is plastic, which kind  of shows the food and agriculture sector not being included in the climate agenda.  So the people don't even know how much of a contributor and solution the food and agriculture  system is.  So that's what we found.  
**[0:23:49-0:23:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:23:49):**  And we also found that people will always choose price and affordability as opposed  to, you know, value and nutritional content, which is within reason because of how accessible  and how the price of food is sort of like a facade.  It's not real, it's not reflective.  And I also found out they're very aware of fast fashion and how not to be involved in  
**[0:24:18-0:24:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:24:18):**  fast fashion because the workers and laborers are definitely not paid.  But they don't equate it back to the food system, taking it back to the price of food  in high end outlets.  It's not reflective of the effort that's being put.  So the farmers definitely are not paid a normal price for that.  
**[0:24:34-0:24:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:24:34):**  So that was one of the findings that they do not conceptualize farmers being paid their  effort and being compensated.  But then they realize this for other sectors of work and life, like the clothing sector  and the fashion sector.  And we found that more time, the reason why they don't really want to take the extra  
**[0:24:55-0:25:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:24:55):**  effort to go to the local stores is because it's too far from them, which kind of shows  how there's not enough accessibility in terms of availability.  Like there's not enough local markets around you.  If you're in a town, there's probably like one and to get there, it's not very much possible  as compared to like the next door high end outlets at your left, at your right, you know,  
**[0:25:20-0:25:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:25:20):**  so it's easier.  And they'll always choose the easy way because they're used to it and probably because of  values that haven't been awakened yet.  I would say if we can just inspire people within our own communities, within our circle  to just make little changes within themselves, because I feel like it's a systemic change  
**[0:25:43-0:25:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:25:43):**  that we're kind of working towards.  So it's built of old habits need to be thrown away and we need to replace them with new  good habits.  So the only way that's going to happen is doing your bit little by little, consciously  making decisions.  
**[0:25:58-0:26:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:25:58):**  Like I want to shop local once, maybe twice a week, just because I know it's going to  help the planet, it's going to help the environment.  And actually might just help myself because it's more nutritional.  I'm saving myself time because I don't have to travel too far to certain outlets.  But I thought it was just inspiring.  
**[0:26:17-0:26:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:26:17):**  I just want to be able to inspire.  If it's one person and they make those changes, they can go and inspire the next person.  So I'm hoping this is what the research will do.  Really giving people a voice and allowing them to say, you know what, I can take control  of what I can do personally, but I know it's going to move us towards a bigger change,  
**[0:26:40-0:26:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:26:40):**  create a bigger impact within society.  So I would say that was that's one thing, you know, that I hope would happen.  I hope people gain real empathy towards the situation.  I just hope people are very empathic towards the farmers, you know, towards local stores,  towards themselves as well, their gut health, the importance of, you know, nutrition in  
**[0:27:14-0:27:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:27:14):**  your food, towards the climate, towards the environment.  I just hope they build the consciousness.  Like I hope the conversation never dies.  I hope the story keeps forming and keeps being told.  And I hope also that there is an opportunity for people who are actually being affected  
**[0:27:35-0:27:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:27:35):**  by the situation to be part of the decision making, to give context to what can be done.  Because there are lots of solutions available, but are they really realistic to do what we  need them to do?  You know, and I just hope that people realize that you can do something about the situation  and your tiny effort does not go unnoticed.  
**[0:27:55-0:27:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:27:55):**  You can make a difference.  And to be so authentic, to bring other people along with them, because that's the only way  that we can get there.  If we have a story and there's no one to hear it, then there can't be any change.  We just have a theory.  
**[0:28:09-0:28:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:28:09):**  That's all we have.  But we don't have a strategy if no one's there to listen to it.  So I just hope the story never dies and people just keep being intentional about how they  live their lives and think about their values, like reassess their values.  Because when you do that, you have like the emotional equipment to have mindful action  
**[0:28:29-0:28:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:28:29):**  towards yourself, the world, the environment, the farmers and the food system.  And I hope as a whole and as a broad view that the food and agriculture system is actually  is really, really introduced as one of the solutions to the climate change because it  has so much potential.  There's a recording of the event on Feedback's YouTube channel, and I'd really encourage  
**[0:28:51-0:28:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:28:51):**  you to check it out.  You can find a link in the episode description.  Another hive of food related activity during COP was the Land Workers Alliance Agroecology  Hub, which was hosted in a community space called Civic House.  One of the events that took place there was a discussion titled Solidarity and Organising  
**[0:29:16-0:29:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:29:16):**  with Migrant Workers in the Food System.  It was organised by Catherine McAndrew from the Land Workers Alliance and also featured  Sarah Woolley, Secretary General of the Bakers, Food and Allied Workers Union.  It was a fascinating, challenging and really eye opening discussion that highlighted the  need for solidarity between people in different parts of the food system.  
**[0:29:40-0:29:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:29:40):**  Alongside Catherine and Sarah, there was an empty chair to represent those food workers  who aren't able to speak in public forums like this about their experiences and their  needs.  I started by asking Catherine, what do workers' rights have to do with food sovereignty?  For me, food sovereignty has always meant the control of the food system by the producers  
**[0:29:59-0:30:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:29:59):**  and consumers of food.  And this is a concept which has been formulated by Livia Campesina, and that is an organisation  which is made up of mostly of peasant producers.  The UK was probably one of the first countries where the peasantry was forced off the land.  And so increasingly what you have in this country is that food production is undertaken  
**[0:30:22-0:30:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:30:22):**  by wage labourers.  It's undertaken by people who are, rather than producing stuff on their land and selling  it to others, it's people who are selling their labour to larger capitalist businesses.  So in my mind I think wage workers are a key agent in creating food sovereignty because  they are the people that have an interest in really changing how the food production  
**[0:30:42-0:30:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:30:42):**  system works and having it so their interests are represented.  Agricultural workers are traditionally seen as very exploited, seen as very marginalised.  Due to shortages of agricultural labourers in the UK at the moment, there's a lot of  discussion about this issue but it's always discussed in terms of agricultural workers  just as inputs into the system.  
**[0:31:03-0:31:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:31:03):**  The humanity and agency of these workers just never seems to come out in any discussions.  In a country like the UK where a lot of food producers are now divorced from the land,  a lot of them are now people selling their labour to larger companies, I think a key  agent in creating food sovereignty in this country is agricultural workers and food production  workers themselves.  
**[0:31:23-0:31:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:31:23):**  There's a shortage of agricultural labourers at the moment and so that means I think agricultural  labourers potentially could have a better bargaining position.  So it means that the agricultural labourers that are going to be coming over are going  to be worked a lot harder and be working a lot longer hours.  Many agricultural workers come from Eastern Europe where currencies have appreciated quite  
**[0:31:43-0:31:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:31:43):**  significantly since accession to the European Union in 2005 whereas the UK's currency is  losing its value so workers are going to be earning a lot less when they come over here.  And in addition as well, post Brexit there are going to be some changes to the migration  system.  One of these proposals and the one I think is going to be the one that becomes the norm  
**[0:32:03-0:32:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:32:03):**  is the seasonal worker pilot.  So the way that works is it's a temporary migration programme where workers are recruited  by two recruitment agencies, Concordia and Powerforce.  The workers they're recruited and so they come over to the UK on a temporary basis,  they're here for six months, they're assigned a specific farm, it's very very difficult  
**[0:32:25-0:32:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:32:25):**  for them to move from that farm.  If they're sacked from that farm they're deported.  I think it really shows the purpose of the new immigration patrols that the Conservative  Government are imposing.  It's not about increasing wages or protecting workers' rights, it's utterly ridiculous.  
**[0:32:40-0:32:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:32:40):**  What it is is about making the workers that come here increasingly dependent on their  employer.  Their employers can dismiss them and if you're dismissed it's not just you've lost your job,  you're having to re-uproot yourself.  So with the seasonal workers pilot, one example that's come out quite recently is of a group  
**[0:32:59-0:33:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:32:59):**  of workers who participated in this from Barbados.  So I think about around 100 workers came over as part of the scheme.  They were billeted on a strawberry plantation I think in Kent and the conditions of work  on this farm were awful.  Like people were placed in caravans that were unsanitary, toilets were not functional, people  
**[0:33:20-0:33:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:33:20):**  were being asked to work very, very long hours and if they couldn't work at the rate that  the bosses were expecting they would not be offered work the next day.  And additionally because also the costs of housing and uniform and food are extracted  from workers' paychecks, so some of these workers were earning less than six pounds  a day for a ten hour day.  
**[0:33:42-0:33:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:33:42):**  That level of exploitation is just extreme.  And of course as well as part of that contract it's not like they can't leave the farm,  they can't go and get accommodation elsewhere.  One of the cases we came across in Spain was a case of a company called Biosabora which  is nominally an organic producer with a very, very poor record of workers' rights and one  
**[0:34:06-0:34:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:34:06):**  of the instances that happened at this enterprise was workers were being asked to spray plants  with pesticides without protective gear being issued to them.  So this made a lot of workers very sick.  So we've got to see who in this set up has the interest in moving away from a pesticide  and agrochemical based food production system.  
**[0:34:28-0:34:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:34:28):**  It's not the bosses of Biosabora, definitely not.  They've got every incentive to continue producing in that way.  Instead it's the workers themselves who in order to protect themselves and to protect  their livelihoods must seek to move towards a more sustainable and more organic way of  producing things to both protect themselves and their health.  
**[0:34:45-0:34:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:34:45):**  So I think it's a combination of the conditions are going to be worsening, workers are going  to be earning less, the migration system is changing in a very negative way and also in  many countries in Eastern Europe, namely in Belarus for instance which is a big source  of labour for the seasonal workers' programme.  There's been big social uprisings there in 2020 with a sort of general strike by industrial  
**[0:35:06-0:35:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:35:06):**  workers.  In Romania you've seen general strikes there, I think you had a general strike there in  2017.  In Berlin you've had the women's strike over the right to access to abortion.  And what you find is that experiences of struggle travel along sort of migration paths, so when  
**[0:35:23-0:35:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:35:23):**  workers have experienced struggles in their own country they're going to carry that new  found sense of dignity to wherever they end up.  So these combinations of factors make me think this is now the time to be looking at this  additionally as well.  This is a point that a European coordination of Via Campesina there has made in relation  
**[0:35:40-0:35:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:35:40):**  to discussions around low wages and the high price.  The issue with organic food is often that, oh, organic food is more expensive and I think  that's, yes, that is true.  Organic food takes longer to produce and therefore is always going to be more valuable than something  that's been mass produced in a very short amount of time.  
**[0:35:57-0:36:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:35:57):**  We want organic food to be the main source of food in this country.  We want everyone to be able to afford and eat and take part in the consumption of good,  high quality, well-produced food.  And in order for that to happen, wages have got to go up.  As I said at the moment, and this is the point that ECVC have made, cheap supermarket produced  
**[0:36:16-0:36:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:36:16):**  food is being used as an alternative by governments to social policy and improved wages.  You can deal with a low wage economy, you can have a low wage economy if food is kept  artificially cheap.  However, the real price of keeping that food so cheap is the degradation of the land, the  soil and the people that are involved in food production.  
**[0:36:36-0:36:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:36:36):**  The supermarkets in this country are essentially four large corporations controlling 80% of  the grocery market.  That in a sense sets the conditions for the entire food production supply chain.  If I remember correctly, the markup on a punnet of raspberries is about 33%.  So of the price of a punnet of raspberries, 33% of that price is pure profit for the supermarket.  
**[0:36:59-0:37:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:36:59):**  And it's no wonder then for that Tesco earned about 2.7 billion pounds in profit last year.  This isn't Tesco's profit, this is workers' profit.  It's workers that have made this money for them, it should be workers that are benefiting  from this at the very, very least.  Often you end up with a situation where you have intense competitions between farms that  
**[0:37:18-0:37:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:37:18):**  are trying to seek to produce the standards that supermarkets want, which in turn ends  up that the profit margins of these farms are often very, very low.  And then these farms have almost no choice, but to degrade the conditions of work on their  farms in order to essentially just make enough money to survive.  And even then it's quite difficult, even then it's not possible without a very, very large  
**[0:37:39-0:37:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:37:39):**  level of subsidies from central government.  That's where I think the connection is, in the sense that it's both small organic farmers  and agricultural workers are being exploited and having their conditions set by the same  system, a system which is ultimately controlled by the supermarket corporations.  When it comes to the sort of organisation of these workers, I think the UK doesn't really  
**[0:37:59-0:38:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:37:59):**  have that much of an agricultural workers' movement at the moment.  That's something I'm seeking to change.  But there is a strong agricultural workers' movement based in Spain with the SOXAT trade  union and Italy as well with the USB trade union.  These are organisations that regularly post updates about what they're doing, about the  
**[0:38:14-0:38:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:38:14):**  disputes they're involved in.  I think the most practical thing that, you know, the sort of bare minimum that someone  can do in this situation is keeping aware of what the situation is in places like El  Maria and seeing like, okay, well, if there is a strike of these workers, then we should  be placing pressures on the supermarkets that are buying from the farms in question.  
**[0:38:32-0:38:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:38:32):**  Additionally, I think this is more further on, but I'm very inspired by an organisation  called the Coalition of Immaculate Workers, which is based in the United States.  It's made up of Mexican tomato pickers based in Florida and they, when they were set up  in 1993, were the worst paid farm workers in the United States.  What they did was through a combination of taking strike action at, you know, on certain  
**[0:38:54-0:38:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:38:54):**  farms and building links specifically with student groups, namely the Student Farm Worker  Alliance.  This sort of alliance between consumers and producers of food was able to sort of force  a number of the large corporations that controlled the food system, the first one they managed  to win over was Taco Bell, to sign up for, you know, essentially sign up to some national  
**[0:39:15-0:39:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:39:15):**  agreements and it's known as the Fair Food Programme.  So this would mandate that the corporation in question would pay about a cent extra for  a, for a, a pun up tomatoes and then this would fund, you know, wage increases for the  workers and also sign up to a worker led monitoring programme of conditions.  What that agreement has managed to do is transform these workers from the lowest paid to the  
**[0:39:38-0:39:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:39:38):**  best paid.  You've gone from $7 an hour on average to $14 an hour and also has made massive improvements  on sort of rates of sexual violence and harassment of workers on a farm level.  And so looking into the future and this is what I'm kind of hoping to be looking into  the practicalities of, we need consumer solidarity groups.  
**[0:39:58-0:40:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:39:58):**  Consumers need to get organised, workers need to be in touch with these consumer groups.  When disputes occur or when workers want to extract concessions from the supermarkets,  these consumer groups are then able to say we're not going to buy from you until you  accept the, the demands of the workers or we're not going to purchase certain tomatoes  until this is done, which then increases the bargaining power of these workers.  
**[0:40:20-0:40:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:40:20):**  We are the people where the solutions are going to come from.  It's getting down, organising, building links with one another, building links between organisations  and coming up with plans to take our social movement forward.  In that instance COP has been an absolute, absolute success.  I think we've made some excellent links between people and never mind the, never mind the  
**[0:40:38-0:40:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:40:38):**  buzzcocks in the convention centre.  This episode of Farmarama was produced by me, Katie Revel, Olivia Oldham and Abby Rose.  Thanks as always to the rest of the Farmarama team, Jo Barrett, Fran Bailey, Annie Landless,  Eliza Jenkins and Dora Taylor.  Our theme music is by Owen Barrett.  
**[0:41:16-0:41:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-cop-26-glasgow-growing-participatory-action-research-and#t=0:41:16):**  We're the people, power, power to the people.  People, power, people.  