### Farmerama  (2021-40-26)
**[0:00:00-0:00:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to Farmerama. We're very grateful to those of you that support us and  allow us to bring you these stories every month. Even the smallest contribution makes  a big difference to us. If you'd like to become a supporter, please visit patreon.com  forward slash Farmerama.  This month we hear about more resilient grape varieties and growing grapes in the UK. We're  
**[0:00:28-0:00:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:00:28):**  offered a mind-bending new way of understanding what soil is. And you can sit back and relax  as we take you on a farm tour on the other side of the world.  Firstly, here's Victoria Vine Lizard, who's recently established a new vineyard, the Shiny  Vine, on her family's farm in Warwickshire. Victoria's looking to farm her vines as ecologically  as possible. And as part of that, she's planted disease-resistant grape varieties which are  
**[0:01:01-0:01:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:01:01):**  more suited to the climate in the UK, known as Pee Wee varieties.  So we only just planted in May this year, so we're at very, very early stages. In terms  of the estate, it's always been in the family. So this is my home estate that I've lived  on my entire life, my dad before me. And we've always had land that we've farmed, mainly  it used to be maize and rapeseed. There was a stint that we had peas as well. So I've  
**[0:01:32-0:01:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:01:32):**  simply just taken a proportion of the land and instead I've decided to diversify the  land and the estate into vine growth, grape growing and wine production because that's  a personal interest of mine.  I suppose it's a natural progression from me having an interest in where my food comes  from and having a personal interest in growing vegetables and trying to be as low intervention  
**[0:01:59-0:02:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:01:59):**  as possible, particularly in this day and age where there's a level of loss of control  in that respect. For some people it can simply be convenience, for others it can be expensive  to eat well.  It made sense to me that if I have a passion in wine and wine making that I should also  have a hand in how those grapes have been grown, how the vines have been nurtured to  
**[0:02:26-0:02:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:02:26):**  also see if I can be as responsible as possible for the land itself, to not abuse it, to not  overwork it, so to speak. That's a common farmer's term, overworking it, but to look  after the soils because ultimately it's going to be there after me. I haven't used up all  of our land, it's a relatively speaking for farming, it's a small estate, it's 150 acres  and there's two lakes, extensive woodland, beautiful mature trees, the biodiversity is  
**[0:03:00-0:03:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:03:00):**  fantastic, we've got all kinds of birds here and species that we're proud of.  Grape growing also is my way of having a hand in how the land is looked after, how it's  going to progress. I suppose I'd like to create an environment where also people can come  and find a bit of peace in nature and to learn about how grapes are grown and where our vegetables  come from and take a moment to look around them, to walk around the lake and to take  
**[0:03:31-0:03:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:03:31):**  walks through the woodlands and to listen to the birds, as cliche as that sounds, but  professionally speaking I came from a very corporate commercialised environment and I  spent a huge chunk of my time where I recognised it's very difficult to know when to stop and  know when to be able to switch off and nature does that for me, so I want to create a space  where I can share that with other people as well.  
**[0:03:58-0:04:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:03:58):**  From the outset I've tried to make it as easier as possible, if there's such a thing, by picking  grape varieties that I've heard anyway and it appears that science is telling us are  lower intervention, so I'm talking about the Pee Wee grape varieties that have been effectively  bred and selected to have a high resistance to fungal diseases. So the idea is that you  won't need to do as many passes in the vineyard with your tractor, you're not compacting the  
**[0:04:32-0:04:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:04:32):**  soils as much, you're obviously not having to use as many fungicides. I don't think they  are perfect in the sense of I don't believe there are varieties that you never need to  spray but it certainly makes it a lot easier. I heard somebody else say it's all very well  saying you want to be sustainable but you're not sustainable if you're economically not  viable as well, if you're not having a sustainable business, so it's finding that balance, that  
**[0:05:00-0:05:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:05:00):**  absolute respect for the land and for what you're doing and making as wiser decisions  as possible. It's all meaningless if you end up with a business that cripples you because  you never actually end up with any fruit or be able to make any wines that anybody wants  to drink, which is another concern that people have had with Pee Wee varieties thus far.  Decades ago they weren't necessarily known as creating great wines whereas now with a  
**[0:05:29-0:05:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:05:29):**  bit of trial and error and extensive use in countries like Germany we're finding that  there's some varieties that are making some delicious wines and I think the market's picking  up on that. It's about marketing it right as well which I'm hoping as time goes on will  become easier. The challenges that always face people of colour, that's not something  that I haven't experienced, I'm aware of, I couldn't say that it's limited to me, I've  
**[0:06:04-0:06:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:06:04):**  been aware of the fact that I've always felt I've had to work twice as hard as others but  if you've been doing that from the day you've taken a breath I suppose you don't know any  different. What it has made me is very aware of the importance of inclusivity and diversity  in the business that I'm about to run. So I want to make sure that any wine I produce,  any labelling, any marketing, any website that I do, any social media, every single  
**[0:06:32-0:06:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:06:32):**  time I open my mouth that to the best of my abilities I don't feel that anybody from any  background, religion, race, creed, whatever, I don't want them to feel they can't be a  part of what I'm doing. That's important to me so it has moulded me in that respect. I  would say I have a good collection of stories and I'm aware of the importance of making  sure that nobody, whatever their personal story is, ever feels that they can't be part  
**[0:07:04-0:07:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:07:04):**  of mine. You know so long as it's all good feelings obviously, you know, but that's important  to me. But everything that I do it's important to me that it's a space that people can connect,  people can you know find a bit of peace, people can feel seen, people can you know share their  stories and not feel that they're excluded from mine or my business because their story  differs from mine. You know that's the core of everything that I do, that's the core of  
**[0:07:35-0:07:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:07:35):**  what the shiny vine itself is and the imagery of it. It's a vine that's struggled, it's  slightly gnarled, it's got all these knots and ridges in it but it's shining because  of its own experience, its own ability to overcome and to produce fruit, fruit being  the good things that we can share with other people. So that's why I'm called, that's why  the business is called the shiny vine and it's the root of everything that I do. I'm  
**[0:08:05-0:08:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:08:05):**  hoping that our industry becomes ever increasingly open-minded and that means the kinds of people  that we invite into the industry, that means creating spaces where younger people can come  into the agricultural industry and it's not about just landowners, people who perhaps  come from a fortunate position. I think we need to, I suppose I'm boiling back to what  I said previously, that being as inclusive as possible and it also means giving different  
**[0:08:35-0:08:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:08:35):**  grape varieties an opportunity and so long as the product is good, which obviously is  important, so long as the wine is something that can truly be marketed for, I hope this  industry opens its mind a little bit more to differences.  Research scientist Andy Neill shares the results of some of the work he's involved in at Rothamsted  Research where they've established a very different way of thinking about soil. Andy  
**[0:09:07-0:09:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:09:07):**  says that soil is a composite extended phenotype of the microbes that make up that soil. This  is definitely one to re-listen to a few times to really get your head around it.  The extended composite phenotype is based upon the concept originally of Richard Dawkins  of the extended phenotype and he demonstrated that with certain organisms, birds are a very  good example, that the genes, or rather the effect of the genes can be noticed beyond  
**[0:09:43-0:09:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:09:43):**  the boundaries of the body. So a bird's nest is a perfect example of that because they're  clearly an expression of the organism's genes because you can tell one species from another  just by looking at the nest. Even if the bird isn't there, you can definitely tell a hummingbird's  nest from an osprey's nest or a bowerbird's nest from an ostrich's nest. But critically,  evolution works upon those nests. So if those nests do not protect the eggs well, the genes  
**[0:10:12-0:10:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:10:12):**  are not passed on to the next generation. So there's this close coupling between the  expression of those genes in building the nest, but then the selection of birds that  are good at building nests back onto the evolution of those genes. So that's the sort of concept  of an extended phenotype. What we've done is taken that and used the extended composite  phenotype to describe that process. So to understand soil as the expression of the genes of all  
**[0:10:44-0:10:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:10:44):**  the organisms in it, and that's where we add the extended term in the sense that the microbiology  and the genes that are being expressed there are what are creating this living structure  that is soil. Now, critically, what drives this extended composite phenotype is the input  of carbon as energy and nutrients for the microbes. But then once it's processed, so  you put carbon into soil as leafy material, as sticks, as effectively large, complex organic  
**[0:11:15-0:11:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:11:15):**  material, it's broken down by the microbial community in soil. And when those cells die  and burst open and release all their innards, when they secrete compounds out through the  cell wall, that carbon is then of the right molecular size to stick to clay particles  in soil, and it forms a sort of cement that then starts to glue particles together in  ever greater sizes. And that's what creates the structure that we call good structure  
**[0:11:45-0:11:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:11:45):**  in soil. The critical bit about the extended composite phenotype concept is that that structure  that is created by the activity of microbes breaking down carbon-creating structure is  that that structure then feeds back upon how the microbes live by changing the way in which  nutrients, water, and oxygen flow through the system. So there's this complex feedback  between the way microbes create structure and the way that that new structure then feeds  
**[0:12:19-0:12:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:12:19):**  back upon the genes in the microbes. We haven't had an opportunity to really look at very  fine time scales. We know soil structure itself and soil carbon sequestration is quite a slow  process. So we have looked at some very degraded soils, soils that have been starved of carbon  for over 50 years. Very low pores, very few connections between those pores. When we plant  that up as a pasture and manage it as a permanent pasture system, even after 10 years, we're  
**[0:12:54-0:13:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:12:54):**  still struggling to see statistically significant changes in the pore network and the amount  of pores in those soils. So it's very, I'm not saying all soils will be that slow. I'm  sure some soils will be even slower. But our experience is that you've got to think about  these things on a sort of decade time scale. How the microbial community changes, we've  never really looked at in any great depth. So one of the key questions is if you take  
**[0:13:21-0:13:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:13:21):**  an organism that has been grown in the lab for 10 years and has got used to being grown  in the lab, how effective is it going to be when you place it back in a community that  may have tens of thousands of other species competing for nutrients in those soils? So  theoretically those organisms are not going to be fit to be able to thrive in any soil.  Given that soil is very low in nutrients, it's a very changeable environment, it can  
**[0:13:50-0:13:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:13:50):**  be very hot during some seasons, very cold in others, very high salt content, but then  there can also be very low water content. So organisms to be able to thrive have to  be as good at coping with those changes as the resident community is. If it's lived for  10 years in the lab, it will have become a labrador rather than a wolf. And so it's very  difficult to get it to, now what we can say is the soils we have at Rothamsted that have  
**[0:14:16-0:14:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:14:16):**  had farmyard manure for 170 years, we're not seeing a particularly different microbial  community in those. They look ostensibly the same. So it's not like you're suddenly seeing  soil, this is really helpful, isn't it? It's not like you're seeing soil suddenly looking  like the rumen microbiome of cattle because it's got lots of farmyard manure in it. It  still looks like the soil microbiome. So I'm rather skeptical about individual organisms  
**[0:14:47-0:14:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:14:47):**  being the answer. I think the way to manage soil is to accept that it functions as a community  and try and manage that community. And that's actually quite optimistic because we have  evidence that we can do that, that we can influence the way the whole community functions  and we can manage it in a positive direction so that it uses nitrogen more efficiently,  it uses less anaerobic processes. So we know that this is possible. A lot of these single  
**[0:15:19-0:15:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:15:19):**  organism products, I am rather skeptical of.  Located on the North Island of Aotearoa, New Zealand, Greg Hart has been moving towards  more regenerative practice in the last 15 years and here he takes us on a tour of his  farm Mangarara Station with our very own Kiwi Fran Bailey and her dad Bill Bailey, recorded  about this time last year.  
**[0:15:48-0:15:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:15:48):**  Mangarara is 600 hectares and it's a beautiful farm and it's got a lovely mixture from about  50 or 60 hectares of flat land, peat soils, and then a mixture of easy rolling hill country  up into some steeper hill country. It's 470 hectares of pasture land and the lake is 35  hectares. There's a 13 hectare indigenous native forest that for some reason got left  behind when they were cutting all the trees down so it's nice to have that. And then the  
**[0:16:33-0:16:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:16:33):**  rest is areas that we've planted, we've planted another 20 hectares of native forest with  Air New Zealand Environment Trust where we got some funding. When people were flying  with Air New Zealand they could either buy carbon credits or they could donate to the  Air New Zealand Environment Trust and we were benefactors of a budget for three years and  over that time we planted 85,000 trees, the bulk of those were the New Zealand natives.  
**[0:17:03-0:17:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:17:03):**  But we've also planted a mixture of exotic trees through the pasture, through the land,  just for shade and shelter and diversity for the farm.  Do you ever get worried about fire and things like that?  Yes, fire is an issue and it's sort of been a real issue there that we are a bit lightly  stocked coming out of a quite a big drought last year and we had an incredibly growth  
**[0:17:36-0:17:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:17:36):**  in spring and so grew lots of grass, we're slightly under stocked but also there's the  whole uncertainty of what the markets are doing so just because you've got grass there's  a whole lot of factors to weigh in and like listening at the moment New Zealand is having  some real issues with shipping and a lot of the meat works in New Zealand are talking  about going down to two or three days a week because we're getting to the point where all  
**[0:18:05-0:18:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:18:05):**  our chillers and freezers are becoming full and just because of the difficulty in shipping  everything's slowed up around the world and that has seen that shipping has gone up 300%  in the last year and so there's just a lot of uncertainty around so I'm not rushing to  buy stock ever again.  Yeah that's got to be a pretty big concern for people right now doesn't it that situation  
**[0:18:40-0:18:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:18:40):**  with COVID and...  Yeah so just watching that one as well, I mean we've pretty much...  How much would you usually export?  Like what's the percentage of your...  Ours is not a lot but of course the export market determines the prices for what the  
**[0:19:01-0:19:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:19:01):**  local market is doing as well because it sets the benchmark and we have been fortunate that  we have got these partnerships with butcher shops which have locked us into a price so  we do have that surety but you know if things get too out of whack then we'd have to adjust  our prices to fall back and so we're two different to what the market is doing.  At least we do have something that's green.  
**[0:19:31-0:19:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:19:31):**  How much winter feed would you make here?  Do you make...  Nothing.  That's what I thought.  I had a thing with it.  
**[0:19:43-0:19:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:19:43):**  Okay.  The whole drive has really been around getting fossil fuels out of our food system and so  we don't make hay or silage and that's probably the big change that we've made is that we're  not afraid to let the grass grow long in the summertime as long as we at some stage we  always will catch up with it and just with big mobs of cattle densely stocked come back  
**[0:20:12-0:20:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:20:12):**  and so they're grazing and are shifted every day so we're returning a lot of that dry matter  back onto the soil surface where it gets broken down by healthy soil biology.  So is that part of your planning?  Yeah so that's part of the New Zealand Environment Trust planning and the plan was to go right  to the top of the hill but we started in 2008 and of course after the 2008 financial crisis  
**[0:20:44-0:20:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:20:44):**  the money just didn't flow into the trust and so we got our budget which we were allocated  for three years and then they said sorry there's no more so we didn't get to go right to the  top of that hill.  Are you measuring the organic matter in your soils?  Because I just look around and I mean this is all going to go back into the soil as organic  
**[0:21:03-0:21:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:21:03):**  matter a lot of this dead grass and I mean okay you've got a low stocking rate here so  you've got heaps of.  That's just for now.  I know it's not the normal one but it would just be interesting to see what the long-term  effects of this organic matter going back into the soil.  
**[0:21:21-0:21:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:21:21):**  Okay you're having a difficult year this year but maybe the long term is going to have some  significant effects further down the track of water holding capacity and those sorts  of things.  That's my expectation.  Mmm that's brilliant.  
**[0:21:35-0:21:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:21:35):**  Saw lots of chicory coming up in the paddocks down by where the hens are.  Yeah yeah we planted a lot of that.  We haven't planted or cultivated for 12 more years since we've sort of been in this mindset.  And like this here we had a mob of like little calves that we couldn't push and they were  being densely stocked.  
**[0:22:03-0:22:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:22:03):**  So you know we'd get a bigger mob of cattle in here that we'll graze and there's still  lots of good clover and lots of good grazing in here and they'll do a good job of tramping  all the rest of it.  There's some plankton in there as well.  Yeah it would be just a wild native plankton.  
**[0:22:17-0:22:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:22:17):**  Yeah but I mean still it's a.  It's diversity.  Diversity and it's providing a different nutrient level too isn't it.  Yep absolutely yeah and other minerals and that for the livestock.  That's right.  
**[0:22:30-0:22:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:22:30):**  So can you walk, you actually go on a walk from like.  Yeah I didn't point it out but back at the sheep yards there is because part of the agreement  for New Zealand is that the farms open to the public and so people can see where their  money that they donated to the trust has gone.  And so they sign in and read the health and safety briefing at the front of the farm and  
**[0:22:55-0:23:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:22:55):**  then drive into the sheep yards, sheep and shed area and then there's maps and that that  show them how to walk and there's little signs.  Oh okay so those are the signs that you get.  Yep yep.  Okay.  
**[0:23:08-0:23:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:23:08):**  You're right.  With this taller grazing and more trees and then having public access to the farm and  fire is a bit of a concern.  Yeah.  Yeah.  
**[0:23:21-0:23:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:23:21):**  So what soils are these mainly?  Great soil that I'm trying to work with.  Well they're a silt, if I show you over the back there it's quite interesting, is a waterfall  and it's like papa which is you know it's sea sediment which is laid down underneath  the sea just stacked up on top of that and then it's just the source of development under  
**[0:23:50-0:23:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:23:50):**  the forest and washed off the hills around.  Amazing.  Do you want the skate open?  Yeah we might have to walk from here.  Yeah that's right.  
**[0:24:04-0:24:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:24:04):**  I usually drive and then we all go.  Yeah can you, I left you in front of the hole there.  I'm still here.  As I'm getting a guy to remake the map.  It's been a long year and we don't know about you but here at the Fomarama team we're pretty  
**[0:24:40-0:24:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:24:40):**  exhausted.  We wanted to say thank you to all of you, the Fomarama listeners and people out there  doing the work to build a more ecological and just farming future for all of us.  We know this isn't easy but we really appreciate you and it's an honour to all be in this together.  May 2022 bring beauty to you all.  
**[0:25:11-0:25:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/69-resilient-grapes-soil-insight-and-aotearoa-farm-tour#t=0:25:11):**  This episode of Fomarama was made by me, Joe Barrett, Abbey Rose and Fran Bailey.  A big thanks to the rest of the Fomarama team.  Olivia Olden, Katie Revel, Annie Landless, Eliza Jenkins and Dora Taylor.  Happy music is by Abbey and Barrett.  