---
title: 71: Continuous Cropping, Land For Who and the Magic of Woodchip
---

### Farmerama  (2022-01-30)  
### Author(s): Farmerama  

**[0:00:00-0:00:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to Farmerama. We're grateful to those of you who support us and allow us  to bring you these stories every month. Even the smallest contribution makes a big difference  to us, so if you'd like to become a supporter, please visit patreon.com forward slash farmerama.  
**[0:00:21-0:00:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:00:21):**  This month we have a roundup from the ever inspiring Oxford Rail Farming Conference,  where we were once again official media partners. We miss seeing many of you there in person,  but the big advantage of it being online is that you can rewatch all of the sessions from  
**[0:00:36-0:00:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:00:36):**  this year's conference, so do head to their YouTube channel to tune in to much more. We're  featuring just a few ideas that we delved into a bit deeper, including continuous wheat  cropping, land relationships in England, and wondrous woodshed.  
**[0:00:57-0:01:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:00:57):**  John Letts is a wheat grower and crop developer living in Buckinghamshire, known for growing  heritage grains. He joined us after his talk at this year's Oxford Rail Farming Conference  to explain continuous cropping, something that goes against the grain for many wheat  
**[0:01:11-0:01:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:01:11):**  growers.  The system that I've been working on and developing produces three times the amount of grain as  an organic system over, let's say, a five-year rotation. It's just more productive. We need  
**[0:01:35-0:01:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:01:35):**  to grow a lot more grain if we're going to feed the UK. I understand why rotation is  so important. Obviously, if you're growing vegetables or if you're growing a few other  things, and particularly if you're growing livestock, organic is fantastic. But if you're  
**[0:01:46-0:01:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:01:46):**  growing grain, you can only grow grain once every five years because you need this three-year  clover grass-lay rotation element to build up nitrogen.  Then you put in one crop, so three years of clover grass, one year of grain, maybe then  
**[0:02:02-0:02:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:02:02):**  another second year of wheat perhaps, which is usually animal feed. So really, there's  only one crop of milling wheat to feed humans in that whole system. It might yield 1.6,  1.8 tonnes, and my older heritage grain populations produce perhaps 1.3. I think I can get 1.5,  
**[0:02:22-0:02:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:02:22):**  certainly get 1.2, 1.1. If you get it every year, you've got three times the yield of  grain with no animal production. That's fine. I don't have the infrastructure for animals.  A lot of people don't want to grow livestock. And the grain is super high quality. It's  
**[0:02:38-0:02:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:02:38):**  really resilient because it's genetically diverse population, so it can take all the  terrible weather that's coming our way. Most organic farmers grow modern varieties. I think  they're still locked into that very industrial production system. Obviously, it's far better  
**[0:02:52-0:02:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:02:52):**  with no chemicals, but it's still pretty much an industrial system where the idea is you  grow a monoculture of a modern variety. They usually have very shallow root systems. I  think you have problems with disease. The idea is to get rid of the weeds in between  
**[0:03:09-0:03:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:03:09):**  because that's stealing nutrients from the crop. Why say embrace your weeds? Embrace  that diversity, that biodiversity, and accept the lower yield. But if you get it every year,  then you're actually producing more. So to me, it makes lots of sense. The only thing  
**[0:03:24-0:03:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:03:24):**  that leaves the field is the rain. So all that carbon is being sequestered in some way.  It goes onto the surface. It's mimicking a natural ecosystem. So the organic matter  surface builds up, breaks down, feeds the crop as the crop needs it. Really deep rooted  
**[0:03:40-0:03:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:03:40):**  plants. Another problem with disease, thriving biodiversity. But the key as well is that  I undersow with clover, short white clover. And clover obviously fixes nitrogen. And far  more than you get from manure. You don't need massive quantities of nitrogen to grow good  
**[0:03:59-0:04:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:03:59):**  quality wheat if you've got the right wheat. So I just think the system we're on, organic  or conventional, is not going to feed us. And I think the conventional system is just  bankrupt. So we have to have an alternative. And this is the best one that I can see after  
**[0:04:19-0:04:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:04:19):**  all the years I've been looking at this drawing on archaeology, ecology, genetics. It seems  to work for me. It certainly produces lovely whiskey, gin, beer, bread, and pizza. So it's  got to be working. I wanted the lowest possible input system I could find. And that just means  
**[0:04:39-0:04:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:04:39):**  mimicking a natural wild cereal kind of ecosystem. As far as I can see, what was done in the  Neolithic period, let's say in the first 5,000 years of farming, all I need to do is broadcast  my seed into the clover and stubble, or perhaps direct riddle if I have that equipment, and  
**[0:04:55-0:05:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:04:55):**  then mow it and close the gate, walk away, and then come back and harvest 1.2 tons. I've  done that. It works. You could perhaps mow it again in the spring. There are ways of  tweaking it. But you're not driving up and down the field. And organic farmers do the  
**[0:05:11-0:05:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:05:11):**  same. They till between rows. It's still an input system. So in an agroecological sense,  which we're all talking about, I think that using genetically diverse populations, as  I've been doing, and using this system is far more agroecological than the organic systems  
**[0:05:31-0:05:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:05:31):**  where people do things in an agroecological way, but it's just not as intensive.  When you look at the history of where organic farming came from, it wasn't certainly about  grain production. But I think in recent years, people have realized that you don't just need  
**[0:05:47-0:05:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:05:47):**  dead plants plowed down to rot to feed the soil, but you need living plants, you need  living mulches, you need weeds are helping in many ways. I think people forget that 80%  of the grain produced by a cereal crop comes from the very, very top of the plant, the  
**[0:06:06-0:06:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:06:06):**  upper flag leaf and the upper stem and the ear. They're the part of the plant that's  collecting all that sunshine and converting it into grain. Everything else is structural,  it's architectural, it's part of the ecosystem. So my cereals are very, very tall. And you  
**[0:06:24-0:06:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:06:24):**  can have a thriving understory, almost like a mini Amazon rainforest. There's a lot of  stuff going on at that lower level that feeds that wider community. It is rewilding. I always  say it's rewilding the cereal field. Everyone talks about planting trees and everything  
**[0:06:40-0:06:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:06:40):**  else. Great. But I still want to feed people. I still want to produce food. And I think  we can rewild our cereal fields and use them to sequester massive amounts of carbon and  yet still produce three times more than organic. If organic is seen as acceptable, truly this  
**[0:06:56-0:07:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:06:56):**  system can be seen successful. I started to call it, and I think it's a good one, a natural  grain farming system. Natural grain farming rather than restorative continuous grain cropping,  which is maybe a mouthful. It does make sense to me, restorative. It's restoring genetic  
**[0:07:12-0:07:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:07:12):**  diversity, restoring ecosystems, restoring health of the soil. But everyone says, what  is that? Well, natural grain farming. Because it is drawing on kind of Puukowoka and permaculture  and a lot of those older ideas. He called his system natural farming. Like Shumai agriculture  
**[0:07:29-0:07:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:07:29):**  is natural farming. So I may rebrand as natural grain farming. Bombarded by farmers since  the ORFC talk. Everybody wants to grow it. I don't have a shortage of people wanting  to grow it. Because farmers are in a difficult place. They don't make any money on cereals  
**[0:07:51-0:07:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:07:51):**  mostly. I mean, the price of cereals is going up in the world because of climate change  and grain failures around the world. It seems a bit crazy. But that's why it's useful. Anyway,  they all want to grow it. The problem is the lack of a market. We need to develop the market.  
**[0:08:07-0:08:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:08:07):**  People need to make a commitment to help. And in the talk at the ORFC, I think I talked  about to me the price of saving the planet is 11 pence extra on the pizza you buy at  a pizzeria. Doesn't seem a lot to me. And maybe three times that for a decent loaf,  
**[0:08:25-0:08:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:08:25):**  a lovely big loaf of sourdough that sells for five pounds. Well, that's the price. That's  the price of switching our grain production from conventional to heritage. I am a scientist  and I do want to apply all the science we can. I did plant breeding. I've been an ecologist.  
**[0:08:42-0:08:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:08:42):**  I've done all those things. So I embrace every potential advantage that science can give  us. But we also have to draw on the wisdom of our ancestors, the way crops were saved  from year to year, all of that. But also I've worked as an archaeologist. So I think that's  
**[0:09:02-0:09:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:09:02):**  given me a certain perspective on the history of cereals and how crops were grown in the  Neolithic. And you've got to juggle that all together and come up with a brand new system  as far as I can see. It's only an approach. You know, I'm not claiming that I have the  
**[0:09:18-0:09:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:09:18):**  answer very specifically to everything. But I think this approach is something that can  be applied all over.  Frances Northrop works for the New Economics Foundation and is an associate fellow specializing  
**[0:09:33-0:09:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:09:33):**  in local economies. She's interested in land as well as municipal politics and something  called new municipalism. Hope I said that right. We caught up with Frances after a session  to hear about a project she worked on last year called Land for Who.  
**[0:09:53-0:09:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:09:53):**  Until I was probably about 40, I didn't realize how important land was to everything, which  is partly what inspired the research into Land for Who. So I was working for transition  town Totnes and we were looking at how to build resilience through food growing and  
**[0:10:08-0:10:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:10:08):**  retrofitting and renewable energy and health and care services. And it very quickly became  apparent that without access to land, we couldn't do any of those things. And it also became  apparent how little land there was that was available to us for those things, because  
**[0:10:24-0:10:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:10:24):**  it was all held in various ownerships that were not really conducive to speaking to us  about those uses.  It was actually a conversation with Guy Shrupsall in the summer of 2020 after he published his  
**[0:10:39-0:10:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:10:39):**  book Who Wants England. And we were just talking about the Scottish Land Commission and saying,  you know, I think it's a rhetorical question that many people have asked, you know, like  why, what about an English Land Commission? You know, obviously the conditions with the  
**[0:10:53-0:10:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:10:53):**  government in Scotland are more sort of, yeah, conducive to that. And down here in England,  it's a little more tricky, but we thought that it was something that it was worth kind  of exploring.  
**[0:11:04-0:11:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:11:04):**  The way that we designed the research itself was that we wanted, because a lot of my work  is practice based, working with groups that are trying to access land or fighting bad  development or, you know, sort of unhealthy uses of land. I wanted to really centre those  
**[0:11:18-0:11:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:11:18):**  people in the research, but it felt important to have this first stage, which was looking  at a review of existing work on land that had been done. So there's a list of about  10 different publications that were reviewed and that's all available for people to look  
**[0:11:33-0:11:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:11:33):**  at. But what really came through strongly, and this is also through the land narratives  work that Shared Assets have been doing, is that the people who talk about land are the  people who are the closest to the land already, who are already quite privileged in that they're  
**[0:11:47-0:11:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:11:47):**  able to talk about it or have land already. And actually what we wanted for the second  piece of research, which would be more detailed, would be to talk to the people who were the  furthest from the land and what they were doing to try and change the system. Because  
**[0:12:01-0:12:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:12:01):**  we recognise that it's not just through policy. And so what is it? Is that campaigning? Is  it, you know, direct action, practice, that kind of thing. And we really wanted to fundamentally  understand that bit better and also try to bring people together that we interviewed  
**[0:12:16-0:12:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:12:16):**  so that we could, you know, sort of reflect the findings to them.  One of the really interesting findings that kept coming up was that change moves at the  speed of trust. And I think within the land movement itself, there needs to be a real  
**[0:12:31-0:12:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:12:31):**  consideration about the history of England's sort of colonisation of the world and its  nearest neighbours. The word English is really triggering for people, unsurprisingly. And  so I think what we really sort of came out with was that until we actually understand  
**[0:12:52-0:12:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:12:52):**  the real fundamental narrative of how messed up the land system is in England and the history  of that and the people who are most affected by that being leading that conversation, then  we can't really change the land system. I think one of the really interesting things  
**[0:13:10-0:13:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:13:10):**  we found was that we started to talk to people who were involved in things that weren't necessarily  related to land when you first look at them. So, you know, people organising around the  police and crime bill, you know, against that. Prison abolition, you know, people who were  
**[0:13:26-0:13:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:13:26):**  looking at various different movements around justice that weren't necessarily land justice,  like disability justice or, you know, disabled justice or racial justice. But everything  kept coming back to the land that was the shared baseline for everything. It's really,  
**[0:13:42-0:13:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:13:42):**  really necessary to have ownership and more sort of control over land to make the different  things happen. So say if you wanted to abolish a prison and instead have therapeutic land  work. So there's a project down here near me called Land Works that works with prisoners  
**[0:14:01-0:14:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:14:01):**  who are, you know, coming out of, people coming out of prison. If you want more of that, there's  got to be more land to make that available. It really is an intersectional campaign that  needs to be run. And the people in the room don't necessarily just have to be people who  
**[0:14:14-0:14:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:14:14):**  are working on land justice. I don't know if you've heard of the E15  Mum, E15 Focus Mum. So there are a group of young women who were single parents who were  faced with eviction from a hostel in Newham in London. And they decided to oppose that  
**[0:14:32-0:14:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:14:32):**  and then systematically organised against a lot of the council house clearance, council  estate clearances in Newham under the previous mayor and with, you know, built their power  in an incredible way. Most people actually don't spend time in the countryside or on  
**[0:14:49-0:14:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:14:49):**  the land because everywhere is very built up really. And there is this real divide between  rural and urban that we also wanted to make sure that in the next sort of phase of the  research that we really focus on that and try to bring that together so that people  
**[0:15:04-0:15:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:15:04):**  are able to connect with the land or create more pockets of nature in urban centres.  My work on municipalism, so this is, you know, the work that's sort of inspired by things  that are happening in Barcelona and in Zagreb and other places where people, and the city  
**[0:15:22-0:15:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:15:22):**  activists have become, you know, sort of elected into city government. What's really interesting  and obviously what's happening in Chile recently as well, what's really interesting is that  it's been the grassroots movements and the groups that have kind of mobilised together  
**[0:15:37-0:15:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:15:37):**  to create that situation and that platform and that awareness that's made people see  that there is a different way for things to work. And so with the land stuff, I see a  very similar kind of evolution of more and more groups that see that they've got a shared  
**[0:15:54-0:16:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:15:54):**  intention around something, that the land underpins everything. And so having that solidarity  and sort of intersectional solidarity will lead to something that is really, really quite  transformative. And I don't know what that looks like, but I think I really like being  
**[0:16:13-0:16:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:16:13):**  part of, you know, making a small contribution to kind of bringing people together to talk  about that more.  We end this month hearing from a long-time friend and supporter of Farmerama. For the  
**[0:16:27-0:16:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:16:27):**  keenest of listeners, you may remember hearing from him in our first ever episode over six  years ago. Ben Raskin is Head of Horticulture and Agroforestry at the Soil Association,  and he just released his latest book, The Woodchip Handbook, a brilliant read about  
**[0:16:43-0:16:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:16:43):**  all things woodchip.  The sort of the eureka moment probably was at Helen's farm where we've been using a lot  of woodchip for mulching trees, and we pollarded a whole bunch of very mature willows along  
**[0:17:01-0:17:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:17:01):**  the riverbank. So we had this mountain of willow woodchip, and in one place it was right  next to a new planting, so we thought, that's great, we'll just pile it over the fence and  at some point I will spread it out and mulch all the trees with it. And of course, you  
**[0:17:15-0:17:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:17:15):**  know, it didn't get back to mulching all the trees with it. So there was a corner of this  new planting where the trees had a mulch of about two and a half feet deep of willow woodchip,  which is probably more than you would normally recommend. And that was in 2018, which was,  
**[0:17:32-0:17:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:17:32):**  if you remember, but was a really, really dry year. So a lot of the trees that we put  in suffered. We had quite a lot of losses in the trees we planted that year. But the  trees that had this massive depth of mulch not only didn't die, but also grew phenomenally,  
**[0:17:49-0:17:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:17:49):**  to the point where I was actually over there yesterday looking at them. And the ones that  didn't have a mulch, or they had a tiny mulch but had almost no mulch, are still barely  past my waist. The ones with this deep mulch are probably 12 feet tall. So I just, I looked  
**[0:18:04-0:18:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:18:04):**  at that and thought, oh my god, this is, I mean, this is serious stuff. I'd come across  the work of David Granitstein, who's a researcher in the States working with commercial orchards.  And he's done some really interesting work on the financials of different weed control  
**[0:18:21-0:18:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:18:21):**  methods, which basically shows if you use a woodchip or compost mulch, you not only  get the benefits of the water retention and the weed control, but you get increased soil  health and yield. So although it seems expensive to put it down, actually commercially it can  
**[0:18:36-0:18:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:18:36):**  pay for itself. And then the work with Ian Tolhurst here in the UK, who's been adding  woodchip to his soil and making propagation compost from it. The work of Sally Westaway  and Joe Smith at Organic Research Centre looking at ramiel woodchip. So just all these things  
**[0:18:54-0:18:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:18:54):**  suddenly made me think, Mike, there's a lot, there's a lot to learn with woodchip. And  it's not just something to put on your paths basically. And so, so I, yeah, I put a proposal  in to write a book on it and they went, oh, okay then. In the book, I researched a lot  
**[0:19:11-0:19:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:19:11):**  of stuff and there's actually quite a lot of studies on mulches and water retention  and weed control. And the general rule seems to be it needs to be at least 15 centimetres  deep to have a good effect on weed control and moisture retention. My experiment seems  
**[0:19:31-0:19:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:19:31):**  to show that if you can do it deeper, that might give you extra benefit. And to some  extent it's weighing up, you know, how much chip you've got, how many trees you've got  to mulch, you know, the cost of doing it and all of that stuff. I would say to some extent,  
**[0:19:42-0:19:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:19:42):**  the more you can put down, the more, probably the more benefit you're going to have up to  a point, but it's, it's weighing up the cost. Yeah. There's a fear, there's definitely a  fear of it. And this sort of myth that you can't put it anywhere near soil or it's going  
**[0:19:56-0:20:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:19:56):**  to, you know, kill everything. And I mean, there is a grain of truth in there, you know,  so you can cause yourself problems, but the, the risk of it, in my opinion, is massively  overstated. It seems to rob nitrogen only from the bit of soil it touches. So about,  
**[0:20:13-0:20:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:20:13):**  you know, one centimetre say from where it touches the soil. So if you're just spreading  on the surface, you will cause some nitrogen lockup in that top 1% of the soil. If you're  growing vegetables or shallow rooted plants, so we potentially, we had a problem, I think  
**[0:20:31-0:20:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:20:31):**  with raspberries, which are very shallow rooted. And we put a lot of wood chip on and I think  they might've caused some issues. But the other thing is don't dig, don't dig fresh  wood chip into the soil, basically. That's when the problems come, when you get uncomposted  
**[0:20:45-0:20:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:20:45):**  wood chip and you dig it into the soil, because then suddenly it's touching every bit of the  soil and you know, every little wood chip has got this sort of one centimetre area around  it that it's being affected. If you're worried, then there's two things you can do. One is  
**[0:20:58-0:21:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:20:58):**  you can compost it. So if you stack it and compost it for six to 12 months, then it will  already have started breaking down and, and it's started that process already. So it will  be very unlikely to, to take any more nitrogen from the soil. You can always add a nitrogen  
**[0:21:14-0:21:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:21:14):**  source to it. So you can add, you know, slurry or manure or sort of green compost, which  obviously provides that nutrient source, the nitrogen source and stops it sucking it out  of the soil. The other thing is you, if you have a ramial wood chip, so ramial wood chip  
**[0:21:32-0:21:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:21:32):**  or ramial wood chip is where you have a wood chip that comes from branches that are less  than seven centimetres in diameter. So the young growth basically. And because it has  a much higher ratio of bark to heartwood, there's more nutrients in it, more nitrogen  
**[0:21:49-0:21:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:21:49):**  specifically, but, but also more other nutrients. So the, the, the rather scarce scientific  evidence seems to suggest you can add ramial wood chip directly to soil uncomposted, fresh  without causing any nitrogen problems. And the beauty of that in a way is you can just  
**[0:22:08-0:22:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:22:08):**  chip and spread it straight in the soil. So rather than having to cart it back somewhere,  compost it and then re-spread it or mix it with stuff, it becomes a very easy operation  to build fertility in your soil using the woody resource that's next to your soil. The  
**[0:22:25-0:22:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:22:25):**  other sort of really exciting bit for me, I think is where you then think of it as part  of a planned resource as part of your whole farm planning using agroforestry. So you build  in short rotation coppice into your system. You get the benefits of extra biodiversity  
**[0:22:41-0:22:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:22:41):**  and shelter or browse for the livestock and, you know, wind protection, all of those things  while it's growing, but rather than having to have a massive tree growing into it, you  can manage it. You can spread the chip then into the rows potentially between. So you've  
**[0:22:57-0:23:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:22:57):**  got this effectively never ending source of soil health and, you know, fungal building  wonder material that's bringing you a whole range of other benefits on the farm as well.  If we assume, which I think is fairly well understood and accepted, that a lot of our  
**[0:23:17-0:23:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:23:17):**  soils have become too bacterially dominant and we want to try and bring them back a little  bit towards having a higher fungal content. And I would say particularly in systems where  you're trying to get trees to grow or shrubs to grow, you know, they particularly want  
**[0:23:33-0:23:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:23:33):**  a more fungal soil. Adding wood chip in a way is a kind of, I look at it as a way of  getting there quicker. So, you know, inevitably when you plant a tree and don't disturb the  soil, you will get more fungi in the soil because it's not being disturbed and there's  
**[0:23:50-0:23:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:23:50):**  a tree root and over time that fungal population will build up. But by adding wood chip, you're  providing easy access food for the fungi. You've already broken it down. It's easy for the  fungus to get into. They can quickly colonise. And so you're jump starting, I think, the  
**[0:24:08-0:24:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:24:08):**  process of increasing the fungi. Obviously initially, particularly under the trees if  you're mulching, but if you're then spreading it over the soil, then it will do that as  well. I mean, not specifically on the fungi necessarily, but another of those kind of  
**[0:24:22-0:24:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:24:22):**  eureka moments was at Ian Tolhurst's farm where he'd been spreading the composted wood  chip on his vegetable rotations and we were standing in the middle of winter in one of  his fields and looked down and there wasn't a bit of the soil that wasn't a worm cast.  
**[0:24:40-0:24:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:24:40):**  You know, it was, and he put the wood chip down like three or four weeks before, I can't  remember exactly, but we looked down, I was trying to find a bit of soil that wasn't a  worm cast and I couldn't. And his soil is not, you know, it's not grade one land. It's  
**[0:24:53-0:24:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:24:53):**  not the best soil from that point of view, but the biological activity in it was just  astounding. And he certainly put some of that down to when he started using wood chip. He  said, you know, and he's been there for 30 years as your listeners, I'm sure will know  
**[0:25:09-0:25:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:25:09):**  he's, you know, he's been at the forefront of a lot of some of these agroecological developments  for forever, but he still says that his productivity and soil health jumped another level when  he started using wood chip. So I think one of the reasons that agroforestry has been  
**[0:25:26-0:25:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:25:26):**  a bit slow to catch on is that I think in this country, we've sort of slipped away from  seeing trees as a useful asset and a resource to them being a problem on farm. You know,  so a lot of farmers, you know, they'll have hedgerows, they'll have some corners of woodland,  
**[0:25:42-0:25:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:25:42):**  but they won't be using them. They'll just be in the way and they've got to manage them  and it costs them money. And it's been really hard historically to get any financial return  on trees at that small scale. So I think one of the big opportunities going forward, obviously  
**[0:26:00-0:26:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:26:00):**  there's the potential for payment for public goods, which could shift the economics. But  the other thing is, is I think to really start to develop some of those farm, woodland, agroforestry  scale supply chains, products, local markets. And obviously one of the first markets to  
**[0:26:21-0:26:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:26:21):**  look at is your own market, you know, which, so which is where the wood chip fits in. You  know, if you're producing it for your own, whether it's wood chip bedding for your livestock  or to spread on the soil, you know, it's very easy to see the benefit of reduced input costs  
**[0:26:34-0:26:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:26:34):**  or something like that. You could be growing your own fence posts. There's lots of ways  that we use wood on land that we could be supplying ourselves rather than importing  it. But the other big challenge that I think we see coming down the line is actually getting  
**[0:26:50-0:26:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:26:50):**  hold of trees. You know, everybody has these massive planting ambitions, but at the moment  we're not even able to supply the trees to meet current demand. You know, I mean, I tried  to buy some trees in December and between me getting an initial quote and getting the  
**[0:27:04-0:27:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:27:04):**  finance finalised, they'd sold out half of them again. And I think for farmers, I think  we need to be looking at growing some of our own. And certainly that's, you know, East  Brut, we're planning to do that. We're looking at, you know, what are some of the easier  
**[0:27:17-0:27:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:27:17):**  ones that we can grow and collect seed locally? You know, local provenance, I think will become  important for some crops. But equally, there are some big opportunities, for instance,  around nut growing in the UK, you know, where you need, you really want specialist varieties  
**[0:27:35-0:27:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:27:35):**  that are going to be productive. You know, do we even have the right varieties for the  UK climate? Do we need to, you know, implement a UK nut breeding programme that's really  going to provide the best ones for the UK climate? Or is the climate changing enough  
**[0:27:49-0:27:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:27:49):**  that we can manage with the ones we've got? I don't think we know. But somebody's going  to need to be producing all of those nut trees. That's a specialist job, probably, you know,  it's not something that all of us are just going to be able to do on our farms. But I  
**[0:28:03-0:28:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:28:03):**  think there's some massive opportunities for new businesses to set up as tree production  nurseries off probably, you know, lots of them at local small scale, you know, on farm,  it doesn't have to be sort of big new nurseries, I think we could be looking at relocalising  
**[0:28:21-0:28:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:28:21):**  that as well as relocalising the supply chain at the other end.  This episode of Farmerama was made by me, Joe Barrett, Abbey Rose and Olivia Oldham.  Big thanks to the rest of the Farmerama team, Katie Revel, Fran Bailey, Annie Landless,  
**[0:28:39-0:28:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/71-continuous-cropping-land-for-who-and-the-magic-of-woodchip#t=0:28:39):**  Eliza Jenkins and Dora Taylor. Our theme music is by Owen Barrett.  