---
title: 73 Chilean Natural Cider The Regen Platform And Biodynamic Whiskey
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### Farmerama  (2022-03-27)  
### Author(s): Farmerama  

**[0:00:00-0:00:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to Farmerama. We're very grateful to those of you that support us and  allow us to bring you these stories every month. Even the smallest contribution makes  a big difference to us. So if you'd like to become a supporter, please visit patreon.com  
**[0:00:18-0:00:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:00:18):**  forward slash Farmerama.  This month we have voices on three continents. We begin with a cider making collective in  Chile. Then Abby is talking to aqua ecologists Nicole Masters about a tool they've worked  
**[0:00:33-0:00:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:00:33):**  on together. And finally we hear from an innovative whisky distillery who are working closely  with farmers.  Juan y Lisboa is one of a collective of friends in Chile who set up Agricula Sin Patrones.  
**[0:00:50-0:01:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:00:50):**  They make extremely delicious natural cider, sourced from local campesino or peasant farmers.  The vast swathes of this region where Juan y works have had the native forests destroyed  and never-ending monocultural pine plantations put in their place. The Agricula Sin Patrones  
**[0:01:09-0:01:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:01:09):**  team are finding ways to empower those still farming small plots of land in this landscape  as they are a vital part of retaining at least some of the diversity that was once all around.  We asked Juan y to tell us more, starting with their name.  
**[0:01:31-0:01:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:01:31):**  Agricula Sin Patrones means farmers without bosses. We are five partners who are egalitarian  partners. We own the same shares of the company and there's nobody who commands over anybody.  They're just different skills and if somebody is better skilled than something then he could  
**[0:01:53-0:02:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:01:53):**  have the word. But the decision is always collective here and that's what we want to  do. Historically the relationship, especially in the countryside in Latin America in general,  it has been very bossy and even slave-like in past history. We want to change that too.  
**[0:02:18-0:02:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:02:18):**  We want to make it so people who live in the countryside are not having to obey anybody  as if that somebody is their owner. They can have a decision. That's how we want to live  too. We've been working in this area where between these huge plantations of pine trees  
**[0:02:41-0:03:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:02:41):**  and other exotic species, there are some vineyards and some apple orchards hidden between them.  We've worked making wine and we saw these apple trees and we wanted to give value to  it and to the people who've been taking care of them since generations. That was the first  
**[0:03:08-0:03:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:03:08):**  motivation to try to save these lands from converting everything into this green desert  that you can actually see. What we do is that we take these apples from heritage and unknown  varieties from very small farmers, what you could call a peasant farmer. The Spanish word  
**[0:03:33-0:03:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:03:33):**  would be campesino. We take these apples and we try to make the best natural cider that  we can with absolutely no additives and try to show that to the world. That's what we're  trying to do. How do we do that? Well, our team is made up of unique people. There's  
**[0:03:53-0:04:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:03:53):**  a brewing master, there's another specialist in wine, there's another specialist in viticulture,  there's another guy who's the fourth generation of cider makers. We're trying to get the best  out from this team that we work with. With that, with our effort, trying to make people  
**[0:04:15-0:04:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:04:15):**  all over the place see the value that's hidden in these countrysides. That's mainly because  of how people have been taking care of their lands. We haven't been involved in that. We're  just showing it. The farms where we get the apples from are, a lot of people could think  
**[0:04:38-0:05:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:04:38):**  that they're not even farms. These are their homes. What they grow, they usually grow it  for themselves or a little bit to sell. They usually have to work around because they have  that little land that you can't make a living of it. The apple trees that they have, they  
**[0:05:04-0:05:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:05:04):**  didn't have any value before. A couple of generations before when raising pigs was more  usual, they would usually give them to pigs. Right now, it's mainly because these farmers  are very old, they don't do it anymore. They were just losing these apples. We're trying  
**[0:05:25-0:05:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:05:25):**  to improve their situation, give them a little extra income by buying these apples. It's  not like if they could sell it to somebody else because there's nobody else buying it.  By that way, we want to improve their living, their livelihood and also attract people to  
**[0:05:49-0:06:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:05:49):**  the countryside. You can actually stay here and you can do stuff. That's one of the messages  that we want to send. We have three different labels and that has to do absolutely with  the origin of the apples. There's one that's called Temprano because it's from the earliest  
**[0:06:08-0:06:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:06:08):**  apples that we get. That's actually one of the few varieties that we actually recognize.  It's a variety called Candelaria because it's harvested right by the Fiesta de la Candelaria,  which is a religious party that goes on. The other one is called Carrizal and it's because  
**[0:06:25-0:06:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:06:25):**  it's harvested in that location. It's a small sector up in the coastal range here in Chile.  It gets way more rainfall so you get a way lighter cider, which has been a great surprise  for us. Finally, the first one that we made is called 42 manzanas, 42 apple trees. That's  
**[0:06:52-0:07:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:06:52):**  because when we started, that's all we got, 42 apple trees and we just wanted to make  the best out of them. I would love to know, what are the apples that other cider makers  are growing in the world? Because one of the mysteries here is that although we do recognize  
**[0:07:09-0:07:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:07:09):**  some of these heritage varieties, there are a lot that we don't and we would love to know  a little bit more about them. It's great to speak with Farmerama and people on the other  side of the world to let them know what we're doing and that on this side of the earth,  
**[0:07:34-0:07:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:07:34):**  there's a group of people and not just us. There's a whole bunch of people who are trying  to take care of the land too and make it much better.  Over the last 18 months, I've been working closely with the brilliant agroecologist and  
**[0:07:57-0:08:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:07:57):**  systems thinker, Nicole Masters, to develop the Soil Mentor Regen platform. I haven't  really shared before on Farmerama that I actually spend most of my working life in my role  as co-creator of VidaCycle. We develop apps to support people on their regenerative farming  
**[0:08:15-0:08:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:08:15):**  journey. Originally, I started building the apps just for my family's farm in Chile. We  have one for trees, one for helping to manage in the vineyards, and then also Soil Mentor,  which helps with soil health. But then the neighbors started using these apps and it's  
**[0:08:34-0:08:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:08:34):**  all grown from there. The Soil Mentor Regen platform is our latest tool. It builds on  the power of in-field observations and it combines those observations with regenerative  benchmarks as well as explanations and potential questions or actions you might want to consider.  
**[0:08:53-0:09:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:08:53):**  It's basically bringing some of the wisdom and experience of Nicole and her team to help  you understand what you're seeing in the field. Getting little tips from Nicole to understand  what your earthworm count means is actually really helpful.  
**[0:09:09-0:09:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:09:09):**  I wanted to ask you a bit about, you have a strong focus on the monitoring and particularly  through observation and digging holes. Could you tell me a little bit about how did that  come about and why and maybe some examples? I don't know.  
**[0:09:22-0:09:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:09:22):**  It often blows me away that our biggest resource and our biggest investment is land and soil.  Yet, when people buy land, I know very few that have dug holes. It's something that I  did the first time I brought my own land, is dug a hole and found a huge disaster. Six  
**[0:09:42-0:10:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:09:42):**  inches down, we had a calcium silicate plate, basically. It had blown over from the volcanic  region. You can use that calcium silicate to quick set concrete. It was basically a  concretion layer. I was like, oh, this is cool. That is such a cool challenge to have.  
**[0:10:02-0:10:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:10:02):**  I think year four or five of owning the property, I was like, this was so stupid. What was I  thinking? By year seven, we had totally broken through that hard pan, not using a ripper,  not using any mechanical interventions, just using grazing, biostimulants, and diverse  
**[0:10:22-0:10:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:10:22):**  plant species. Those three things cracked through a hard pan that the neighbors could  not get through with a ripper. They couldn't even get through with a single tine on a ripper.  For me, digging those holes and observing how, if you set the scene, we can overcome  
**[0:10:38-0:10:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:10:38):**  so many challenges. What I find is people are often pretty good at looking above ground  and looking at pasture or looking at crops, but they're not digging holes because that's  where the pre-warning system is coming in. That's what's going to let you know that actually  
**[0:10:53-0:11:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:10:53):**  there is compaction starting to form. The biggest limitation to yield, production, health,  and profit is compaction, is the amount of airflow and gas exchange that you have in  the soil. If you're not even digging a hole, you're missing that whole signal that that  
**[0:11:08-0:11:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:11:08):**  soil is basically saying to you, hey buddy, we need to really shift what we're doing here.  I find digging holes can be one of the most powerful things we can do, especially if we  dig a hole in the middle of a field and then dig a hole underneath a fence line. That can  
**[0:11:23-0:11:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:11:23):**  be a huge emotional impact for somebody who's like, whoa, did I create this? The answer  is yes, you did. This is a soil that's lost all its aggregate structure, all its carbon,  all its life. Sometimes those impacts are the best thing for us. It's a bit of a shock  
**[0:11:40-0:11:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:11:40):**  and then it's like, okay, cool. All right, now what do I do? Let's get into action. I  think if there's one thing that anyone needs to do on their own property, it's dig a hole.  Working together over the last two years or so, you and the Integrity Soils team have  
**[0:11:56-0:12:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:11:56):**  brought together the 10 Regen Indicators, which are an amazing way to kind of, whilst  you're looking at the soil, to take specific readings and then start to monitor and learn  how things are changing. Maybe you could tell me a little bit about the Regen Indicators  
**[0:12:14-0:12:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:12:14):**  and why you chose them, those 10, and then we could pick maybe one or two of your favorites.  I think when I first met Abby and the Vetus Cycle team, there was this challenge, right?  If we could narrow down all the indicators. I came to Abby with what was our existing  
**[0:12:33-0:12:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:12:33):**  consulting platform to try and make it more workable for us. It is very in-depth. It has  a huge number of indicators. I like it, but then I'm a geek, right? But for producers,  it was actually off-putting because here's this huge list and array of different types  
**[0:12:53-0:13:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:12:53):**  of measures for soil and plant health, and actually it became a barrier because now we  have too many things that we're measuring. The challenge was if we had to distill that  down to 10 of your favorite children, who would they be? Which was very mean, but very,  
**[0:13:09-0:13:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:13:09):**  very, very helpful in terms of, okay, well actually a lot of these indicators are interrelated  and interlinked. Some of them are more related to other factors. If we could narrow down  just 10 of those, what would they look like? I'm really, really excited about what we've  
**[0:13:26-0:13:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:13:26):**  put together. I'm really proud of it. I think it simplifies that soil assessment process.  It's not every single thing we can do to assess soil health, but they are some of the most  powerful indicators. If I was to use something like aggregate stability, how does a crumb  
**[0:13:43-0:13:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:13:43):**  of soil hold itself together? That can tell you so much about what's happening with water.  It can tell you so much about air movement. It can tell you so much about soil losses.  What I find is most producers don't realize how much soil they're losing. It continues  
**[0:13:58-0:14:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:13:58):**  to be our biggest export in the world. I think you guys lose about five tons an acre roughly  of soil losses in the UK. You might have to check that. Those soil losses are often happening  unseen. It's from underneath your feet that you get water moving through that profile  
**[0:14:18-0:14:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:14:18):**  and it actually takes soil with it. You can often see it when there's a heavy rainfall  event. You'll see your rivers will be like a muddy color. Then what we're seeing here  in the US right now are massive, massive dust storms. The dust storm that went all the way  
**[0:14:32-0:14:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:14:32):**  through Canada, all the way down to Kansas, these huge dust storms. By doing an aggregate  stability test, it actually tells us what is happening with pore spaces, so can air  and water move through that? What holds those soils together is microbiology. It's a pretty  
**[0:14:48-0:15:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:14:48):**  good indicator that you've got microbes active because as they move through the soil, they're  releasing like poos and wheeze and vomit and spit and all that stuff that holds the soil  together. That's what gives you stability. When we have degraded our microbial community,  
**[0:15:06-0:15:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:15:06):**  then there aren't those sticky substances. Then when soil comes into a little crumb or  a little aggregate, it rushes into those pore spaces and that soil collapses. It just turns  into a little piece of muck and then that's more likely to wash away or blow away. That's  
**[0:15:23-0:15:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:15:23):**  one indicator that I really like because it does tell us so much and there's a definite  link between aggregate stability and yield. The less stability we have, then the less  yield potential you're going to have. I think too, we focus in on the micro and that reflects  
**[0:15:41-0:15:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:15:41):**  the macro. It's like just from that tiniest particle, we can tell so much about a soil.  It's all interlinked with those other 10 indicators. By itself, it doesn't mean as much until you  start to bring all of those pieces together. That's really exciting for me because often  
**[0:15:57-0:16:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:15:57):**  I get quite saddened by the whole carbon credit movement and this focus just on organic matter  or soil organic carbon. What I think is really exciting about the Regen indicators is that  it really does bridge that complexity or it brings you the oversight of so many different  
**[0:16:17-0:16:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:16:17):**  things all in one place. I think keeping that complexity whilst also making it doable for  producers is where we're trying to play, I guess.  Yeah. We're seeing the soil carbon gold rush all over the world and anytime we focus just  
**[0:16:37-0:16:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:16:37):**  on purely on one aspect in complex systems, there's the potential for some negative outcomes,  whatever that might be. There's ways to cheat carbon tests. There's ways to just focus in  on that part and that doesn't tell us if it's functional or not. That's what we're interested  
**[0:16:56-0:17:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:16:56):**  in is the functionality of soil processes. You can have really high organic matter and  be on peat. That doesn't mean that that carbon is highly functional or of benefit. We need  to be thinking in whole systems and we need to be doing that for climate mitigation, animal  
**[0:17:15-0:17:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:17:15):**  health, the whole thing instead of just looking at disparate parts that has never worked in  the past and it's not going to work in the future.  From the tests themselves, we then work together to build the actual Soil Mentor Regen platform.  
**[0:17:32-0:17:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:17:32):**  That's something that at VitaCycle, when you first approached us, we didn't know it was  on the cards, but that's where we've got to, which is really exciting to work together  on that. Very much the idea is to then have across those 10 indicators, you can see a  
**[0:17:48-0:18:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:17:48):**  benchmark of red, amber or green for your biome, rainfall and soil type. How good is  your earthworm count, for example, compared to expectations, but then also compared to  other farmers who are on the platform in a similar situation to you?  
**[0:18:08-0:18:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:18:08):**  One of the things I find very exciting about the platform is there is lots of monitoring  tools that we can use. There are other pieces of software that will give us this reading,  whatever. It's a benchmarking. What we go above and beyond on is here are these indicators,  
**[0:18:27-0:18:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:18:27):**  is this good, bad or ugly, but then what does that potentially mean? What are we seeing?  Why would that indicator perhaps look like that? Then most excitedly, what are some of  the things we could start to consider to do? It's not a prescription. It's not going to  
**[0:18:43-0:19:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:18:43):**  be, hey, you need 250 kilos. That's not what this app is designed to do, but it's designed  to help build your own observation skills so that you can start to take some different  actions or reflect on why is this particular indicator performing so poorly? Because all  
**[0:19:01-0:19:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:19:01):**  of it's going to relate to your goals. If that is profitability or performance or health,  all of this comes back to the soil metrics. What I like about it is by being able to see,  am I actually in the green here? I'm doing really, really well with this indicator, but  
**[0:19:18-0:19:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:19:18):**  then other indicators are not doing so well or not doing very well compared to my cohort  or other people in that biome. For me, I don't know, I find most producers are pretty competitive.  We do have this competitive nature. Being able to see what other measures might be for  
**[0:19:35-0:19:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:19:35):**  our biome and our soil type is so powerful. We can go actually on average, people might  have this many earthworms or on average, we're seeing this many insect pests. What might  be helpful is you can take a look and see actually a lot of people are having these  
**[0:19:54-0:20:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:19:54):**  insect pests as well. That doesn't mean you can rest on your laurels, but it helps to  feel like I'm not alone as well in having some of these issues. There's a whole lot  of things that I could be doing.  
**[0:20:07-0:20:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:20:07):**  Yeah, I totally agree with that, that being able to move from that in-field observation  to some understanding of where you sit compared to expectations to then have an idea of, okay,  what might you consider at this moment in time to then do in response to whatever your  
**[0:20:27-0:20:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:20:27):**  soil is telling you through these indicators. Just bringing those together feels really  exciting and obviously, I still think that conversation is required. That's something  that we've been really clear on and I know you're clear on. It's not that the platform  
**[0:20:43-0:21:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:20:43):**  will provide you with all of the answers and you just have to go and apply something that  it says. It's all about, here's a way to help you move to the next level in your questioning  and conversations and whether that further investigation is with your community or with  
**[0:21:03-0:21:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:21:03):**  a coach or with just with your farming team, whoever it is. In my experience of being on  the farm, I've really noticed that having sole responsibility for some of the decisions,  it just isn't very healthy, I don't think, in the end.  
**[0:21:21-0:21:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:21:21):**  Yeah, and I think the cool thing is that as many people on your team can all be tying  into that information, they can be adding things that they're observing. What I'm finding  is it's getting some of the managers and some of the people on the ground connected in a  
**[0:21:38-0:21:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:21:38):**  different way and then being able to share some of those insights. I think that's a really,  really important outcome is that everybody can have it on their phone and then share  that and then sharing it within hubs. We're seeing farmer groups and hubs signing up and  
**[0:21:56-0:22:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:21:56):**  then being able to share that with each other, I think is so powerful because we're all learning  and it is a journey and part of it is being willing to be transparent and authentic about  some of these aspects and go, hey, you know what? This is not working as well as I thought  
**[0:22:12-0:22:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:22:12):**  it was. What do you guys think? What do you think is going on? Having that hive mind to  troubleshoot, I think is so powerful. My early days of learning happened through hubs like  that and I think that they are the most powerful tool. I think they're more powerful than going  
**[0:22:29-0:22:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:22:29):**  to university or anything like that. It's actually being able to work through ideas  and what people are seeing and do that as a collective. Then it stops, especially if  you're by yourself, you're trialing all these different things and another season has passed.  
**[0:22:46-0:22:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:22:46):**  Whereas if you can collectively trial and work through things, we're going to speed  up that transition to incredibly healthy, vibrant ecosystems, which I believe we all  want. It is our life support system.  
**[0:22:59-0:23:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:22:59):**  Okay, great. Is there anything else that you would like to share or communicate to the  farmerama community or anything we missed?  I wonder if we just share a little bit about like data is theirs, I think is important.  
**[0:23:12-0:23:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:23:12):**  What happens with all that material and how it's becoming one of the most valuable commodities  and actually it's theirs. It's not somebody else's.  That's core fundamental belief at VitaCycle and I think also at Integrity Soils is that  
**[0:23:29-0:23:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:23:29):**  any information that's collected about your farm or that you collect on your farm is your  information and your data and you own it. We're here to support you in learning from  your data. We're not here to use your data for other means. That's always been really  
**[0:23:49-0:24:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:23:49):**  clear and we have a data policy, which you can easily read online.  When we first met Nicole, I shared with you the feminine business principles at the time  and you encouraged me to move them forward and they're now the regenerative business  
**[0:24:07-0:24:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:24:07):**  principles that we operate from at VitaCycle. I think that it's like all this data is great,  but also and moving soil health forward is super important, but actually reflecting that  in the business and what we're committed to as people, talking about mindset shifts, that's  
**[0:24:26-0:24:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:24:26):**  also a really important piece of the puzzle. To me, the data policy is super important  alongside how we operate and that we build regenerative into everything that we do.  That's what attracted us to you is we want to see like-minded businesses that really  
**[0:24:44-0:25:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:24:44):**  do see how do we regenerate businesses, how do we regenerate farm businesses and that  it doesn't happen through an extraction model. That's not happening by trying to pull the  wool over farmers' eyes, you know, and I could see that you guys had a really similar ethic  
**[0:25:00-0:25:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:25:00):**  to where we were coming from, so it felt like a very good, exciting, natural fit.  I'm very proud that we've created the Soil Mentor Regen platform. We're already supporting  about 100 farmers on a regenerative transition program in Southern Europe. We work with groups  
**[0:25:15-0:25:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:25:15):**  in Australia, some key brands in the UK, as well as working with committed individual  farmers. Really, the main aim is to support producers to go out and use their infield  observations as their compass. If you want to hear more about this work, then it's best  
**[0:25:32-0:25:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:25:32):**  to head to our website, soils.Vedacycle.com, and you can get in touch there.  Now we're going to speak to a farmer and whisky producer who work hand in hand to produce  whisky in tune with the land, inspired by an approach often more associated with winemaking.  
**[0:25:52-0:26:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:25:52):**  The Bruclady distillery was originally founded in 1881, but after closing was resurrected  in 2001 by co-founders who were keen to explore the idea of terroir. They were so familiar  with in their previous line of work making wine, the distillery focuses on provenance,  
**[0:26:09-0:26:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:26:09):**  traceability, sustainability and transparency.  First, the farmer. Richard works in Wiltshire. He grew up on farms, but only became a farmer  himself in the early 1990s, where he says he saw the soil deteriorate before his eyes,  
**[0:26:26-0:26:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:26:26):**  which spurred him to grow organically and biodynamically. His barley has been used to  produce Bruclady's first ever biodynamic whisky, launched at the end of last year.  I love the connection, the direct connection between us, you know, our love for the soil  
**[0:26:48-0:27:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:26:48):**  and the plants that grow in the soil and the organisms that are there, and then the quality  that that then passes on to the products, the grains. Then that is appreciated by Bruclady  because they're taking it directly from the farmer and there's that connection. I love  
**[0:27:09-0:27:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:27:09):**  that story, you know, that we can talk about what we're doing in our fields and they're  receiving it at the other end and they're seeing how that develops in flavour and taste,  but also in the yield of the whisky at the end, which is often being talked about by  
**[0:27:28-0:27:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:27:28):**  their head distiller there. So I just love that constant connection, which I think is  rare these days in farming. But I hope with the changing in how farming is being supported,  I hope those sorts of connections are going to develop more and more.  
**[0:27:47-0:28:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:27:47):**  In about 2009, I guess, we were approached to grow biodynamic barley. We were working  biodynamically at the time, but we weren't growing barley. We had grown malting barley  before conventionally and we were asked, could we grow biodynamic barley for Bruclady? And  
**[0:28:07-0:28:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:28:07):**  they said, yeah, we'd love to. But they'd come across biodynamic wines and were interested  to see whether those sort of reasons that people were buying and growing biodynamic  wines could be transferred to whisky. So that's why we got involved and we're very excited  
**[0:28:24-0:28:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:28:24):**  to be involved since then. So our first crop was grown in 2010 and the first whisky was  distilled in 2011. It's so exciting. And it also came together around the COP26, which  is probably in everyone's distant memory now, but it was lovely that the first whisky that  
**[0:28:45-0:29:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:28:45):**  was bottled after 10 years of working relationship came out around this hiatus of talking about  global carbon. So it was lovely that we could produce something with a real depth, not only  of flavor, but also of responsibility to farm, soil and planet and have all the evidence  
**[0:29:12-0:29:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:29:12):**  that was needed to back that up and go with it.  Christy McFarlane's been with Bruclady for the last six years and in whisky for a lot  longer. She speaks about the important connection between whisky and farming and about some  
**[0:29:27-0:29:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:29:27):**  of the work Bruclady has been doing with a type of barley called bear grown in Orkney.  Bear is a landrace, which means that it's become adapted over many years to the climate,  soil and landscape of the place where it's grown. In this case, that's the Western and  
**[0:29:43-0:29:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:29:43):**  Northern Scottish islands. There's evidence that bear has been grown in Scotland going  back all the way to the eighth century and Bruclady have been collaborating with the  University of the Highlands and Islands to distill a modern whisky from this ancient  
**[0:29:57-0:30:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:29:57):**  grain.  It's really important to us to have a direct connection with our farming partners and to  kind of share in the risk and help to create viable business systems, so making sure that  
**[0:30:09-0:30:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:30:09):**  they've got a market for their crop. Bear barley that we've grown on Islay for a couple  of seasons started in 2005 and then eventually was taken up to Orkney. So in partnership  with the University of the Highlands and Islands Agronomy Institute in Orkney, we've been growing  
**[0:30:29-0:30:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:30:29):**  bear and successfully distilling bear barley for a number of years. It really bears the  only landrace that we work with, but it's all come from a curiosity of flavour and a  pursuit of flavour and just finding diversity and nuance in whisky production.  
**[0:30:47-0:31:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:30:47):**  So yeah, we've been working for a while with the team up there. Bear is a really fascinating  grain. It's a six-row grain instead of a two-row grain and it just has amazing flavour qualities  for us. So you get a really unctuous, creamy texture in the whisky and there's some benefits  
**[0:31:06-0:31:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:31:06):**  to farmers as well, like it thrives in nutrient-poor soil conditions and has a very long straw,  which is of benefit to farmers using it for cattle bedding and the like. It also thrives  in a short growing season, so up in the northern latitudes of Orkney it works really well for  
**[0:31:25-0:31:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:31:25):**  their long, light summers. So yeah, fascinating grain and just a small part of a really interesting  and infinite barley journey that Brucladdy's been on for two decades now.  We've come on quite a far journey or a long journey so far. For us it is just about connection  
**[0:31:47-0:32:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:31:47):**  and it's about supporting the entire supply chain and the entire ecosystem. So as we move  forward as a planet that needs to be more sustainable, it's about making sure that everybody  is supported and that the right kind of business decisions are being made across the whole  
**[0:32:04-0:32:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:32:04):**  chain, whether that's from barley growing to malting to distilling and then the products  that we put in front of people. So biodynamic is a massive step forward for us and a whisky  for the future. Not only is it delicious, not only are we connected directly with the  
**[0:32:22-0:32:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:32:22):**  farmer, but as Richard said, it's carbon sequestering from a farm that sequesters 10 times more  carbon than it emits. So it's those sorts of connections that we need to really master  and that all businesses need to look a little bit further at what they're doing and do more  
**[0:32:40-0:33:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:32:40):**  for all the communities that they work with.  I didn't used to drink whisky actually. Now, yeah, I definitely enjoy having a drink last  night actually. I mean, I would describe it as velvety and it's that sort of smoothness  
**[0:33:01-0:33:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:33:01):**  that I like that I probably didn't see in other whiskies, which in the past, and velvety  is also a word that's been used to describe our crops as well and how they grow. So it's  a lovely connection in that way.  
**[0:33:23-0:33:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/73-chilean-natural-cider-the-regen-platform-and-biodynamic-whiskey#t=0:33:23):**  This episode of Farmarama was made by me, Joe Barrett, Abbey Rose and Olivia Oldham.  A big thanks to the rest of the Farmarama team, Katie Revel, Fran Bailey, Annie Landless,  Eliza Jenkins and Dora Taylor. Our theme music is by Owen Barrett.  