### Farmerama  (2022-05-24)
**[0:00:00-0:00:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to PharmaRama. We're very grateful to those of you that support us and  allow us to bring you these stories every month. Even the smallest contribution makes  a big difference to us, so if you'd like to become a supporter, please visit patreon.com  forward slash pharma rama.  This month we hear from three practitioners about what it takes to transform minds and  
**[0:00:27-0:00:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:00:27):**  hearts. We hear about how collaborations between multiple farmers and indigenous landholders  have built a new vision for the food and farming system in one county in California. A farmer  in the UK tells us about her journey moving towards a regenerative farming system, and  we hear what it takes to train people so they can support others on their regenerative journey.  Leah Alvarez is the Climate Resilience Projects and Outreach Coordinator at Carbon Sink Farms  
**[0:01:01-0:01:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:01:01):**  and Food Shed in San Diego County, California. She's based at Solidarity Farm, which is on  Luseno Indian Territory and neighbors Palma Tribal Farms. What started as a single farm  leasing land from the Palma Band of Luseno Indians has turned into a much larger movement  as the landholders and tenants work together to build a carbon sink demonstration farm.  Where we are located we have a changing Mediterranean climate, and in 2017 there was a very extreme  
**[0:01:38-0:01:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:01:38):**  weather event with reached temperatures in the summer of 122 Fahrenheit, and that made  very clear this alarm that was ringing very, very loud that either we need to change the  way that we farm in order to continue to survive in this environment, and if we wanted to make  the livelihood of the farmers as, you know, continue to thrive, changes needed to be made.  So Solidarity Farm leases land from the Palma Band of Luseno Indians, so we have been built  
**[0:02:24-0:02:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:02:24):**  through the years in relationship with them, with the tribe that has other agricultural  projects undergoing. So this event in 2017 like affected us all in the area. So we lost  animals, we lost crops, and you know, like trees were just like burning, and it was just  like a daunting scenario. So together we started to like have conversations about what can  we do, you know, like in collaboration so we can create different projects that can  
**[0:03:03-0:03:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:03:03):**  shift the way that we are building resilience in our ecosystem, in our region. That was  the birth of the carbon sink farms. So in collaboration we started to look at what are  the different systems and practices that we could implement to shift from conventional  to more regenerative practices. Here in the US there are several different agencies and  programs that support this transition from conventional to regenerative or more like  
**[0:03:44-0:03:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:03:44):**  carbon farming based practices. So we were the first project here in Southern California  to receive the NRCS, the Natural Conservation Healthy Soils Program. It's a grant that,  you know, like allow farmers to implement different conservation practices. So we did  an analysis, created a carbon farm plan, and you know, like through that started to implement  the practices that we have now five years in the making. So we started with implementing  
**[0:04:21-0:04:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:04:21):**  some hedgerows. We started planting like cover crops and transition like about five acres  in the farm. We have a total of 10 acres that we are in operation and we transitioned that  into no-till or reduced tillage. So that was the foundation for these practices. The farm  does not use any kind of like pesticides or chemical fertilizers and you know, we have  seen how the practice of no-till generate many co-benefits. And you know, like one of  
**[0:05:08-0:05:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:05:08):**  them is just the carbon sequestration and that's one of the topics that has been in  the priority of different agendas in the region in terms of like policies and climate action  plans. And in the county right now, there is a project in progress with the different,  you know, approval through the governance in the county that is called the Regional  Decarbonization Framework. So we have been very, very active in this scenario in which  
**[0:05:47-0:05:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:05:47):**  we can show what are the benefits that the farm has been producing through like having  these practices. We have better water holding capacity in an area that we are prone to drought.  Then the yield of our crops is higher. We are able to measure the increase on the carbon,  the fungal and the bacterial ratio and the organic matter in the soil. So focusing on  the work in on improving the soil health, we saw the benefits of this. The journey started,  
**[0:06:29-0:06:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:06:29):**  you know, with Solidarity Farmers like leading these practices and the partnership with the  tribe allow us to create this dynamic that is very unique. And the tribe at the moment  started an olive orchard and this last year they implemented vineyard. And also through  the pandemic, they created a program in which some of the tribal members got trained in  our farm to do a small scale farming. And now they're farming about four acres and  
**[0:07:09-0:07:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:07:09):**  producing a CSA box, a farm box that they distribute with them, with the tribal members  every week for free. Not a lot of farms are able to work alongside different indigenous  communities. And one of the things that we implemented in the practices is like when  we did the hedgerows, for instance, we selected a plant like pallet that was like tailored  to or associated with what is called like tech or traditional ecological knowledge.  
**[0:07:48-0:07:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:07:48):**  In which all native plants that were planted on the hedgerows were selected because they  were for the indigenous communities in the area, their food, fiber or medicine. So we  are not only using the hedgerows for the convenience and the benefits of having better soil structure  and attracting more pollinators, but also these plants that play a significant cultural  role in the traditions of the indigenous communities in this area. I feel like the benefits that  
**[0:08:25-0:08:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:08:25):**  comes from these practices is not only improving the soil health and the plants and the crops  like health, but also the principal co-benefit is that we can do local distribution of these  products.  In the last few years, another layer has been added to the brilliant work being done with  the establishment of Foodjet. Bia explains how it was born.  
**[0:08:57-0:09:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:08:57):**  This is going to take me like back a couple of years to November of 2019. We hosted the  first carbon sync convergence here in Southern California. So about 180 representatives from  the state and from different states here in the US and different indigenous communities.  We come together with the goal of mutual aid and an exchange of practices and experiences  and information. So there were like four different work groups in which we were able to share  
**[0:09:42-0:09:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:09:42):**  experiences to envision the future for the region and an opportunity for us to learn  from different farms in different bio regions and from different farms in different areas  and capacities about governance, ways of operation, how we can support more new farms and how  we can support beginner farms with the focus or also amplifying and elevating the voice  of BIPOC, Black, Indigenous and People of Color and communities that have been for many  
**[0:10:21-0:10:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:10:21):**  years just relegated or neglected by the food system.  So one of the work groups was focusing on food hubs and shared resources. 2020 came  about and you all will remember what happened that year. And at the beginning of the year,  Solidarity Farm and La Huerta Farm came together with the idea of creating this collaboration  for a new CSA program. So a new farm box distribution that these two farms could start implementing  
**[0:11:05-0:11:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:11:05):**  in the city of San Diego, especially providing these equity boxes at a very affordable price  to a neighborhood that is very diverse and has the most or the highest rate of immigrant  communities and refugee communities in the city of San Diego. It's called City Heights.  So it started at the beginning of March in 2020 and it was called Food Shed. A food shed  is just like a regional area in which the food is produced, how far it travels to go  
**[0:11:49-0:11:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:11:49):**  to the tables of the communities and to whom this food is distributed. So the food shed  launched in early March 2020 and then the pandemic hit. And in the middle of the chaos,  it was very important just to see how this crisis also opened a new window of opportunities  for local farms. What happened at the beginning of the pandemic with the lockdowns was a lot  of producers didn't have any farmer's market to attend. A lot of crops were lost because  
**[0:12:30-0:12:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:12:30):**  they couldn't be harvested. There was no outlet for a lot of local farms that usually sell  their produce in farm stands and farmer's markets. And this to me, it was the eye opening  that we all needed because a lot of farms were reaching to us to say, hey, are you still  having the CSA boxes? Can we sell our produce through your CSA? So this created the perfect  storm in a way for us to come together and start creating these co-op farmers owned and  
**[0:13:16-0:13:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:13:16):**  operated network. So this is March 2020 and we started with six farms and now 2022, the  network has grown. We have about 44 farms that in different capacity are providing the  food. So we aggregate the food from these farms and we have about 63% of the farms that  are BIPOC and 50% of the farms, these farms that are women owned and operated. So our  strategies are based on the equitable distribution. So we like to sustain these communities by  
**[0:14:04-0:14:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:14:04):**  meeting people where they are and work tirelessly to build and sustain healthy families. So  with support of different programs from the state, we have one that is CalFresh or EBT  that give people with low income access to grocery. And now the program has opened up  for a grand match to people of the community to be able to access these fresh produce from  local farms. So this has a huge impact in the local economy. Usually San Diego has the  
**[0:14:47-0:14:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:14:47):**  highest rate of, San Diego County has the highest rate of small local farms, but only  5% of the food that is produced here is consumed locally. There's a lot of exporting to other  states and such. So we did this calculation that if we spend only 5% of our food budget  on locally grown products, we could sustain approximately 6,000 small farms. And these  purchases will in turn have an additional 2.7 billion economic multiplier effect to  
**[0:15:30-0:15:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:15:30):**  recirculate in our communities. We also focus on the farmer to farmer mentorship and the  support of these community of practices. So one of our strategies is the thriving farms.  So we work directly with farmers to produce quality food that is good for people and for  the environment. And we do this by developing a mutual aid support network to empower local  BIPOC, new and seasoned farmers to farm regeneratively. By cultivating this economic viability, we  
**[0:16:15-0:16:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:16:15):**  like to cooperate with farmers and create a multifaceted support network that is committed  to fighting climate change using the concept of carbon farming and regenerative agriculture  practices and with the goal to restore and rehabilitate the approach to food and farming  systems. This is the beginning of the food shed that these like food have and resources  and focuses on focusing on the distribution of local produce. So there you have the benefits  
**[0:16:54-0:17:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:16:54):**  that we can guarantee the purchase of the produce to the farmers and do the distribution  in the communities that will traditionally wouldn't have access to this kind of fresh  produce or organic food that usually or traditionally you go to the market and this is like neighborhoods  or communities that are in a food desert or they don't have nearby markets or either  like farmers markets that will allow them to have access to fresh produce. So changing  
**[0:17:36-0:17:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:17:36):**  the dynamic allow us to work directly with the consumers and work directly with the farmers.  And since this is an S corporation that is farmer owned and operated, so we are all involved  in the ownership of the organization. We've been inspired by many people, by many farmers  here in the States and internationally as well. And the message is just keep planting  seeds and keep farming. And now we have the challenges that we have in our times, not  
**[0:18:21-0:18:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:18:21):**  only with climate change, but also with the economic crisis and the economic shifting  in different systems and seeing my system falling apart. And this is an opportunity  to come together and create.  Claire Hill is Regenerative Agriculture Director at FAI Farms and is establishing her own small  farm in Shropshire. She implemented the regenerative transition of FIA Farm in Oxfordshire, coached  
**[0:18:58-0:19:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:18:58):**  by Caroline Grindwood at Roots of Nature Consultancy. She told us how it started and some of the  biggest challenges she's found along the way.  I think we all want to know the things that we need to do differently. Just tell me, give  me the list of things we want to do when we're thinking about transitioning to anything.  But particularly everyone's talking about regenerative at the moment. So what do we,  
**[0:19:30-0:19:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:19:30):**  what do you want me to do differently? And that was definitely the first question I used  to ask Caroline. But what I came to realize was that actually it's the way that I see  things and the way that I view things that has changed. I think to explain it that we  still farm the same, same land, same animals, same customers, but we just think about what  we do differently. And for me, that came about as triggers, triggers were things like finding  
**[0:19:56-0:20:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:19:56):**  we had resistance in the sheep to yellow drenches or yellow wormers, the group of wormers and  thinking, well, that's great because we've still got orange and purple to go, but what  happens when they run out? And we know that those, you know, that that day is coming,  we already use quite a lot of orange drench already. And, and it was like, there needs  to be a radical change. Like, and I can't see any other way of doing it. And there was  
**[0:20:20-0:20:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:20:20):**  no one thing that made me say, right, today we're going to be regenerative. It was, it  was like a lot of little things. The other thing was when we did some, yeah, kind of,  we changed our grazing. We went for the kind of techno grazing, New Zealand style model.  And that worked well, like we grew a lot more grass. That was, that was really good, but  it was quite labor intensive for us here. And on an extensive system, we had all these  
**[0:20:43-0:20:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:20:43):**  animals during the summer that we knew that we could hold, but then it was like, what  do we do with them in the winter when the grass isn't growing as much? And because the  focus was on focus was on utilization. You, yeah, you had loads of grass in the, in the  summer and you stopped that. And then in the winter, they all had to come indoors, but  we didn't have the housing. We're in a tenant farm on an old dairy farm. So the housing  
**[0:21:05-0:21:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:21:05):**  is no longer sort of suitable. And so it was like, well, we need to put up more sheds.  Well, then you start costing up that and just thinking about it from a carbon ongoing point  of view, it just didn't make sense. The straw, the tractors, the diesel, everything that  was going to need to go into that. And, and that's when, yeah, kind of was another point  was like there needs to be a different way. Yeah. And I guess that's, that's what they  
**[0:21:27-0:21:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:21:27):**  were the two, one of the two of the key things that kind of got me thinking differently.  Yeah. Our measures of success are, yeah, definitely changing. And a biggest thing is  instead of focused on yield, we're focusing on margin. So how much margin are we making?  And what part of our decision making process on all of this was that we would reduce our  sheep numbers because we're having these problems with the worms and everything else. So we  
**[0:21:52-0:21:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:21:52):**  thought sheep are, you know, rarely in the UK making much money. So actually does it  make a big difference to our margin? It makes a difference to our yield, but it doesn't  make a difference to our margin if we reduce the numbers. And, and often people will say,  oh, you've got a lot of land and not very many animals stocking it. And I say, yeah,  but we don't house many of them. And our aim is to not house anything. And so our costs  
**[0:22:17-0:22:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:22:17):**  are significantly reducing. We're reducing. We haven't got there yet. Each year we do  a bit more and we've still got a long way to go, but that's what, that's what we're  kind of aiming for. And also in that productivity thing, I start to think about what, what we  really like, we all talk about productivity. We've got to get more efficient. We've got  to be more productive. What are we aiming for? And my productivity measure now is about  
**[0:22:40-0:22:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:22:40):**  how much water I can hold onto because we, we flood in the winter and we burn off in  the summer. That's our rhetoric around what this farm is. And what I realised is that,  well, we have all this water in the winter, but it disappears in the summer. But if we  could hold onto it through the summer, then wow, how much more grass would we grow then?  So instead of thinking about the immediate, how quickly is that animal growing? I'm thinking,  
**[0:23:02-0:23:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:23:02):**  how do I manage the land to make it be able to hold onto more, more water so that when  it does rain in the winter or flood in the winter, we hold onto that for longer because  our growth rates definitely slow down kind of July, August and into September before  we get that autumn flush of grass again. But if I had that spring and autumn flush, wasn't  a flush and it was just a continuum, well, we'd be growing, we'd be growing some serious  
**[0:23:25-0:23:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:23:25):**  grass and finishing some serious amount of animals through that time. So yeah, it's moving  as well from that individual right here and now making a decision through to how do we  manage this to be productive long term? And that water holding capacity of the land is  now my main productivity focus.  What's the most important thing you can do? I think it varies. It varies for different  
**[0:23:49-0:23:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:23:49):**  people. For me, it's been having training because I did lots of reading and I read lots  of videos, but I just couldn't work out where to start. What do I do first? If we need to  spend money, what do we do? Where do we take a risk? Do we start grazing differently and  how do we even go about that? Which livestock group do we focus it on? So for me, getting  training about the kind of principles about what we're trying to achieve was really helpful.  
**[0:24:14-0:24:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:24:14):**  And to start with, as I say, I was always like, I just want to know what to do. But  taking that time to understand it has been the thing that has propelled us on further,  more quickly in the long run, just going through that to start with. But equally, we did just  do some things where we just said, let's just start. So we split quite a few years ago now,  we split one of our biggest fields into four with permanent electric fencing. We use permanent  
**[0:24:36-0:24:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:24:36):**  because everybody told us that you'll never keep those cattle behind a temporary electric  fence, which proved to be wrong. But just splitting that field in four and grazing round  that, we saw that we could grow more grass and get better recovery. And that was sort  of something that helped us propel on to do more as well. So I and the other thing is  kind of making new regen friends and trying to find a new network or get on a WhatsApp  
**[0:25:02-0:25:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:25:02):**  group. Because that's the other bit that's hard is when when you do start doing things  differently, and people love to look over the fence and comment on what you're doing.  It can be really hard not to lose the thing on the loose face here and just go back and  when something starts to go wrong to just revert back. So that new new network or finding  other people going through a similar thing and there are loads of different groups around  
**[0:25:25-0:25:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:25:25):**  that I found has been one of the really helpful things as well. The thing that I found myself  talking about more and more lately and thinking about is the mindset shift. Like everyone  says it needs a mindset shift. And of course, that's really hard to articulate what that  means. And how do you get others on board? That's a question I often get asked about,  you know, I want to do it, but brother, mother, cousin, business partner, etc, etc, doesn't.  
**[0:25:54-0:25:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:25:54):**  So it's not been easy. I think that's the thing to say. And maybe that's been partly  because we've done it quite early, but more and more people are adopting things every  day. And that's, that's really good. But it's, that's been a biggest learning that I don't  think I expected to have to deal with people's uncertainty about it. And some of that stuff  goes really deep. Like we're challenging everything that people know, and they react in ways that  
**[0:26:19-0:26:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:26:19):**  you don't expect. I think that's the thing that I found is that I thought it's just changing  the way we farm. But actually, what this has ended up doing is, is, is questioning some  people's deep beliefs, including my own, I've come from a traditional training system. My  dad was a farm manager on arable farms. And I went to Harper Adams and had a traditional  training in how to run farming systems. And through my career, that's how it's been. And  
**[0:26:42-0:26:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:26:42):**  when you start to unpick that, and talk about doing it differently, it's everything, it's  almost everything, everything I've learned on our question. Lots of it's still really  relevant and it's right. It's just maybe a tweet. We always knew that soil health was  important. There's no getting away from that. And I definitely did a lot of learning about  soil health at university, but how to improve it and what is soil health. So soil health,  
**[0:27:03-0:27:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:27:03):**  when I learned was all about getting the chemistry right, getting the balance of the nutrients  right. But now I understand soil health to be so much more than that. And it's a living  thing and how do we nourish it and how do we manage it in a way that we're feeding it  what it needs? Because when we do that, it will pay us back. And how, what progress means.  So we think maybe progress is all the new varieties of seeds and new cultivation techniques  
**[0:27:27-0:27:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:27:27):**  and all of that is coming. Well, we know that when we leave a bit of land, stuff grows and  actually that stuff is suited to that soil and maybe the animals on that farm. And that  we've undervalued that. I would have always talked here about our rough old pasture. It's  not very productive. It doesn't do anything, but it's productive here because it keeps  coming back. And however many times we try and reseed and put different things in, eventually  
**[0:27:48-0:27:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:27:48):**  those hybridized varieties, which can do really well and, but require quite a lot of support  and of course require reseeding every few years. And so just try thinking about input  costs in a different way as well. Like just flipping everything that I thought I knew  on my head. And once you start on this journey, sometimes it can be quite revealing like that.  You start questioning a lot of things. So that would just be another observation of  
**[0:28:11-0:28:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:28:11):**  mine, I think.  We heard from Nicole Masters last month talking about the importance of digging holes to understand  what's really happening on the land. Nicole is an author, pattern thinker and regenerative  soil coach based in Montana. In recent years, she's found her skills in such high demand  that she's created a program to train more regenerative coaches. It turns out being a  
**[0:28:42-0:28:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:28:42):**  regenerative coach isn't just about the practices we need to implement. It's about learning  a way of thinking and then being able to take others on that journey.  2021, we released the CREATE program, which is a coaching school for agro-ecological  coaches. And the reason that we did that is I'd been looking to hire people and I just  couldn't find people that had the level of skills and experience and the thinking that's  
**[0:29:15-0:29:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:29:15):**  required to be a really, really good coach. It's been years and years and years in development,  but I just went, right, we're going to do this and see what the interest is. And we  got a threefold over subscription of people applying for the program, which just really  made me realize that there is a big interest in people doing that kind of deep ecological  training and also what the demand is. I mean, it's just so huge. And I felt like I was letting  
**[0:29:41-0:29:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:29:41):**  people down, people wanting consultancy in any kind of arena from viticulture to sheep  and beef to bison to turf, you name it, and feeling like there's just not the people out  there that are well-trained that can really help to support this sudden explosion in people  being interested in soil health. I think students have been really blown away by the diversity  of topics that we've covered. I mean, we go from everything from the technicalities of  
**[0:30:09-0:30:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:30:09):**  soil microbiology, soil nutrients, and then how do we weave those patterns together in  terms of what are we seeing with soil function? How does that relate to plant health and yield  and production, resilience, animal health, and even the human health aspect? It's that  pattern sensing that we're missing is often you find people are incredibly skilled in  a very narrow focus of knowledge, and that's not what the world needs right now. We need  
**[0:30:36-0:30:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:30:36):**  people that can see in holes, that can see in that whole picture in terms of how do these  things all interrelate. And then the biggest part of that is then how does that interrelate  with the person on the ground, with the farmer or the rancher? Because at the end of the  day, it's that person that's managing that landscape and all of the stories and all of  the struggle and all of the issues that that particular producer is dealing with as a coach,  
**[0:31:04-0:31:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:31:04):**  that's a big part of what you're managing. It's all very well to come in and say, hey,  you should plant a cover crop, but that doesn't really shift people's relationship to landscape  or really shift this, what we call tickling the system. Like how little do we need to  put into a landscape to alter what those outcomes might be? Or how little do we need to change  some of these grazing systems or what we're doing with nutrition? And all of that is a  
**[0:31:30-0:31:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:31:30):**  mindset. How do we look at weeds and pests and diseases? Do we feel like it's something  that we need to control and kill? Or is it something that's there as an indicator? So  I think the students themselves have been really blown away by the amount of focus that  we have on the mindset part. How do we shift our own mindsets and how we see the world  or how we see challenges or how we see conflict? And then how do we support a producer in being  
**[0:31:58-0:32:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:31:58):**  able to do that? Because that's where the real success lies. It's not in looking for  an external expert. It's not to look for an external product. It's to look internally  and develop the critical thinking so that we can solve problems for ourselves or within  our communities. And that's the paradigm shift that is regenerative agriculture is how do  we become our own experts, not look for the guru. When you look at the acronym of what  
**[0:32:24-0:32:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:32:24):**  CREATE stands for, it stands for Consciously Regenerating Ecosystems in Agriculture through  Transformative Experiences. It's a big mouthful. It's on the brochure. So when I talk with  the students signing up, I promise them, you will not be the same person that completes  the program as you are today. There's so much that is out for us all to transform. We are  layers of these onions that we keep peeling back another layer and there's another layer  
**[0:32:52-0:32:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:32:52):**  under there. So for instance, one topic we spent some time on is our conversation. It's  what we call the ecology of money. We all have our own internal conversations and belief  systems about money. And that might be how you were brought up, your ancestral stories  around money, media pressure, social pressures, all of this becomes the story. And then that  can either be a hindrance or a help. And what I find when I work with a lot of producers  
**[0:33:20-0:33:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:33:20):**  is they have some really squirrely kind of conversations around money. And that might  be money is struggle or money is greed or money is bad in some way or I'll never have  it, all these kinds of stories. So what we do in the classes, we actually peel back what  are those stories? Where did they come from? Do they serve you? And what would it look  like if you didn't have that story, what would become possible? And so that's what we're  
**[0:33:47-0:33:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:33:47):**  doing with the students is transforming what are those conversations and then what would  be possible. And so I think for many of us, it's financial freedom of not feeling like,  yeah, it's shame or struggle or greed or any of those stories. So it's been a lot of fun.  I really enjoyed that topic. One thing that I'm really enjoying with the Create program  is just the diversity of people on, they range from 26 years of age to 70 years of age. They  
**[0:34:15-0:34:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:34:15):**  range from people that are much more practical to people that have higher science or extension  experience consulting already. And what I've found is for every single one of them, it's  a journey and of rounding out where are those areas that maybe we're not as strong in so  that we can provide these really robust but generalist approach to coaching. So just inspired.  It's really challenging. Like it's super challenging to teach to such a diverse group with such  
**[0:34:48-0:34:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:34:48):**  diverse experience. But what I find is every session I'm learning from as well. So it just,  it's an expansive process. And out of this, we will be creating a fellowship of agro-ecological  coaches or consultants that will continue this hive mind of learning and experience  and sharing as we go forward. So I'm really looking forward to the next chapter. If you're  interested in the Create program, then they are currently taking applications for the  
**[0:35:17-0:35:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/74-foodshed-agroecological-coaching-and-the-regenerative-mindset#t=0:35:17):**  2022 cohort. So check out Integrity Soils website to find out more.  This episode of PharmaRama was made by me, Joe Barrett, Abbey Rose and Olivia Oldham.  A big thanks to the rest of the PharmaRama team. That's Katie Revel, Fran Bailey, Annie  Landless, Eliza Jenkins and Dora Taylor. Our theme music is by Owen Barrett.  