### Farmerama  (2022-31-29)
**[0:00:00-0:00:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to FarmerRama.  Thank you to everyone who signed up to our Patreon last month, or previously.  We appreciate every one of you.  Your support helps us to keep bringing you the stories of regenerative farming from around  the world each month.  
**[0:00:18-0:00:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:00:18):**  If you'd like to join our growing Patreon family, please visit patreon.com forward slash  farmerama, where you can choose your level of support.  This month, we hear from a baker and a miller about the benefits of having a close relationship  and what it takes to maintain it.  Then, we head to Aotearoa, New Zealand, where a market gardener shares how important love  
**[0:00:43-0:00:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:00:43):**  and compassion are in his growing practice.  And finally, we hear about some important research on the experience of black farmers  in the UK.  In early May, we headed to Nottingham for UK Grain Lab, a gathering of farmers, millers,  bakers and scientists who are building a new grain system.  
**[0:01:07-0:01:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:01:07):**  While we were there, we spoke with Kate Hamblin, baker and founder of Hamblin Bread in Oxford,  and David Howell, miller at Offaly Mill in Staffordshire.  Kate and David have developed a close working relationship, with David milling all the flour  Kate bakes with at Hamblin.  We asked them to share more about how and why they work together.  
**[0:01:30-0:01:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:01:30):**  My name is Kate Hamblin.  I have a bakery in Oxford called Hamblin Bread, and we use UK organic stone ground heritage  flour.  My name is David Howell.  I'm from Offaly Mill in Staffordshire, a water mill, and we produce stone ground flour, and  
**[0:01:45-0:01:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:01:45):**  we produce Kate's for her bakery.  So we've always worked with the heritage wheat farmer, John Letts, who has worked with David  for a long time.  And we've always used his grain in conjunction with organic modern varieties.  And initially we were getting organic modern flour from another supplier, but due to pallets  
**[0:02:13-0:02:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:02:13):**  breaking, not arriving, being arriving in poor condition, John Letts suggested that  we buy organic modern grain directly from one of his friends, get it stored at David's  Mill in a silo, and David could mill it fresh for us, and therefore deliver not only the  heritage flour, but all our flour.  Initially taking on the work with Heritage Harvest and Kate was there to supplement as  
**[0:02:38-0:02:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:02:38):**  a business opportunity, but in the last five years, not only does it do that, it purely  keeps the water wheel going, which is obviously the heritage roots of the mill, which is something  I really want to keep going.  But then you start to get involvement in the wheat, the grains, and understanding of them,  and even more so this last few months with this war in Ukraine, I am completely convinced  
**[0:03:07-0:03:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:03:07):**  it's the way forward because the fertilizer is not going to be available, and the climate  change we need to be looking at an alternative.  It means that I have control over much more of the process, so I can identify the farmers  that I want to buy grain from, hopefully in the future have more of an influence over  the types of grain, and it means that we also have grain security, so the grain that we  
**[0:03:38-0:03:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:03:38):**  buy stored at David's, we know that that's there, so we're less vulnerable to fluctuations  in flour prices, or for example during the pandemic when there was a national flour shortage,  we had this security because we knew that we had all of this grain in silo and that  it was just going to keep on coming because David was going to keep on milling it and  delivering it.  
**[0:04:03-0:04:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:04:03):**  The flour is also very fresh because David mills it the day before he delivers it, so  that's guaranteed, and there's just complete transparency in the whole process.  I think the farmer should need to move more to the better quality and look at the smaller  businesses to combine with it and benefit them rather than the great big feed mills  that are taking over things.  
**[0:04:29-0:04:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:04:29):**  If we've got some good farmers, good land and good equipment, a little bit more understanding  with the smaller business, I think that would be the key structure for forward, and especially  look at alternatives of fertiliser, I think that's the key structure for survival of the  economy and the environment at the moment.  In a way it's so simple what me and David have, but it's very holistic and it's very  
**[0:04:54-0:05:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:04:54):**  complete and I think that that could be replicated in various iterations across the country.  There's a lot of people with a lot of good intentions who are working either on the farming  side or on the baking side or on the milling side and it's just about knowing that you  can join those dots, that you can create a new model of working together and it takes  a bit of commitment between one person and another, it might take a slight financial  
**[0:05:27-0:05:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:05:27):**  risk, but it also takes a little bit of imagination to think that another way is possible.  You have to have full trust in each other.  The trust in, from my perspective, that I'm constantly investing to try and get the best  product to Kate possibly, but whilst doing that I need to have 100% faith that the customer  is going to continue with you to do that.  
**[0:05:56-0:06:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:05:56):**  I couldn't work without Kate's arrangement with everybody, I'd have to have somebody  that I trust completely.  It's a time thing that's been built up that obviously we're both very proud of.  It can work in the right hands but it needs the same commitment from each person.  We're both very pragmatic, we both have small businesses and it has to work not only on  
**[0:06:19-0:06:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:06:19):**  an ideological level but also on a financial level as well and I think that sometimes that's  what's missing from the wider conversation and yeah, I guess I just want to communicate  that it is a totally viable way of doing business.  The dirty word.  I think things have come on leaps and bounds in the last 10 years.  
**[0:06:45-0:06:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:06:45):**  10 years ago, okay, the grains weren't as good.  You couldn't see a future in them.  The way things are progressing now, I can see a future in them.  Kate's obviously pushing forward all the time and it wouldn't take a lot for another couple  of bakeries like Kate to come in and take account for a lot more of our work.  
**[0:07:05-0:07:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:07:05):**  So yeah, I'm hopeful for the future of Heritage Grains.  I think it's, I'm convinced it's the way forward.  Just make contact with people, just get in touch with people, just talk to people and  just put yourself in an uncomfortable position to move things forward.  Just do it, just do something.  
**[0:07:33-0:07:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:07:33):**  Jake Clark is the head farmer at Organic Market Garden in Tamaki-Mukuro, Auckland in Aotearoa,  New Zealand.  Organic Market Garden, or OMG, is a model farm set up by For the Love of Bees, a charity  that aims to heal ecosystems and provide healthy food to local people through a network of  regenerative organic urban farms.  
**[0:08:01-0:08:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:08:01):**  Fellow farmer-omer Olivia Oldham spoke to Jake about OMG.  My name's Jake Clark and I'm the head farmer here at OMG.  OMG stands for Organic Market Garden and we're an urban farm that operates on about a 500  square metre plot of land and 320 square metres of that is growing space.  We provide 41 vegetable boxes each week to locals living in the community.  
**[0:08:31-0:08:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:08:31):**  We also have a compost CSA and a seedling CSA and we produce around 300 packets each  year of seedlings, 75 per season.  You've come over from Yorkshire, is that right?  Yeah, that's right.  I worked in sort of ecology and land restoration in the Yorkshire Dales.  
**[0:08:49-0:08:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:08:49):**  What do you reckon is the biggest difference between what you could do over there and what  you can do here in Auckland?  Here in Auckland we can grow all year round.  So in summer we're growing peppers and pumpkins and cucurbits and tomatillos, corn and then  in winter we focus more on brassicas, celeriacs and celery and alliums.  
**[0:09:11-0:09:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:09:11):**  Whereas back in Yorkshire you'd be lucky to get a harvest from your vegetable garden in  the middle of winter.  I think from my mum's garden the only thing that would be able to harvest in winter was  sorrel.  We'd go out on a frosty morning and the only thing that would still be there is sorrel,  
**[0:09:29-0:09:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:09:29):**  everything else would be dead.  So we've got massive potential here to grow food all year round.  My favourite thing to grow hands down is definitely pumpkins.  They have a totally unique way about them and you can try and control them and you can  try and send them a different way but they'll do what they want.  
**[0:09:49-0:09:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:09:49):**  It's such a visceral reaction to the elements and the sun with their big leaves that act  like solar panels and capture sugars and then you get these giant fruits which form on the  vines and they swell up and grow almost before your eyes and then from a winter storage pumpkin  then you can just put them away and bring them out in the middle of winter and carve  into it.  
**[0:10:13-0:10:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:10:13):**  For me it's like carving into the sun, you know, you get those lovely sugary smells of  summer and it's just, yeah, not even growing but also eating.  It's just, I love growing pumpkins, it's so much fun.  At OMG we're organic, we're regenerative and we use the term biology first so we prioritise  the biology, the microbiology, the birds, the bees and what a lot of that relies on  
**[0:10:44-0:10:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:10:44):**  is no-tilling and polycropping.  So because we're a small site we can't do monoculture because there's not enough room  to do a row of cabbages and then a row of pumpkins and then a row of zucchini, we have  to intertwine it all and stack the crops in amongst each other like an ecosystem.  Another huge aspect to this project is to mitigate climate change through growing our  
**[0:11:11-0:11:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:11:11):**  food.  I think a lot of what we get taught today is that our food production and our agriculture  is a burden on our planet when it can actually be a way to restore our planet.  So yeah, the storing of carbon within the soil is a huge aspect which we really like  to focus on and that's where the no-tilling comes into play because with tilling we damage  
**[0:11:35-0:11:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:11:35):**  the soil, we damage the fungi, the microbiology and we release carbon into the atmosphere  and lose its moisture holding capacity but by no-tilling it and leaving it undisturbed  we can leave it to do its natural thing, we can increase the carbon in the soil, increase  the biology and then it becomes a carbon sink.  When you're growing you're either degrading or damaging the ecosystem or contributing  
**[0:12:02-0:12:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:12:02):**  to it so we really want to teach people to contribute to a healthier ecosystem.  I think from my perspective and my viewpoint is that growing up in the UK and then moving  over to New Zealand and both of them being very capitalist countries focused around money  and economic growth, we forget about our own joys and our own love and compassion that's  involved in growing and gardening.  
**[0:12:34-0:12:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:12:34):**  So an example is right now we're here in the polytunnel and I don't know how to put science  behind it, there's no way to calculate it but when I sow a tray of seedlings and seeds,  when I'm 100% focused in that process, when I'm there making sure that each seed that  I put into the tray has my undivided attention, I have excellent germination rate.  When I'm rushing and when I'm not focusing, when there's other things on my mind, the  
**[0:13:09-0:13:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:13:09):**  germination rate isn't as great and it shows in the seeds so I don't know how you calculate  that with science but there is something there.  And also it feels nice to be compassionate, it feels nice to have love at the centre of  the project, it's a rare thing.  So for me the polycropping celebrates diversity and celebrates the wonderful interconnectedness  
**[0:13:35-0:13:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:13:35):**  of life and here at the farm it really mirrors the cultural diversity that Auckland has and  it shows and represents what a beautiful thing diversity can be, how we all have our different  traits and we all bring different things to the table and together we can be this wonderful  healthy ecosystem.  So that's what I reflect on a lot, that's what I think about when I'm gardening and  
**[0:14:07-0:14:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:14:07):**  trying to incorporate as many species as possible and I like sharing that story.  For the Love of Bees has a number of other projects including community composting and  creating pollinator habitats.  Jake also told us about the Earth Workers Programme, a week-long intensive course teaching  people from around New Zealand how to grow using OMG's Biology First regenerative principles.  
**[0:14:42-0:14:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:14:42):**  In the future the hope is to build on the Earth Workers Programme to set up many other  farms around the country which can act as learning hubs.  Finally we wanted to share a preview from our upcoming series Cultivating Justice.  We've been working on the series in partnership with Land in Our Names and the Land Workers  Alliance Out on the Land group.  
**[0:15:10-0:15:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:15:10):**  Cultivating Justice shares and celebrates the voices of queer, trans, black, brown and  neurodiverse people in the agroecological food and farming movement.  The first episode will be launched next month so look out for that end of June.  In this snippet I speak to fellow farmer Dora Taylor about her master's research on the  experiences of black farmers in the UK.  
**[0:15:36-0:15:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:15:36):**  Early on in the research you talk about rural spaces are overwhelmingly white and then you  say as Beth Collier points out, black absence in green spaces is incorrectly interpreted  through a colonial perspective as rooted in a lack of interest in or appreciation of nature.  Black people enjoying nature are seen as exceptions.  I would love you to talk a little bit about that and that finding and also what you recognised  
**[0:16:02-0:16:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:16:02):**  in yourself as well or what you communicated.  So I think there is this framing.  We think of black communities as being mainly in cities, which they are, but the reasons  behind that are actually very structural.  It's because that's where migrants were kind of put when they came to the UK and there's  
**[0:16:28-0:16:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:16:28):**  a lot of racism that exists in rural spaces and there is this kind of historical narrative  around English culture which has this idea that diversity is a very new thing and that  historically everyone was white and that people very recently came here and kind of disturbed  that.  That narrative is definitely there even though when I say it sounds very extreme.  
**[0:16:54-0:17:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:16:54):**  Actually that is really there in the way that like especially English culture I think is.  But I had quite a strange experience I suppose when I was doing this research because I grew  up in a rural area of the UK with a lot of privilege and I'm very light-skinned, mixed  race and I realised that even I had kind of internalised that idea of black people being  exceptions in nature even though I as a black person had enjoyed this natural environment  
**[0:17:36-0:17:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:17:36):**  for my whole life.  I think it really made me realise quite how powerful those cultural narratives are that  I was kind of discovering them in myself and having to kind of check myself when people  I was speaking to were talking about their connection to and love of nature to really  like acknowledge that I was having this reaction as well of being like oh that's unusual when  
**[0:17:59-0:18:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:17:59):**  it's really not.  It's just that black people are kind of excluded actively from rural spaces which means that  you might not see black faces as much but that connection to nature is definitely not  lacking.  Definitely I recognise it in myself as well that I 100% have believed that narrative for  
**[0:18:19-0:18:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:18:19):**  many years and without even noticing that I'm believing it so I really appreciate you  drawing that out and reflecting back on all of us.  Some of these things we don't even notice are written in our brains, in our culture  and how destructive they are actually as well.  I think that's the other thing we have to acknowledge.  
**[0:18:45-0:18:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:18:45):**  What do you think this research tells us about the situation in the UK today?  It demonstrates how little attention has been paid to black growers as a community from  like the wider alternative farming space.  I think that it's come at a time where that attention is really picking up actually but  when I was doing my research it was really difficult because there was very little information.  
**[0:19:13-0:19:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:19:13):**  I think I found maybe two texts on black British growers in the UK.  Obviously academic writing is not the only form of information but I think it is a good  snapshot into how much attention has been paid to that dynamic.  I think we need to be careful of framing the apparent growth in black farmers and growers  as a new phenomenon.  
**[0:19:45-0:19:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:19:45):**  It's just that they haven't been given as much support and airtime as other alternative  farming spaces have.  And I think although there are a relatively small number I think we need to recognise  that those traditions have been there for a really long time.  Later on in the research you talk about within the international African diaspora providing  
**[0:20:08-0:20:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:20:08):**  food for the black community has historical significance as a form of black resistance.  The strong tradition of black people growing food in the UK is not simply a form of diasporic  reproduction of homeland conditions but it's something which is embedded in who we are.  British black growers focus on self-preservation, unity and intergenerational learning.  I don't know I just felt like a lot of very powerful words are used there and it does  
**[0:20:32-0:20:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:20:32):**  give this really strong visual of community and values.  And so I was wondering if maybe you'd like to just paint a picture of what it is that  you felt and saw.  Really I felt so much joy and love and openness.  I felt a real kind of flexibility and dynamic way of communicating and of learning that's  
**[0:21:06-0:21:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:21:06):**  really it's actually not set in stone at all.  And I think the traditions that I was learning about are very porous and the way that I was  being taught when I was like volunteering with people and kind of like learning about  the different ways to grow things it's so open and the way that they were talking to  me about the plants and like the way that plants have emotions and like I felt a flexibility  
**[0:21:37-0:21:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:21:37):**  and dynamism and like freshness that I think is sometimes lacking in other parts of the  space.  Could people use the results of your research to inform what they do or is there even a  call to action for people in the alternative food movement?  I actually think that the work is already happening.  
**[0:21:59-0:22:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:21:59):**  I think that this research came at a really interesting time even in the six months since  I submitted this.  There's been a real growth in the way that black farmers are being incorporated into  the wider alternative farming space I think.  There's been a lot of momentum around building networks and like getting stories out there.  
**[0:22:22-0:22:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:22:22):**  I think that there's definitely a need to be more comfortable with maybe the like uncomfortable  realities of how entrenched our perceptions are of the place of black people in nature.  I think that's a really ingrained thing that everyone should be actively working on.  This episode of Farmerama was made by me, Abbey Rose, Olivia Oldham and Suzy McCarthy.  A big thanks to the rest of the Farmerama team, Jo Barrett, Katie Rebill, Fran Bailey,  
**[0:23:04-0:23:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/75-biology-first-regen-black-british-farmers-and-the-miller-to-baker-relationship#t=0:23:04):**  Annie Landless, Eliza Jenkins and Dora Taylor.  Our theme music is by Owen Barrett.  Toodle-oo.  