### Farmerama  (2022-55-30)
**[0:00:00-0:00:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to Farmerama. We haven't said that in a while. We hope you enjoyed  the recent Cultivating Justice series and then our bonus shorts where we featured different  millers from our series Cereal. We've just celebrated our seventh birthday, seven years  of sharing the voices of the regenerative farming movement. We want to take a moment  to thank everyone who's been part of Farmerama episodes in that time. To the farmers producing  
**[0:00:29-0:00:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:00:29):**  food and fiber for us whilst rejuvenating the ecosystems they're working in. This month  we hear how one ranch is managing to build green cover in its 22nd year of drought in  California and about the vineyard they've designed to allow for grazing sheep below  the canopy all year round. And we learn about the roots of the fiber shed movement, again  in California, ahead of the release of our upcoming mini series Farming Fashion from  
**[0:00:54-0:01:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:00:54):**  Fiber Shed UK.  Sally Calhoun owns and manages the Paisie Neze Ranch. She's also an impact investor,  activist and philanthropic funder in regenerative agriculture. She shared with us some signs  of hope in the drought stricken area of the world in which she lives. So the ranch is  about 7600 acres. There is the San Benito River, which is a very seasonal, small river,  
**[0:01:32-0:01:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:01:32):**  runs through it. We have about seven miles of meandering that kind of splits the ranch  in half. We're in a very low rainfall area in the midst so far of 22 years of drought.  So we've gotten, we usually get between three and 10 inches of rain a year and sometimes  less these days. So when we arrived on the ranch, I was very interested in regenerating  both the California perennial grasses and also the riparian corridor. The riparian corridor  
**[0:02:01-0:02:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:02:01):**  had historically been used to graze 500 cows from the middle of June until the middle of  December and it was basically dust. And so we really are starting in around 2004. We  immediately fenced the river so that it would not be grazed all the time, stopped utilizing  it in that way and then have progressively adopted holistic planned grazing. So the river  has been grazed almost every year for the last 20 years. And what we've seen is really  
**[0:02:27-0:02:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:02:27):**  a regeneration of the riparian corridor. We were very optimistic. We have a lot of willows  and mule fat and all kinds of salt grass creeping wild rye. Very interesting things happening  and we thought it was good. And last year we spoke to some restoration biologists to  see if we could get some mitigation credit or some credit for the ongoing river restoration  and they said, you're pretty much finished. So it's super cool that by just changing the  
**[0:02:54-0:03:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:02:54):**  way we manage the grazing in 20 years of drought, but with a river, so there is a lot of water,  that we really, we didn't plant a single plant. We didn't have a plan about what should grow  here or what should grow there. We said, we'll see what the river and the land and nature  give us. And it's super cool what we've got now. I mean, they figure that 95% of the riparian  corridors in California have been destroyed, usually because they're on the flamplades  
**[0:03:21-0:03:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:03:21):**  and they're a really good place to farm, right? So it makes sense that they got destroyed.  But if you, we were told this is the only corridor like this on the central coast anywhere.  And if you fly from the Bay Area to Los Angeles, it is so obvious when you fly over this corridor,  because it is by far the largest thing like it that you'll see in that whole trip. So  yeah, we're super psyched about it. I wish we had done some analysis and figured out  
**[0:03:47-0:03:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:03:47):**  how much carbon we've sequestered. So maybe we'll figure out how much carbon is there  now and they'll tell something anyway. When we got here, I didn't know anything, but I  was introduced to Alan Savory's work and I'd been growing California native perennial bunch  grasses in my backyard for 15 years and was intrigued by the idea they might be able to  come back here because they're viewed as being mostly extinct in California rangeland. And  
**[0:04:10-0:04:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:04:10):**  in fact, when we got here, we could not find a single cool season California bunch grass  anywhere. We did finally find some very sad looking ones on north facing slopes. So we  knew they were here. Here in California, it's painful because you have to assume that they're  there and graze accordingly, even if you can't see them, which is kind of frustrating. But  we did that we assumed that they were here. And with pretty minor improvements in grazing,  
**[0:04:35-0:04:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:04:35):**  like just less overgrazing, we began to see pretty dramatic returns of the purple needle  grass in particular, that's the one that's really come back. And the other one is the  salt grass, which is a sea for grass, a warm season grass, the only one left here. Its  resurgence has also been pretty dramatic. It's kind of come out of the river and is  heading upslope. So yeah, it just seems like if you just, you know, if you just take your  
**[0:04:59-0:05:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:04:59):**  foot off their necks, it's amazing what can happen even in such a low rainfall place with  really degraded soils and a totally crashed ecosystem. So sitting as a person who's 22  years into this giant drought, I mean, it just really, I sometimes think I'm so sad  about with this change in management, if it kept raining, what might have been, which  we'll never know. So I don't know over the next 10 to 20 years, if the rainfall stays  
**[0:05:27-0:05:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:05:27):**  down at three inches, five inches a year, I don't know that a lot is going to change,  to be perfectly honest. And we know we have not increased soil organic matter. And we  have increased biodiversity. And we'll keep working as hard as we can at increasing biodiversity.  But I'm really struck by the realization that if it doesn't rain, it's very hard to improve  or to create any change in the system. So I'm optimistic, you know, that the great flood  
**[0:05:52-0:05:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:05:52):**  will come. And then I think if it would rain, we would be totally astonished at what would  happen. I think we have no idea what could happen. But it just takes water. My joke is  that if it just stops raining, we'll put in solar panels and we'll mine the 500-year sand  and gravel pit. It'll be about sun and sand if it just doesn't rain anymore. It's important  to have a backup plan in the 21st century. We need functioning ecosystems. That's the  
**[0:06:22-0:06:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:06:22):**  goal here at this point. We've just got to have them all over the planet. We should manage  every square foot of the planet to sequester carbon and create functioning ecosystems.  Kelly Mulville is vineyard director at Pisoners Ranch, where he's planted a vineyard that  looks a little different. Originally trained in holistic management, Kelly's designed a  vineyard that allows for animals to graze in it all year round.  
**[0:06:51-0:06:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:06:51):**  The first thing that most people notice with the vineyard is that it is a tall trellis.  So we're using a system called the Watson system developed by a retired petroleum engineer  in Texas. And it actually was not developed, designed for sheep. It was rather designed  for climates that are very hot and humid to help prevent the mildew and make it easier  to manage in those situations. But when I saw that trellis system, I realized that that  
**[0:07:20-0:07:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:07:20):**  would probably work very well for sheep. And so one of the aspects of our design is we  wanted sheep to be able to do most of the work for us. I'd done a trial of a vineyard  in Sonoma County where I set it up to graze throughout the growing season. And we had  some really dramatic results in water savings and labor savings and fertility benefits.  And so the next step was actually to design something from the get-go that we could graze  
**[0:07:45-0:07:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:07:45):**  without having to do so much modifications. So the idea with this is that we have a trellis  system that enables grazing throughout the growing season of the grapevines as well as  during the dormant season. And so in order to do that, we have to raise the trellis system  up so that it's out of reach of the sheep, the important parts, the fruiting zone and  the shoots. But we also want them to do our suckering forest, which are the shoots that  
**[0:08:13-0:08:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:08:13):**  come out at the base of the vine and not along the trunk. And we want them to do our shoot  tipping forest as well. So those are the shoots that hang over, they grow up, and then they  hang over and come back into range of the sheep. And so most of those tasks are generally  done by machine or human labor. So we have that design so that the sheep will do that  just through their browsing practices.  
**[0:08:35-0:08:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:08:35):**  So the first thing people notice is that the trellis is higher. The vines, it's a partial  overhead, it's a V trellis. And so that provides about, the row spacing is 12 feet and the  vines are six feet apart. Once those vines are full, they take up about probably five  to six feet of the row in a partial overhead canopy, which allows dappled light and good  exposure to air and partial exposure to the sun. So it's almost like being in a small  
**[0:09:09-0:09:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:09:09):**  orchard rather than a vineyard. And so the fruit is up higher and the vines are up higher.  And it has a different feel than when the vines are in rows or in their head trains  on close to the ground.  So the sheep are a critical part of our management in this vineyard. And actually, before we've  implanted, we were using what is called holistic plant grazing. Some people refer to it as  
**[0:09:31-0:09:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:09:31):**  mob or intensive grazing. And what that means is we keep the animals bunched up fairly tightly  and they move very often so that we're not overgrazing or over-trampling the site. And  having the vineyard high like this, including our drip wire is high as well. So both humans  and sheep can go any direction in the vineyard. And they're not restricted to just the row  itself. And that enables freedom of access. And it also makes it easier for us to set  
**[0:10:01-0:10:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:10:01):**  up temporary fencing inside the vineyard. If we want to have a higher impact of animals  for a shorter period of time, then we can have a very small paddock. And it isn't necessarily  restricted to just one or two rows to do that. So that offers a lot more flexibility. And  we are running sheep in the vineyard during... A lot of it depends on rainfall. We're in  a very low rainfall area, about 12 inches a year is the historic average. The past two  
**[0:10:29-0:10:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:10:29):**  years we've had about five inches. So we're in a pretty good drought. And so the amount  of grazing is dictated by the amount of rainfall we get. And we are in a Mediterranean climate.  So we get the rains starting in... The typical rainy season would be October through the  end of April or so. Our rainy season seems to be shrinking with the drought. But that  allows us to graze during the non-growing season. We can graze sheep in the vineyards  
**[0:10:56-0:11:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:10:56):**  and we don't have to worry about the vines at that time. And then during the growing  season of the vines or summer, we can graze as well. But because we don't get rainfall  in the summer, that means that the flock is generally smaller. And then typically we're  just using the rams. Our flock here is about 2,000 sheep. So we have somewhere around 25,  30 rams. And that's a good number for grazing kind of quickly through the vineyard during  
**[0:11:25-0:11:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:11:25):**  the summer season because there's just not much vegetation. Most of the vegetation is  under the vines themselves. The initial goal of this was to create an agricultural system  that encourages biodiversity and builds biodiversity back into the ecosystem. Most agriculture  actually reduces biodiversity, sometimes really severely, to basically one crop and all insects  and most life is kept out of farming systems. And so we wanted to do the exact opposite.  
**[0:11:55-0:12:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:11:55):**  And I was a bit inspired by something although Leopold said in that when we restore ecosystems,  we may use some of the same tools that we use to destroy them. And that's just so you  just have to change your mindset on how you're using those tools. Animals, for instance.  So we're using livestock not to over graze and over trample and create erosion and reduce  biodiversity. We're using them for the opposite reason because the grazing practices that  
**[0:12:20-0:12:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:12:20):**  we are using basically mimic natural grazing animals in an ecosystem that includes predators.  The idea of this is that basically we're testing all of our decisions, our management decisions  or design decisions and saying, will this increase biodiversity or will it reduce it?  And so that means we're not doing tillage. We're keeping the soils covered. We're using  all of the soil health principles plus some additional ones. We have a page that we've  
**[0:12:50-0:12:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:12:50):**  put together of principles that we're working on, working with that allow us to achieve  these goals. And one of the things in order to verify this is we're doing a lot of monitoring.  So we're monitoring soil health, soil biology. We're monitoring insect populations, insect  species. We're monitoring bird populations, plant species. And obviously we're monitoring  things like a normal vineyard would do, like your wine quality. And so all of that has  
**[0:13:22-0:13:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:13:22):**  led us to some interesting results. We're seeing a lot of benefits in all of those areas.  All of those areas are good, but one of the really exciting things that happened this  year is we had an endangered species that's endemic to California show up. We've always  had a few of these birds called the tricolor blackbird. And this year we ended up having  a large breeding colony. We had about 800, a flock of 800 birds that were working in  
**[0:13:47-0:13:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:13:47):**  the vineyard every day and they were nesting just below the vineyard in a small pond that  we have. And so that was very exciting for us. And it was also exciting for a lot of  the folks that are watching this bird and trying to figure out how do we stop the decline  of it. So that apparently they found the vineyard an exciting place to be. And that was a real  affirmation that we're on the right track.  
**[0:14:11-0:14:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:14:11):**  One of the things that I really appreciate in having worked with a number of ranchers  and farmers and farmed myself is that when you do the right thing, you get unintended  benefits. And when you do the wrong thing, you get unintended negative consequences.  And so we are seeing a lot of sometimes expected benefits and sometimes things that we totally  did not expect. For instance, the increase in bird population, we didn't expect that  
**[0:14:45-0:14:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:14:45):**  we would have an endangered species that would fall in love with the vineyard and park itself  here. So that was...we had hoped to increase some bird species, but that was...so that  was definitely an unintended benefit.  The other things we're seeing is that the overhead trail, as you mentioned, does provide  shade and it provides shade in a large portion of the vineyard. So what we are seeing is  
**[0:15:07-0:15:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:15:07):**  that we are creating resiliency in the face of climate change. And so the higher...being  higher up from the ground means we're cooler. We have a microclimate that's cooler than  being close to the soil. And oftentimes vineyards have been planted low specifically so they  could be warmer in cooler climates. So we're a warm to hot climate, so we don't need things  to get any warmer. And things are going towards the hot direction for us for sure. So having  
**[0:15:36-0:15:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:15:36):**  the trellis, the canopy up high, helps provide shade, provides shade for people when you're  harvesting, provides shade for the animals when they're in their grazing. And it's also  providing habitat for things like insect-eating birds, for spiders. And so it's expanding  the habitat niches for a lot of life.  We are also seeing that in addition to making it cooler in the hot season, it's helping  
**[0:16:03-0:16:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:16:03):**  to prevent frost damage when we get frost. And we used to not experience frost here to  the lateness that we are right now anyway. We've had frost as late as towards the end  of May. And those have been very damaging to the vines, the young vines that are still  on the ground. But those vines that are up on the trellis, we might see a little frost  burn but we're not getting any serious damage. So that is helping us mitigate this climate  
**[0:16:31-0:16:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:16:31):**  change which brings both heat and cold in extremes. So that is helping us in that way.  And so those are just a couple examples of things that we're seeing that we're not necessarily  seeing. We didn't, I'd kind of thought maybe that it might be helpful for frost but not  to the extent that we're seeing it's pretty dramatic how much benefit it is to having  a trellis, their vines up higher.  
**[0:16:56-0:17:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:16:56):**  One of the things that we have been experimenting with over the past two years is having an  internship program. And that has been a fascinating experience, learning experience for all of  us. And it's great having younger people at the vineyard who are very passionate about  what we're doing because we have not figured out everything yet. We have a lot to learn.  We're just scraping the surface here. And so bringing young folks that are interested  
**[0:17:24-0:17:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:17:24):**  in this on this journey with us and sending them out there to do what they, take what  they've learned from here and what they learned from other places too and expand on this is  I think a great opportunity of sharing or learning and learning from each other because  the learning definitely goes both ways. And so that has been another fun and sometimes  challenging aspect I'm sure for both sides that is happening here.  
**[0:17:55-0:18:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:17:55):**  Rebecca Burgess is an indigo farmer, author and community organizer. She's the executive  director of Fibershed. She set out to develop clothing made from fiber grown, woven and  sewn within a single bioregion, North Central California. As she began to bring ranchers,  farmers and artisans together, she discovered that even in her immediate community, there  was ample raw material being grown to support a regional textile economy rooted in climate  
**[0:18:23-0:18:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:18:23):**  change prevention and soil restoration. This is a teaser to get you ready for the farming  fashion mini series from the Fibershed UK team that we'll be bringing to you next month.  What inspired me to start Fibershed was that I had already initiated a project to establish  a one year wardrobe challenge for myself working with fibers and dyes and community members  to generate something I would wear over the course of a year. And after that year, which  
**[0:18:54-0:19:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:18:54):**  had been successful, there was more fiber than I knew what to do with and incredible  natural dye palette, incredibly talented community. I realized that there was more to this that  might even end up looking like a new regional economic lens to evaluate our community through  because most of the clothes, if not, probably close to 100% of clothing in our community  is imported and it has very little to no transparency. I mean, now it's getting better. Small and  
**[0:19:30-0:19:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:19:30):**  medium brands are really pushing the edges on and even a couple of big brands are trying,  but I felt like there was this need to codify the value system in something more structural  than just a personal endeavor. So that's when the community who had already participated  in the one year wardrobe challenge, they also started to participate in the board of directors  and the structure to define the work came a lot from their input. They just went and  
**[0:20:01-0:20:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:20:01):**  did all the legal work and got pro bono help and set it up as an org that would, yes, evaluate  the future of regional economic sovereignty, fiber sovereignty. What does it mean to be  able to process our own materials in ways that allow us to provide for our communities?  I think a global advocacy is the opportunity. I think being able to say from a series of  grassroots organizers who work in these food fiber, natural medicine, I mean everything,  
**[0:20:38-0:20:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:20:38):**  the land, everything that comes from and yields from healthy, productive landscapes, all of  us who are part and parcel of those processes, we're part of the carbon cycle and we acknowledge  it. What does reparative justice look like for the communities that we have forced to  become the means of production, in some cases against their will, tearing people out of  their traditional culture to become means of production for Western culture, which is  
**[0:21:10-0:21:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:21:10):**  what fast fashion has done. Now that you've concentrated all those women primarily in  these huge sewing factories from Vietnam to Bangladesh to Myanmar, and China has pretty  much moved cut and sew out of their country. Ethiopia is now a new landscape for exploitation.  What is the just transition? How do we as fiber shed organizers reach out to the communities  that have been so imperiled by fast fashion and say, we're taking responsibility. We've  
**[0:21:43-0:21:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:21:43):**  always needed to, we're doing that, but we know that you got caught in a conundrum that  we got caught in too, but you have more to lose because this is everything to keep your  family going. I think we have to address reparative justice in this transition. It's so interesting  to see the achievements to me on community organizing, which is an achievement in itself  to be a community organizer and actually say you can call something something because you've  
**[0:22:09-0:22:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:22:09):**  invested your time and attention into getting people to work towards something together.  That's an achievement and that that's happening globally is awesome. There's a beauty that  it's also happening in primarily it's happening in Canada, the United States, Australia, Britain,  somewhat in the North Atlantic, a little bit in Central and Southern Europe, but it's happening  in countries that are my, it's interesting, it's my own ancestry. My family is originally  
**[0:22:39-0:22:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:22:39):**  Irish, Welsh, it's Scandinavian, but the islands, the North Atlantic islands is where we're  from and to watch it kind of birth out of these locations, it feels, I mean, if I were  to go very personal, it feels like a healing of a very long ancestral line that we were  starved out, the commons were enclosed, our family had to leave, we were exiles. And so,  and then the exiles, my ancestors, not specifically my ancestors in so much, but a lot of European  
**[0:23:15-0:23:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:23:15):**  ancestry did atrocious things in Australia and Canada and the United States because we  recreated the oppression that we'd experienced in our home country. So I think what this  means is a full circle achievement to say, we're going to now include everyone we, that  was dispossessed on the continent that we colonized. And we tried to, we just almost  destroyed and in some cases did destroy it so much. Now it's time to repair. Now it's  
**[0:23:42-0:23:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:23:42):**  time to apologize. Now it's time, I mean, it has been forever, but it should have never  happened in the way it did, but we can really just try now our best to be humble and thoughtful.  The thing I keep hearing about or that we would see is like, oh, it's, there's a lot  of, you know, lack of understanding of how would our future looks like because of all  these extreme climactic changes. But what I keep seeing is every time something catastrophic  
**[0:24:10-0:24:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:24:10):**  happens like in my community, like a big fire, it's the sheep grazers who come out the next  year and start a matchmaking process between themselves and landowners to get all the fire  fuel load out of their communities. And I watched, I've driven, I'm going to drive there  tonight an entire mountain that was covered in conservation ethos, which is don't touch  it. And this mountain now the community was so scared it was going to burn. And so I've  
**[0:24:42-0:24:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:24:42):**  driven out there and grazers that I work with have been working on this landscape now for  two years. All of the understory is healthy and low, but the tree branches don't start  until maybe like eight or 10 feet up. So fire can come through and smolder, but it can't  get into the catastrophic element of the tree canopy. And it was just to me to see the resilience  of fiber systems. It just, it's like, oh, I love it. I love that we're ameliorating  
**[0:25:12-0:25:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:25:12):**  catastrophic fire with fiber producing animals. So that's something I haven't, yeah, we were  going to talk about, we're going to talk about it more, but you know, people who are like  my fire, a fire burned my house, I rebuilt my house, I'm still having to evacuate, but  my house isn't burning anymore because I have been working with this forest proactively  now for two years. Like people are staying and they're trying to figure this out and  
**[0:25:38-0:25:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:25:38):**  the fiber systems are hugely integral to how they're staying. So anyway, just a little  anecdote of positivity.  This episode of Farmerama was made by me, Joe Barrett, Abbie Rose and Olivia Oldham.  A big thanks to the rest of the Farmerama team, Katie Revel, Fran Bailey, Annie Landless,  Eliza Jenkins and Dora Taylor. Our theme music is by Owen Barrett.  
**[0:26:14-0:26:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/california-drought-sheep-under-vines-and-the-beginning-of-fibershed#t=0:26:14):**  portable wireless wireless  